Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A RITHMETIC W ITHOUT A LGORITHMS : L ANGUAGE
M ODELS S OLVE M ATH WITH A BAG OF H EURISTICS
  Yaniv Nikankin1∗ Anja Reusch1 Aaron Mueller1,2 Yonatan Belinkov1
 1
   Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 2 Northeastern University



                                             A BSTRACT

           Do large language models (LLMs) solve reasoning tasks by learning robust gener-
           alizable algorithms, or do they memorize training data? To investigate this ques-
           tion, we use arithmetic reasoning as a representative task. Using causal analysis,
           we identify a subset of the model (a circuit) that explains most of the model’s be-
           havior for basic arithmetic logic and examine its functionality. By zooming in on
           the level of individual circuit neurons, we discover a sparse set of important neu-
           rons that implement simple heuristics. Each heuristic identifies a numerical input
           pattern and outputs corresponding answers. We hypothesize that the combination
           of these heuristic neurons is the mechanism used to produce correct arithmetic an-
           swers. To test this, we categorize each neuron into several heuristic types—such as
           neurons that activate when an operand falls within a certain range—and find that
           the unordered combination of these heuristic types is the mechanism that explains
           most of the model’s accuracy on arithmetic prompts. Finally, we demonstrate
           that this mechanism appears as the main source of arithmetic accuracy early in
           training. Overall, our experimental results across several LLMs show that LLMs
           perform arithmetic using neither robust algorithms nor memorization; rather, they
           rely on a “bag of heuristics”. 1

1       I NTRODUCTION
Do large language models (LLMs) implement robust reusable algorithms to solve tasks, or are they
merely memorizing aspects of the training distribution? This distinction is crucial (Tänzer et al.,
2022; Henighan et al., 2023): while memorization might suffice for limited problem sets, true algo-
rithmic comprehension allows for generalization and efficient scaling to new problems.
Arithmetic reasoning provides a lens for this investigation, as it can be solved using various methods:
learning known algorithms, developing novel approaches, or by memorizing vast quantities of input-
output pairs. Thus, we ask the following: Do LLMs implement robust algorithms to correctly
complete arithmetic prompts, similar to children learning vertical addition to add two numbers, or
do LLMs merely memorize the arithmetic prompts that appear in their vast training data?
Previous studies have made progress in identifying arithmetic mechanisms in LLMs. Stolfo et al.
(2023) and Zhang et al. (2024) have identified a subset of model components (a circuit) respon-
sible for arithmetic calculations in several LLMs and characterized the information flow between
them. Zhou et al. (2024) suggested that pre-trained LLMs use features in Fourier space to accurately
answer addition prompts. However, Stolfo et al. (2023) and Zhang et al. (2024) stopped short of elu-
cidating the mechanism implemented by the circuit they identified—a required feat to understand
the trade-off between generalization and memorization in this task. Zhou et al. (2024) studied ad-
dition prompts in models that were fine-tuned on arithmetic data. Their findings regarding Fourier
features are significant, but we claim these represent only a part of a more complex mechanism. Our
work aims to bridge these gaps: we investigate how the arithmetic circuit works qualitatively—and
specifically, whether it implements a mathematical algorithm or memorizes arithmetic training data.
To do so, we reverse-engineer the arithmetic mechanism applied by LLMs. We use causal analysis
to examine their arithmetic circuits, focusing on individual neurons within the circuit responsible
    ∗
        Correspondence to: yaniv.n@cs.technion.ac.il
    1
        Code at https://github.com/technion-cs-nlp/llm-arithmetic-heuristics


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   Attention                        MLP
      Input Tokens                                                                                  Llama3 – 8B                      Output Logits
    226                                      ...
     −                                       ...
     68                                      ...
     =                                       ...
                                                                                                                                               68    𝟏𝟓𝟖      160

       17 4942                    𝑜𝑝2 ∈ [5,25] mod 50     24 12439 𝑜𝑝1 – 𝑜𝑝2 ∈ [150, 180]
                                                          L24|1249)                                         30 1582 𝑜𝑝1 − 𝑜𝑝2 ≡ 8 mod 10
                                                                                                            L24|4692

                                                                                                                                                           17 692
                              0                                                     0                                            0
            First Operand


                                                                 First Operand


                                                                                                              First Operand
                            20                                                   20                                           20                         Layer
                                                                                                                                                       Neuron
                              0                                                     0                                            0
                            10                                                   10                                           10                       Number

                             0       100    200                                    0    100   200                               0       100   200
      (a)                   Second Operand                 (b)                   Second Operand             (c)               Second Operand


Figure 1: Bag of heuristics visualization. We show that transformer LLMs solve arithmetic
prompts by combining several unrelated heuristics, each activating according to rules based on the
input values of operands, and boosting the logits of corresponding result tokens. These heuristics
are manifested in single MLP neurons in mid to late layers.


for generating the correct answer. Our analysis reveals that a sparse subset of neurons is sufficient
for accurate responses, with each neuron implementing a distinct heuristic. Each heuristic fires for
a specific pattern in input operands or in their combination, and some increase the logits of relevant
result tokens accordingly. For instance, one heuristic (Figure 1b) increases logits of tokens between
150 and 180 for subtraction prompts whose answer falls within this range. By examining these
neurons, we classify each into one or more heuristic types. For example, the mentioned neuron
(Figure 1b) falls within the type of result-range heuristics, which promote continuous value ranges.
We discover that successful prompt completion relies on a combination of several unrelated heuristic
types, forming a “bag of heuristics” approach. This finding suggests that LLMs may not be em-
ploying a single, cohesive algorithm for arithmetic reasoning, nor are they memorizing all possible
inputs and outputs; rather, they deploy a collection of simpler rules and patterns.
We investigate if the bag of heuristics emerges as the primary arithmetic mechanism from the onset
of training, or whether it overrides an earlier mechanism. To do that, we analyze how the heuristics
evolve over the course of training. We show arithmetic heuristics appear throughout the model
training, gradually converging towards the heuristics observed in the final checkpoint. Furthermore,
we provide evidence that the bag of heuristics mechanism explains most of the model’s behavior
even in early stages, indicating it is the main mechanism used for solving arithmetic prompts.
We contribute by providing a high-resolution understanding of the mechanism that LLMs use to an-
swer arithmetic prompts. We (i) show pre-trained LLMs implement a “bag of heuristics” approach,
(ii) investigate when and why this mechanism fails to generalize, and (iii) discover how it emerges
across training. This allows us to better understand the source of current capabilities and limitations
of LLMs in arithmetic reasoning—a finding that could apply to additional reasoning tasks.

2      A RITHMETIC CIRCUIT DISCOVERY
In transformer-based LLMs, a circuit (Elhage et al., 2021) refers to a minimal subset of inter-
connected model components (multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) or attention heads) that perform the
computations required for a specific task. We locate, and later analyze, the circuit responsible for
arithmetic calculations.

2.1       C IRCUIT DISCOVERY AND EVALUATION

Models and Data We analyze four LLMs: Llama3-8B/70B (Dubey et al., 2024), Pythia-6.9B
(Biderman et al., 2023), and GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021). For each, we locate and analyze
the circuit responsible for arithmetic calculations. We focus on Llama3-8B in the main paper and
report similar results for the additional models in Appendix I. We use pre-trained models without
fine-tuning them on arithmetic prompts, as our goal is to uncover the mechanisms induced by typical


                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Eﬀect Map Per Attn Head / MLP
                                                           log
             Attention Heads (Last Position)     MLPs      scale
        0                                                                      Early MLPs (0 to 15)
                                                              8
        10                                                                         operator
                                                              6
Layer
                                                                                    Heads
                                                                       Heads       (L2H2, …)      Heads
                                                              4                                 (L15H13, …)
        20                                                           (L16H21, …)
                                                              2
        30                                                                                                Late MLPs
                                                              0
             0       10         20         30   0 1 2 3                                                   (16 to 31)
                     Attention Head             Position
                                     (a)                                                  (b)

Figure 2: Llama3-8B arithmetic circuit discovery results. (a): Few attention heads have a high
effect on arithmetic prompts. Most MLPs take part in the computation. The first MLP noticeably
affects operand and operator positions, while mid- and late-layer MLPs influence the final position.
(b): The arithmetic circuit in Llama3-8B. The attention heads project token information to the last
position, where the middle- and late-layer MLPs promote the logits for the correct answer.


language model training. Each model tokenizes positive numbers as a single token, up to some limit;
e.g., in Llama3-8B, numbers in [0, 1000] are tokenized to a single token. To locate the arithmetic
circuit, we use two-operand arithmetic prompts with Arabic numerals and the four basic operators
(+, −, ×, ÷), such that each prompt has four tokens: op1, the operator, op2, and the “=” sign.
We sample a list of 100 prompts per operator for circuit discovery, and an identical amount for
evaluation. Each prompt is chosen so that both its operands and result will be tokenized to a single
token; e.g., in Llama3-8B, the operands and result must be between 0 and 1, 000. Unlike previous
studies (Stolfo et al., 2023), we do not use in-context prompting, to ensure the circuit does not
include any component not directly linked to arithmetic calculations. To reduce noise and ensure
the circuits only contain components responsible for correct arithmetic completions, we only use
prompts that are correctly completed by the model, similar to previous studies (Wang et al., 2022;
Prakash et al., 2024). Throughout the paper, the prompt “226 − 68 =” is used as a running example.

Method To locate the circuit components, we conduct a series of activation patching experiments
(Vig et al., 2020) that allow us to assess the importance of each MLP and attention head at each
sequence position. Each experiment involves sampling a prompt p with result r from the dataset (for
example, “226 − 68 =”), and sampling a random counterfactual prompt p′ that leads to a different
result r′ (for example, “21 + 17 =”). After pre-computing the activations of the model for the
counterfactual prompt p′ , we introduce the prompt p to the model. We intervene on (“patch”) the
computation, which means we replace the activation of a single MLP layer or attention head with
its pre-computed activation for p′ . Following Stolfo et al. (2023), we observe how this intervention
affects the probabilities of both answer tokens, r and r′ , by measuring the following:
                                      1 P∗ (r′ ) − P(r′ ) P (r) − P∗ (r)

                                 ′
                           E(r, r ) =                     +                                       (1)
                                      2       P(r′ )             P∗ (r)
where P and P∗ are the pre- and post-intervention probability distributions, respectively. The two
summands in Equation (1) increase if patching raises the probability of r′ or decreases the probabil-
ity of r, respectively. High effect for an intervention on a component indicates its high importance in
prompt calculation. The effect is averaged across prompts and measured separately per component.

Results The patching results, shown in Figure 2a, reveal that the MLP layers affect the output
probabilities more than the attention heads. The first MLP affects the representation at the operator
and operand positions (see Appendix B.1), while middle- and late-layer MLPs exhibit a strong effect
at the final position, likely reflecting their role in predicting the answer token in that position (further
discussed in Section 2.2). Figure 2a also shows that very few attention heads are important to the
circuit. Each such attention head copies information from a single position (either an operand or
operator position) to the final position (see Appendix B.2). Figure 2b summarizes the information
flow within the circuit, consistent in structure with prior work (Stolfo et al., 2023).
To evaluate the circuit c, we measure its faithfulness (Wang et al., 2022), the proportion of the full
model’s behavior on arithmetic prompts that can be explained solely by the circuit. To measure


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


faithfulness, we first pre-compute mean activations for each model component (in each position)
across all arithmetic prompts. We then intervene on the evaluation prompts by replacing non-circuit
component activations with their means. To quantify performance, we measure NL(c), the logit of
the correct answer token normalized by the maximal logit, as a proxy for accuracy, when mean-
ablating all components not in the circuit c. The circuit’s faithfulness is calculated as:
                                                  NL(c) − NL(∅)
                                         F(c) =                                                      (2)
                                                  NL(M) − NL(∅)
where M is the entire model and NL(M) is the normalized correct-answer logit when no component
is ablated (always 1.0 for correctly completed prompts). NL(∅) is the normalized correct answer
logit when all components are mean-ablated. This formula normalizes faithfulness to a [0.0, 1.0]
range.
The circuit achieves a high faithfulness of 0.96 on average across the four arithmetic operators; i.e.,
the circuit accounts for 96% of the entire model’s performance. We can therefore conclude that
the components identified in this section comprise the arithmetic circuit, and explain most of the
model’s accuracy for arithmetic prompts. See Appendix A for results across various circuit sizes,
and a discussion of Pareto-optimality with respect to faithfulness and size.

2.2       I DENTIFYING ANSWER - PROMOTING COMPONENTS

To understand the mechanism implemented by the cir-           Operand1                               0.8


                                                             Position
cuit to promote the correct answer, we first search            Operator                              0.6
                                                                                                     0.4
for the specific circuit components that increase the         Operand2
                                                                                                     0.2
probability of the correct answer. For this, we em-                   =                              0
ploy linear probing (Belinkov, 2022). For each layer                   0     10       20      30
                                                                                 Layer
l and sequence position p, we train a linear classifier
        d      1000
fl,p : R → R         (where d is the dimension of each Figure 3: Answer token probe accuracy.
layer’s output representation) using a training set of The linear probes are successful in extract-
correctly completed arithmetic prompts. We pass these ing the correct answer from the final posi-
prompts through the model and calculate the output tion, starting at layer 16.
representation hl,p ∈ Rd at layer l and position p for
each prompt. The classifier fl,p receives hl,p as input, and outputs a probability distribution over the
1, 000 possible arithmetic answers. The classifier fl,p is evaluated on a separate test set of correctly
completed prompts, showing to what extent the correct answer can be extracted from the output
representation at layer l and position p.
We find that the answer can only be extracted with high accuracy from the final position (Figure 3),
after the token representation is processed by the later layers of the model, starting from layer l = 16.
Given that the arithmetic circuit contains only MLPs in these layers (Figure 2), this suggests that
these MLPs in layers [16, 32] are the components that write the correct answer into the representation
at the last position. The following section zooms into these middle- and late-layer MLPs, and
presents evidence for the role they play in generating the correct answer— specifically, in how they
promote the correct answer token through a combination of many independent arithmetic heuristics.

3       MLP NEURONS IMPLEMENT ARITHMETIC HEURISTICS
3.1       D ECOMPOSING CIRCUIT MLP S TO INDIVIDUAL NEURONS

Having shown that the model generates the arithmetic answer in middle- and late-layer MLPs at the
final position p = 4, we zoom in on these MLPs and their calculations at this position to investigate
the implemented mechanism. The MLP at layer l can be described by the following equation:
                                                                  dmlp
                                                                   X l,n l,n
                  hlout = MLPin hlin · Woutl
                                               = hlpost · Wout
                                                            l

                                                               =       hpost vout                 (3)
                                                                         n=0

where hlin , hlout ∈ Rd are the input and output representations of the MLP at layer l, respectively.
hlpost ∈ Rdmlp is the output of the up-projection of the MLP, 2 where we define the nth value hl,n
                                                                                               post ∈
    2
        The up-projection MLPin is implemented differently in each LLM we analyze. See Appendix C.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Individual MLP Neuron Intervention Eﬀects                               Faithfulness of using only top-k neurons
                                                                                              1

Intervention Eﬀect


                                                                              Faithfulness
                                                                                                                                        +
                     0.05
                                                                                             0.5                                        -
                                                                                                                                        ×
                           0                                                                                                            ÷
                                                                                              0
                               0           5k           10k                                                    1%          10%
                                           Neuron Index                                                 Neurons used Per Layer (%)
(a) We intervene on each neuron in MLP layer l =                              (b) We measure the faithfulness when including only
17. Few neurons in this and other middle- and late-                           a fraction of high-effect neurons in the circuit. This
layer MLPs have a high effect on arithmetic prompts.                          circuit achieves high faithfulness.

Figure 4: Analyzing effect of individual circuit MLP neurons. Our results demonstrate that a small
amount of neurons is required to correctly predict the result.

                                                                           l,n
R as a neuron. Wout l
                        ∈ Rdmlp ×d is the output projection matrix, and vout   is its nth row vector.
                                                                l
Biases are omitted. By expressing the output representation hout as a linear combination of row
         l,n
vectors vout  and their corresponding neuron activations hl,n
                                                            post , we can identify the neurons that
most affect the completion of arithmetic prompts.
To measure the effect of each neuron hl,n post , we perform activation patching experiments on indi-
vidual neurons (as described in Section 2.1), and measure the average effect across prompts. We
observe that very few neurons have a high effect; an example for layer l = 17 is shown in Figure 4a.
Additionally, we notice the neurons with the highest effect are different between operators. In fact,
roughly 45% of the important neurons for each operator are unique (Appendix D). Thus, when an-
alyzing the circuit at the neuron level, we analyze it as 4 separate circuits—one for each arithmetic
operator. We hypothesize that for each operator, the highest-effect neurons are sufficient to explain
most of the model’s arithmetic behavior. To verify this, we measure the faithfulness of the arithmetic
circuit when mean ablating non-circuit components and lower effect MLP neurons in middle- and
late-layer MLPs. The results (Figure 4b) confirm that only 200 neurons (roughly 1.5%) per layer
are needed to achieve high faithfulness and correctly compute arithmetic prompts.

3.2                        MLP NEURONS ACT AS MEMORIZED HEURISTICS

To understand how the top-200 middle- and late-layer important MLP neurons contribute to the gen-
eration of correct answers, we view them as key-value memories (Geva et al., 2021).3 In this view,
the input to each MLP layer hlin is multiplied by a key (a row vector in the MLP input weight matrix)
to generate a neuron activation hl,n                                                              l,n
                                  post that determines how strongly does a value (a row vector vout
in the MLP output weight matrix) gets written to the MLP output (Equation (3)). Geva et al. (2021)
demonstrated that keys correspond to specific topics or n-grams, triggering high neuron activations
when these are given as input, and their corresponding values represent tokens that can serve as ap-
propriate completions for these topics or n-grams. Building on this insight, we hypothesize that (i)
in arithmetic contexts, keys correspond to numerical patterns, e.g., a neuron might activate strongly
when both operands in an arithmetic operation are odd numbers; and (ii) the associated value vectors
encode numerical tokens that represent plausible answers to the key patterns.
To test the first hypothesis, we investigate the activation pattern of the top-200 neurons in each layer.
For each neuron l, n, we plot the activations hl,n  post (at position p = 4) as a function of operand
values, separately for each operator. We find that many neurons in the arithmetic circuit exhibit
distinct, human-identifiable patterns. For instance, in “226 − 68 =”, neuron h24,12439
                                                                                    post     shows high
activation values for subtraction prompts with results between 150 and 180 (Figure 1). Additional
examples are provided in Appendix J.
To verify the second hypothesis, we check whether the tokens embedded in the value vectors of the
top neurons relate to their activation patterns. Using the Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020), a method
of projecting a vector v ∈ Rd onto a probability distribution over the vocabulary space Pdvocab , we
                              l,n
project each value vector vout    to find the numerical tokens whose logits are highest. This reveals
                     3
                         Not to be confused with the attention heads’ keys and values.


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Heuristic pattern examples. Each heatmap is the activation pattern of an example neu-
ron, implementing a specific heuristic type. Within the heatmap, each pixel at location (op1 , op2 )
represents the activation strength of the neuron under the addition prompt “op1 + op2 =”.

two distinct patterns: First, in some neurons, the activation pattern depends on both operands and
the value vector encodes the expected result of the arithmetic calculation (Figure 1b,c). We term
such neurons direct heuristics. Second, in neurons where the activation pattern depends on a single
operand, the value vectors often encode features for downstream processing, rather than the result
tokens directly (Figure 1a). We term such neurons indirect heuristics. Next, we demonstrate how
these heuristic neurons combine to produce correct arithmetic answers.

4      A RITHMETIC PROMPTS ARE ANSWERED WITH A BAG OF HEURISTICS
Observing the example prompt, “226 − 68 =”, we have shown that it satisfies the pattern of several
heuristic neurons, where each such neuron slightly increases the logit of the result token, r = 158
(Figure 1). These small increases combine to promote the correct token as the final answer. We
hypothesize that a combination of independent heuristics—termed a bag of heuristics—emerges
across arithmetic prompts, comprising the mechanism used by the model to produce correct answers.

4.1     C LASSIFYING NEURONS TO HEURISTIC TYPES

To present evidence for the causal effect of the bag of heuristics on generating correct answers,
we first systematically classify neurons into heuristic types. Through manual observation of key
activation patterns, we identify several categories of human-identifiable heuristics, exemplified in
Figure 5, and further detailed in Appendix E. To determine if a neuron n at layer l implements a
specific heuristic, we examine the intersection between the prompts that activate the neuron and the
prompts expected to be activated for this heuristic. A visual example of this procedure is shown in
Figure 6. An automated algorithm of this approach is described in Appendix F.

    Neuron: 29 2850                 Logits                                                   Heuristic: result range ∈ [150, 180]
                                                                       op1


                            (b)                        (c)
                                    𝑙1 … 𝑙170 … 𝑙999                         (f)   1+1 . . . 130 + 45 . . . 145 + 7 . . . 299 + 291 . . .

        (a)                                                  op2
                                       (e)    145 + 14                       (g)
                                                                   Top                        Does neuron implement heuristic?
op1


                      op1


                (d)                           136 + 17              𝑘
                                               70 + 81                                                                   Yes
                                                  ...                                                        ?
       op2                    op2             12 + 181                                                                    No

                                                                                            29,2850
Figure 6: Neuron to heuristic matching example. (a) Measure the value of hpost                      for each
operand pair (op1 , op2 ), using the chosen operator (addition). (b) Calculate the logits of numerical
                        29,2850
tokens embedded in vout         , using Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020). (c) Convert the logits vector to
a 2D pattern, where the cell in index (op1 , op2 ) is the logit of the result token of applying the operator
to (op1 , op2 ) (i.e. op1 + op2 ). (d) Multiply both patterns element-wise, to get the effective logit
contribution of the neuron to the correct answer token for each prompt. (e) Extract the prompts that
activate the neuron the most from the activation pattern. (f) Create a list of prompts associated with
the tested heuristic. (g) Measure the intersection between the two prompt lists. If this intersection is
larger than a threshold (we use t = 0.6), the neuron is said to implement the heuristic.

We apply this algorithm to each pair of important MLP neuron n in layer l and heuristic H. Through
this method, we classify as arithmetic heuristics 91% of the 3,200 top neurons for each operator


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Addition                    Subtraction                 Multiplication                  Division
            1


Accuracy
           0.5

                            Mean: 0.86                   Mean: 0.88                      Mean: 0.89                   Mean: 0.91
                            Mean: 0.56                   Mean: 0.64                      Mean: 0.80                   Mean: 0.78
            0
             0    14   28   42    56     0    19    38   57   76        0     22   44   66    88      0    7    14   21   28   35
                   Heuristic index              Heuristic index                Heuristic index              Heuristic index
                       Eﬀect of heuristic ablation on related prompts       Eﬀect of heuristic ablation on unrelated prompts


Figure 7: For each heuristic, we measure the accuracy of 100 correctly completed prompts associ-
ated with a heuristic (blue) and 100 correctly completed prompts not associated with the heuristic
(yellow), after ablating that heuristic’s neurons. The heuristics are sorted by the accuracy drop in-
duced on associated prompts. Across most heuristics, ablating heuristic neurons causes a larger
decrease in accuracy in prompts associated with that heuristic than in not associated prompts.

(200 per layer across 16 layers). Manual inspection of neurons that fail to classify into one of the
defined heuristics reveals patterns that are not clearly identifiable (Appendix J).

4.2              H EURISTIC TYPES ARE COMBINED TO ANSWER ARITHMETIC PROMPTS

Following the classification of the important neurons in each middle- and late-layer MLP into one or
several heuristic types, we provide evidence that the bag of heuristics is the primary mechanism the
model uses to correctly answer arithmetic prompts. We show this through two ablation experiments.

Knocking out neurons by heuristic type. We now verify that the neurons in each heuristic type
contribute to the accuracy of associated prompts by knocking out entire heuristic types and observe
the resulting changes in model accuracy. We define a prompt as associated with a heuristic if and
only if its components meet the conditions specified by that heuristic. (For instance, the example
prompt “226 − 68 =” is associated with the heuristic “op1 ≡ 0 (mod 2)”.) For each heuristic,
we sample two sets of 100 correctly completed prompts each, one containing prompts associated
with the heuristic and the other containing prompts not associated with that heuristic. For each
heuristic, we knock out all neurons classified into it (by setting each hl,n
                                                                         post activation to zero) and
then remeasure the accuracy on both sets of prompts. We expect a higher decrease in accuracy on the
associated prompts, since we claim each heuristic is causally linked only to its associated prompts.
The results (Figure 7) show that ablating neurons of a specific heuristic causes a significant accuracy
drop on associated prompts, more than on not associated prompts, on average. This confirms the
causal importance of heuristic neurons in promoting correct answer logits specifically in prompts
that are associated with their heuristic type, verifying the targeted functional role of these heuristics.
However, the ablation does not result in a complete accuracy drop; it causes an average drop of 29%
out of 95% average pre-ablation accuracy. We find two reasons for this. First, some heuristics have
low recall: they do not apply to all associated prompts as they should (see Appendix J). Second,
each prompt relies on several unrelated heuristic types, so even when one is ablated, others still
contribute to increasing the correct answer’s logit. In the following ablation experiment, we verify
that this interplay of heuristics provides a fuller image than focusing on one heuristic at a time.

Knocking out neurons by prompt. To provide further evidence that the bag of heuristics is
causally linked to correct arithmetic completion, we conduct a second ablation experiment. For
each correct prompt, we identify the heuristic types that should affect it based on its operands and
ground truth result. We then ablate the neurons with the highest classification scores (Section 4.1)
in these heuristics, up to a certain neuron count, and check if the model’s completion changes.
The results (Figure 8) show that ablating neurons from associated heuristics significantly drops
the model’s accuracy, much more than the accuracy drop caused by ablating the same number of
randomly chosen neurons from unassociated heuristics. This demonstrates that we can identify the
neurons important to a given prompt solely based on its associated heuristics. This also indicates a
causal link between the neurons belonging to several heuristics and the prompt’s correct completion.
This supports our bag of heuristics claim: each heuristic only slightly boosts the correct answer logit,
but combined, they cause the model to produce the correct answer with high probability.


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Llama3-8B                                           Llama3-70B
                   1

                 0.75


      Accuracy
                  0.5

                 0.25


                    0   20       40      60       80           0            40       80      120      160
                         Ablated Neurons (Per Layer)                         Ablated Neurons (Per Layer)
                              Heuristic Ablation
                              Random Ablation      +       -         ×        ÷


Figure 8: Knocking out neurons that implement heuristics associated with each prompt (full lines)
leads to a greater decrease in accuracy than knocking out the same number of neurons whose heuris-
tics are not associated with each prompt (dashed lines). This effect occurs across model sizes.

4.3       FAILURE MODES OF THE BAG OF HEURISTICS

The bag of heuristics mechanism employed in Llama3-8B does not generalize perfectly: it fails to
achieve perfect accuracy across all arithmetic prompts (Appendix H). This limitation contrasts with
the theoretical robustness of a genuine algorithmic approach. Here, we aim to elucidate the specific
failures of this mechanism, focusing on why it falters for some prompts.
We hypothesize that the bag of heuristics mechanism completes prompts incorrectly in two ways.
(1) The “bag” might not be big enough; i.e., a prompt might lack sufficient associated neurons. (2)
the heuristics might have imperfect recall (e.g., a neuron that fires for most prompts where the first
operand is even, but does not fire for the prompt “226 − 68 =”) or have low logits for the correct
answer token in the value vectors.
To test these hypotheses, we randomly sample 50
                                                                Incorrect
                                                                   Prompt


correctly completed and 50 incorrectly completed
                                                                    Type


prompts. To test hypothesis (i), we count the number
                                                                  Correct
of heuristic neurons associated with each prompt.
We find that on average, incorrect prompts have                           0        5        10        15
                                                                          Correct answer logit contribution
more heuristic neurons associated with them than
correct prompts. Therefore, we find no support for Figure 9: The model’s failures can be ex-
this hypothesis. To check hypothesis (ii), we calcu- plained by a lower total logit contribution of
late the total contribution of all heuristic neurons to the heuristic neurons to the correct answers.
the logit of the correct answer for each prompt. This
measurement considers both the specific activation of each neuron for the prompt, as well as the logit
of the correct answer token embedded in each neuron’s value vector. On average, there is indeed a
slight advantage in the total logit contribution for correct prompts over incorrect prompts (Figure 9).
This suggests that the primary reason for the bag of heuristics failure on certain prompts is poor
promotion of correct answer logits, rather than a lack of heuristics.

5     T RACKING HEURISTICS DEVELOPMENT ACROSS TRAINING STEPS
Does the bag of heuristics emerge as the primary arithmetic mechanism from the onset of training,
or does it override an earlier, different mechanism that initially drives arithmetic performance? We
conduct an analysis of heuristic development across the training trajectory of the Pythia-6.9B model
(Biderman et al., 2023), due to the public availability of its training checkpoints. Specifically, we
analyze the model at its final checkpoint (143K steps) and at 10K-step intervals down to 23K steps.
The 23K checkpoint is the earliest checkpoint showing good arithmetic performance; Thus, we
begin our analysis at this checkpoint. To guide this analysis, we aim to answer three sub-questions:
When do the final heuristic neurons first appear? We examine when each heuristic neuron from
the final checkpoint first appears during training. For each neuron classified into a particular heuristic
type, we check if the same neuron gets classified into the same heuristic in earlier checkpoints.
Averaging this measure across all heuristic types and operators provides insight into when the final
heuristics initially appear during training. We observe (Figure 10a) that the model develops its final
heuristic mechanism gradually across training, starting from an early checkpoint.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Heuristic neurons intersection
                          with ﬁnal checkpoint
                      1

Intersection ratio
                     0.8
                     0.6
                     0.4
                     0.2

                      23k      63k     103k     143k
                               Training step

                                 (a)
                                                       (b)
                                                                                     (c)

Figure 10: Heuristic analysis across Pythia-6.9B training checkpoints. (a) The percentage of
heuristic neurons from the last checkpoint that also appear in previous checkpoints increases over
training, revealing a gradual creation of the bag of heuristics. (b) The heuristic neurons that are
mutual with the last checkpoint (full line) explain most of the total heuristic behavior (dashed line)
at each checkpoint. Thus, the heuristics that disappear across training are less important to the
model. (c) Ablating specific heuristic neurons heavily drops the model’s accuracy across all training
checkpoints. This suggests arithmetic accuracy primarily stems from heuristics, even in early stages.


Do additional heuristic neurons exist mid-training? Next, for each mid-training checkpoint,
we investigate whether its heuristic neurons that are mutual with the final checkpoint make up the
entire heuristic mechanism in that checkpoint, or whether other heuristics exist that later become
vestigial. We examine the faithfulness (Section 2.1) of the arithmetic circuit at each checkpoint—
once when including only the neurons mutual with the final checkpoint, and once when including
all heuristic neurons in that checkpoint. The difference between these two measurements gives us
an estimate of the importance of the mutual heuristics. Using this metric, we observe that these final
heuristics explain most of the circuit performance for each intermediate checkpoint: they account
for an average of 79% of the total heuristics’ contribution to accuracy at each checkpoint. This
indicates that, while other non-mutual heuristics exist in each checkpoint, these are less important
to the circuit’s accuracy and slowly become vestigial as the circuit converges to its final form.
Does a competing arithmetic mechanism exist mid-training? Finally, we determine if the heuris-
tics appear as the main arithmetic mechanism from early on in training, or if they co-exist with an
unrelated mechanism that becomes vestigial in later checkpoints. We repeat the prompt-guided neu-
ron knockout experiment (Section 4.2) for each checkpoint; i.e., in each checkpoint, we sample 50
correctly completed prompts for each operator. For each prompt, we ablate 5, 10, and 25 heuristic
neurons associated with the prompt in that checkpoint. We test if this targeted ablation significantly
impairs the model’s accuracy, even in earlier stages of training, and compare this to a baseline, where
we ablate a similar amount of randomly chosen heuristic neurons. The results (Figure 10c) demon-
strate that removing any amount of neurons from heuristics associated with a prompt substantially
reduces the model’s accuracy on these prompts even at earlier checkpoints, much more than ablating
a random set of important neurons. We also observe that ablating 25 heuristic neurons per layer is
enough to cause near-zero accuracy in all stages of training. This finding asserts that the causal link
between a prompt’s associated heuristics and its correct completion exists throughout training.

6                     R ELATED WORK
Mechanistic interpretability (MI) aims to reverse-engineer mechanisms implemented by LMs by
analyzing model weights and components. Causal mediation techniques (Pearl, 2001) like activation
patching (Vig et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2021), path patching (Wang et al., 2022), and attribution
patching (Nanda, 2022; Syed et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024b) allow localizing model behaviors to
specific model components. Other studies have also presented techniques to explain the effect of
specific weight matrices on input tokens (Elhage et al., 2021; Dar et al., 2023), or to analyze acti-
vations (nostalgebraist, 2020; Geva et al., 2021). Many studies have aimed to use these techniques
to reverse-engineer specific behaviors of pre-trained LMs (Wang et al., 2022; Hanna et al., 2024a;
Gould et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2023). We leverage MI techniques to reverse-engineer the arithmetic
mechanisms implemented by pre-trained LLMs and explain them at a single-neuron resolution.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Memorization and generalization in LLMs. Whether models memorize training data or gen-
eralize to unseen data has been extensively studied in deep learning (e.g., Zhang et al., 2021) and
specifically in LLMs (Tänzer et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2023; Antoniades et al., 2024), but not
many studies have observed this question through the lens of model internals. Among those that
do, Bansal et al. (2022) attempt to predict this trade-off by observing the diversity of internal ac-
tivations; Dankers & Titov (2024) show memorization in language classification tasks is not local
to specific layers, and Varma et al. (2023) explain grokking using memorizing and generalizing cir-
cuits. We use this lens to observe how model internals operate in arithmetic reasoning—a task that
could theoretically be solved either through extensive memorization or by learning a robust algo-
rithm. Concurrent work (jylin et al., 2024) has shown that a LM trained to predict legal board game
moves (Li et al., 2022) does so by implementing many heuristics. While heuristics would suffice to
robustly predict legal moves in a board game setting, we find that the extent to which LLMs rely on
heuristics is greater than prior work suggests: sets of heuristics are used to accomplish even generic
tasks like arithmetic, where no heuristic is likely to generalize to all possible results.

Arithmetic reasoning interpretability. Recent studies on how LMs process arithmetic prompts
(Stolfo et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024) reveal the general structure of arithmetic circuits, but do
not fully explain how they combine operand information to produce correct answers. Our research
bridges this gap by revealing the mechanism used for promoting the correct answer. Some studies
show the emergence of mathematical algorithms for modular addition (Nanda et al., 2023; Zhong
et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024) and binary arithmetic (Maltoni & Ferrara, 2023) in simple, specialized
toy LMs, but it is unclear if these findings extend to larger, general-purpose LMs or other operators.
In pre-trained LLMs, Zhou et al. (2024) found that Fourier space features are used for addition.
However, we claim this is only a partial view, as many additional types of features and heuristics
relying on these features are involved in calculating answers across arithmetic operations. In this
work, we give a wide view of these heuristics and how they combine to generate arithmetic answers.

7    C ONCLUSIONS
Do LLMs rely on a robust algorithm or on memorization to solve arithmetic tasks? Our analysis
suggests that the mechanism behind the arithmetic abilities of LLMs is somewhere in the middle:
LLMs implement a bag of heuristics—a combination of many memorized rules—to perform arith-
metic reasoning. To reach this conclusion, we performed a set of causal analysis experiments to
locate a circuit, i.e., a subset of model components, responsible for arithmetic calculations. We ex-
amined the circuit at the level of individual neurons and pinpointed the arithmetic calculations to a
sparse set of MLP neurons. We showed that each neuron acts as a memorized heuristic, activating
for a specific pattern of inputs, and that the combination of many such neurons is required to cor-
rectly answer the prompts. In addition, we found that this mechanism gradually evolves over the
course of training, emerging steadily rather than appearing abruptly or replacing other mechanisms.
Our results, showing LLMs’ reliance on the bag of heuristics, suggest that improving LLMs’ mathe-
matical abilities may require fundamental changes to training and architectures, rather than post-hoc
techniques like activation steering (Subramani et al., 2022; Turner et al., 2023). Additionally, the
evolution of this mechanism across training indicates that models learn these heuristics early and re-
inforce them over time, potentially overfitting to early simple strategies; it is unclear if regularization
can improve this, and this is a possible avenue for future research.

8    L IMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
Interpretability work is often fundamentally limited by human biases. As researchers, we often
impose human abstractions onto models, whereas the goal of interpretability is to understand the
abstractions that models learn and apply in a way that we can understand. Our work is also sub-
ject to this limitation, namely with respect to the definition of heuristic types: We define heuristic
abstractions based on our human-identifiable definitions. A possible improvement would be to de-
velop a method to identify these abstractions without human bias. Another important detail is that
our analysis focuses on LLMs that combine digits in tokenization. That is, every token can contain
more than one digit. The robust algorithms used by humans depend on our ability to separate larger
numbers to single digits. Thus, a similar analysis might lead to different conclusions for models that
perform single-digit tokenization.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Dana Arad and Alessandro Stolfo for providing feedback for this work. This
research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 448/20), an Azrieli Founda-
tion Early Career Faculty Fellowship, and an AI Alignment grant from Open Philanthropy. AM is
supported by a postdoctoral fellowship under the Zuckerman STEM Leadership Program. AR is
supported by a postdoctoral fellowship under the Azrieli Postdoctoral Fellowship Program. This
research was funded by the European Union (ERC, Control-LM, 101165402). Views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the Euro-
pean Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor
the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

R EFERENCES
Antonis Antoniades, Xinyi Wang, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
  and William Yang Wang. Generalization vs. memorization: Tracing language models’ capabilities
  back to pretraining data. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Foundation Models in the Wild, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=0LaybrPql4.
Rachit Bansal, Danish Pruthi, and Yonatan Belinkov. Measures of information reflect memorization
  patterns. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational
  Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, 2022.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Verna Dankers and Ivan Titov. Generalisation first, memorisation second? Memorisation localisa-
  tion for natural language classification tasks. In The 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 14348–14366. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Guy Dar, Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. Analyzing transformers in embedding
  space. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16124–16170, 2023.
Xiaoman Delores Ding, Zifan Carl Guo, Eric J Michaud, Ziming Liu, and Max Tegmark. Sur-
  vival of the fittest representation: A case study with modular addition. In ICML 2024 Work-
  shop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  2WfiYQlZDa.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The Llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of neural
  networks. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 9574–9586. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2021/file/4f5c422f4d49a5a807eda27434231040-Paper.pdf.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 5484–5495, 2021.
Rhys Gould, Euan Ong, George Ogden, and Arthur Conmy. Successor heads: Recurring, inter-
  pretable attention heads in the wild. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=kvcbV8KQsi.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: Inter-
 preting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. Have faith in faithfulness: Going beyond
 circuit overlap when finding model mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17806, 2024b.
Tom Henighan, Shan Carter, Tristan Hume, Nelson Elhage, Robert Lasenby, Stanislav Fort,
  Nicholas Schiefer, and Christopher Olah. Superposition, memorization, and double descent.
  Transformer Circuits Thread, 6:24, 2023.
Yifan Hou, Jiaoda Li, Yu Fei, Alessandro Stolfo, Wangchunshu Zhou, Guangtao Zeng, Antoine
  Bosselut, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Towards a mechanistic interpretation of multi-step reasoning
  capabilities of language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4902–4919, 2023.
jylin, JackS, Adam Karvonen, and Can Rager. Othellogpt learned a bag of heuris-
   tics, 2024. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/gcpNuEZnxAPayaKBY/
   othellogpt-learned-a-bag-of-heuristics-1.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, David So, and Quoc V Le. Pay attention to MLPs. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 34:9204–9215, 2021.
Davide Maltoni and Matteo Ferrara. Arithmetic with language models: From memorization to
  computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01154, 2023.
Callum McDougall, Arthur Conmy, Cody Rushing, Thomas McGrath, and Neel Nanda. Copy sup-
  pression: Comprehensively understanding an attention head. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04625,
  2023.
Neel Nanda. Attribution patching: Activation patching at industrial scale, 2022. URL https:
  //www.neelnanda.io/mechanistic-interpretability/attribution-
  patching.
Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom.   TransformerLens.                      https://github.com/
  TransformerLensOrg/TransformerLens, 2022.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress mea-
  sures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
nostalgebraist. Interpreting GPT: The logit lens, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/
  posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. Direct and Indirect Effects, 2001. URL https://ftp.
  cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/R273-U.pdf.
Nikhil Prakash, Tamar Rott Shaham, Tal Haklay, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Fine-tuning
  enhances existing mechanisms: A case study on entity tracking. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alessandro Stolfo, Yonatan Belinkov, and Mrinmaya Sachan. A mechanistic interpretation of arith-
  metic reasoning in language models using causal mediation analysis. In Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7035–7052, 2023.
Nishant Subramani, Nivedita Suresh, and Matthew E Peters. Extracting latent steering vectors from
  pretrained language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
  2022, pp. 566–581, 2022.
Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit
  discovery. In NeurIPS Workshop on Attributing Model Behavior at Scale, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=tiLbFR4bJW.
Michael Tänzer, Sebastian Ruder, and Marek Rei. Memorisation versus generalisation in pre-trained
 language models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
 tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7564–7578, 2022.
Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, Gavin Leech, David Udell, Juan J Vazquez, Ulisse Mini, and
  Monte MacDiarmid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10248, 2023.
Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
  grokking through circuit efficiency. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2309, 2023.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and
  Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12388–12401, 2020.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: A circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.
Wei Zhang, Chaoqun Wan, Yonggang Zhang, Yiu ming Cheung, Xinmei Tian, Xu Shen, and Jieping
 Ye. Interpreting and improving large language models in arithmetic calculation. In Forty-first
 International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=CfOtiepP8s.
Ziqian Zhong, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Jacob Andreas. The clock and the pizza: Two
  stories in mechanistic explanation of neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Tianyi Zhou, Deqing Fu, Vatsal Sharan, and Robin Jia. Pre-trained large language models use
  Fourier features to compute addition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03445, 2024.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L LAMA 3-8B CIRCUIT EVALUATION RESULTS

                                                  Llama3-8B circuit faithfulness
                                              as function of number of circuit heads
                                         1


                         Faithfulness
                                        0.5


                                          0        10      20           30          40
                                                   Number of heads in circuit
                                                      +      -    ×       ÷

    Figure 11: Llama3-8B arithmetic circuit faithfulness as function of number of circuit heads.

In Figure 11, we present an analysis of the faithfulness of the identified circuit in Llama3-8B (Sec-
tion 2.1) as a function of the number of attention heads within the circuit. The circuit includes
all MLPs (the neuron-level analysis in Section 3.1 does not apply in this context). Our goal is to
find a minimal subset of the model with the fewest attention heads possible while maintaining high
faithfulness. We assess faithfulness independently for each operator to obtain a more nuanced un-
derstanding of the necessary attention heads. For addition, subtraction, and division operations, we
observe that 6 heads suffice to attain high faithfulness (97% on average). In contrast, in multiplica-
tion, 20 attention heads are required to achieve a faithfulness score exceeding 90%. The faithfulness
of the full arithmetic circuit for each operator, corresponding to the Pareto-optimal number of heads
(in terms of achieving high faithfulness with as few heads as possible), is documented in Table 1.
We explore the attention patterns of these attention heads in the next section.

                  Table 1: Llama3-8B arithmetic circuit faithfulness, per operator.

                                        Operator          +         -         ×          ÷
                                        Faithfulness    0.97       0.98      0.90    0.96
                                        # Attn Heads      6          6        20       6


B     L LAMA 3-8B CIRCUIT ADDITIONAL COMPONENTS
To provide a more comprehensive understanding of the arithmetic circuit in Llama3-8B, we analyze
the additional components that compose it, namely the first MLP layer (MLP0) and the high-effect
attention heads.

B.1   MLP0

To analyze the role of MLP0 in the arithmetic circuit, we first test if—similarly to the middle- and
late-layer MLPs—only a sparse set of neurons within the MLP is required. We measure the inter-
vention effect of each neuron, averaged across the operands and operator positions (p ∈ [1, 2, 3]).
The results, shown in Figure 12a, reveal that few MLP0 neurons have a high effect, similar to the
middle- and late-layer MLPs. To verify these neurons are sufficient for arithmetic calculations, we
repeat the experiment from Section 3.1. Specifically, we measure the faithfulness of the circuit—
consisting of the top 1% of neurons in each of the middle and late layers (l ∈ [16, 32]) as well as
a varying number of neurons in MLP0. The results, shown in Figure 12b, reveal that also in the
first MLP layer, as little as 1% of neurons is sufficient for the circuit to achieve high faithfulness,
similarly to the middle- and late-layer MLPs.
Because Llama3-8B applies a positional embedding only at attention layers, the activation of MLP0
is not affected by the position of any token. Additionally, due to a lack of attention heads that move
information between the operand and operator positions before MLP0, we can analyze its effect
directly on single tokens. Thus, we view MLP0 as an “effective embedding” (McDougall et al.,


                                                              14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Individual MLP Neuron Intervention Eﬀects                                                 Faithfulness of using only top-k neurons
                                                                                                                1

Intervention Eﬀect


                                                                                                Faithfulness
                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
                     0.05                                                                                      0.8                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ×
                           0                                                                                   0.6                                                                                          ÷

                                0           5k         10k                                                                      1%                             10%                       100%
                                            Neuron Index                                                               Neurons used Per Layer (%)
(a) Few neurons in the first MLP have a high effect                                             (b) The circuit faithfulness when including a percent-
on arithmetic prompts.                                                                          age of high-effect MLP0 neurons in the circuit.

Figure 12: Analyzing effect of individual MLP0 neurons. A small number of neurons is sufficient
for circuit accuracy.


2023), and hypothesize that the role of each MLP0 neuron is to incorporate additional numerical
information into each token embedding. To verify this, we pass a list of numerical tokens, each
representing an operand in our analyzed operand range (t ∈ [0, 300]), through the model. We
measure the activation of each high-effect neuron for each token. As exemplified in Figure 13,
the activations of these high-effect neurons correspond to varied numerical features. For example,
Neuron 6206 (Figure 13a activates for numbers near 170 or 17; Neuron 7101 activates for numbers
greater than 100; Neuron 8969 activates for numbers that are congruent to 8 (mod 10). Overall,
the set of patterns identified by these neurons can be used by the middle- and late-layer heuristic
neurons to perform their more complex functionalities.
Neuron activation


                                                           Neuron activation


                     0.6
                                                                               0.4                                             Neuron activation
                                                                                                                                                     0
                     0.4                                                                                                                           −0.1
                                                                               0.2
                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                   −0.2
                      0                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                   −0.3
                           0
                           25
                           50
                           75
                           100
                           125
                           150
                           175
                           200
                           225
                           250
                           275


                                                                                     0
                                                                                     25
                                                                                     50
                                                                                     75
                                                                                     100
                                                                                     125
                                                                                     150
                                                                                     175
                                                                                     200
                                                                                     225
                                                                                     250
                                                                                     275


                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                              32
                                                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                                                        96
                                                                                                                                                                             128
                                                                                                                                                                                   160
                                                                                                                                                                                         192
                                                                                                                                                                                               224
                                                                                                                                                                                                     256
                                                                                                                                                                                                           288
                               Numerical input token                                 Numerical input token                                                    Numerical input token

                               (a) Neuron 6206                                       (b) Neuron 7101                                                      (c) Neuron 8969

                     Figure 13: Individual MLP0 neurons have identifiable activation patterns for numerical tokens.


B.2                        ATTENTION HEAD PATTERNS

We present the attention patterns of the attention heads that are contained in the arithmetic circuit.
In Section 2.1, for simplicity, we consider the arithmetic circuit as a single circuit for all arithmetic
operators, containing all attention heads used across the four operators. We observe that to achieve
high faithfulness of the circuit with a minimal number of heads (Appendix A), some general arith-
metic heads, that significantly improve faithfulness across all operators, are required. Other heads,
while contributing to increased faithfulness, are operator-specific. They exhibit varying levels of
importance for different operators. A full description of the attention heads used in the arithmetic
circuit for each operator is provided in Table 2.
To better understand the role of the general arithmetic heads (L2H2, L15H13, L16H21), we compute
their attention patterns, averaging them across our prompt dataset (Section 2.1). These patterns
(Figure 14) reveal a clear signal: each of the three heads attends to a single input token, copying
the representation from that position and projecting it to the last position. Specifically, L16H21
attends to the first operand, L2H2 attends to the operator and L15H13 attends to the second operand.
This implies the role of each such head is to move the representation from that position, which
includes to the last position, where it is further processed by the bag of heuristics implemented in
the middle- and late-layer MLPs. To confirm that the information copied from each position to the
last position consists solely of data from the token at that position, we conduct an ablation study.
For each general arithmetic head, we zero out all preceding attention patterns that move information


                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Llama3-8B operator-specific arithmetic circuit attention heads. The general arithmetic
heads are marked bold. LiHj denotes the j th attention head in Layer i.

                         Operator                                                              Circuit Heads
                               +            L2H2, L5H3, L5H31, L14H12, L15H13, L16H21

                               −            L2H2, L13H21, L13H22, L14H12, L15H13, L16H21

                                            L2H2, L5H30, L8H15, L9H26, L13H18, L13H21, L13H22, L14H12,
                               ×            L14H13, L15H8, L15H13, L15H14, L15H15, L16H3, L16H21,
                                            L17H24, L17H26, L18H16, L20H2, L22H1

                               ÷            L2H2, L5H31, L15H13, L15H14, L16H21, L18H16


to its attended position (e.g., for L15H13 we zero out all patterns that move information to the op2
position), preventing any influence from previous positions. We observe this does not affect the
circuit’s performance, indicating that the representation copied by each general arithmetic head to
the final position contains information only regarding the token at its original position.

                        BoS                                                        BoS                                                               BoS
Destination Token


                                                           Destination Token


                                                                                                                             Destination Token
                        Op1                                                        Op1                                                               Op1

                    Operator                                                   Operator                                                          Operator

                        Op2                                                        Op2                                                               Op2

                          =                                                          =                                                                 =
                               Bo    Op    Op  O    =                                     Bo       Op      Op  O     =                                      Bo       Op    Op  O     =
                                 S     1     er p2                                             S       1     er p2                                               S     1     er p2
                                               at                                                              at                                                              at
                                                 or                                                               or                                                              or
                                    Source Token                                               Source Token                                                      Source Token

                        (a) Layer 2 Head 2                                        (b) Layer 15 Head 13                                              (c) Layer 16 Head 21

Figure 14: The attention patterns for the general arithmetic attention heads in Llama3-8B, show that
each head attends, at the last token, to a single previous token across all prompts. When combined,
these heads attend to all three operand and operator positions.


C                      M ULTI - LAYER PERCEPTRON IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Across the models we analyze, different implementations exist for the MLP layer in a transformer
block. More specifically, Pythia-6.9B and GPT-J use simple MLP layers, consisting of two matrix
multiplications. For a layer l, it can be described as:

                                                          l⊤
                                         hlpost = σ hlin Win                                 (4)

                                                                                  hlout = hlpost Wout
                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                   (5)

where hlin , hlout ∈ Rd are the input and output representations of the MLP at layer l, respectively.
hlpost ∈ Rdmlp is the post-activation vector, Win
                                                l     l
                                                  , Wout  ∈ Rdmlp ×d are parameter matrices, and σ
is a non-linearity function. Llama3-8B and Llama3-70B use a Gated MLP layer (Liu et al., 2021),
described in the following two equations for layer l:
                                                                                                   ⊤                     ⊤
                                                        hlpost = σ(hlin Wgate
                                                                         l
                                                                              ) ◦ (hlin Win
                                                                                         l
                                                                                            )                                                                                      (6)

                                                                                  hlout = hlpost Wout
                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                                                                                   (7)
       l
where Wgate ∈ Rdmlp ×d is an additional parameter matrix and ◦ is Hadamard product. Biases are
omitted in both presentations.


                                                                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


While the key-value view that was used in Section 3 was devised for simple MLPs (Geva et al.,
2021), it can be applied to the Gated MLP mechanism of Llama3 models as well. For the nth neuron,
we treat the element hl,n         l                               th
                         post of hpost as the activation of the n key vector. Each such activation is
                   l,n                       l
multiplied with vout   , a row vector of Wout   , resulting in the same multiplication as performed in
simple MLPs.

D    N EURON INTERSECTION BETWEEN OPERATORS


                                           Neuron Intersection Across Operators
                                                                              1
                                           + 100.0% 55.8%    52.6%   52.3%

                                                                              0.8

                                           - 55.8% 100.0% 53.0%      53.3%
                                Operator



                                                                              0.6

                                           × 52.6%   53.0% 100.0% 55.8%
                                                                              0.4


                                           ÷ 52.3%   53.3%   55.8% 100.0%
                                                                              0.2

                                               +       -      ×       ÷
                                                       Operator

                 Figure 15: IoU of MLP neurons between operator-specific circuits

Figure 15 presents the IoU (intersection over union) of causally important neuron sets in the arith-
metic circuits, identified separately for each operator. Each circuit consists of the top-200 neurons
from each layer l ∈ [16, 32], ranked based on their mean effect (Section 3.1), totaling 3, 200 neu-
rons. The average IoU between any two operator-specific circuits is relatively low (54%), indicating
that a substantial proportion of key neurons are unique to each operator. Consequently, we define a
distinct circuit for each arithmetic operator at the neuron level (Section 3.1).

E    H EURISTIC TYPES DESCRIPTIONS
In this section, we present the various heuristic types that were manually identified.
Most heuristic types are defined with parameters. A neuron is defined as a heuristic H, if it matches
the heuristic definition given a parameter value. For example, the neuron in Figure 1b is a range
heuristic with a range parameter [150, 180]. In Algorithm 1, we describe the process of matching
between each important neuron and each heuristic H. The parameters are sub-sampled evenly to
cover most observed possibilities, which causes some inaccuracies (for example, a neuron that fires
when op2 ∈ [105, 205] will be classified as a range heuristic with op2 ∈ [100, 200] due to our
parameter choices).
Several types of heuristics (Range, Modulo, Pattern) can apply either to an operand in a prompt
or to the prompt’s result. For example, an “operand range” heuristic is triggered when op1 or op2
falls within a specific numerical range, while a “result range” heuristic activates when the prompt’s
ground truth result is within a defined range.
The full list of heuristic types is as follows:

       • Range heuristic: A neuron that activates when a value (either an operand or result)
         falls within a specified range [a, b]. The parameters a, b ∈ N are chosen such that the
         range length len = (b − a) ∈ [10, 30, 50, 100] for addition, subtraction, and multi-
         plication, and len = (b − a) ∈ [2, 10, 100] for division (due to a different distribu-
         tion of potential results for integer division). The range start, a, is defined as a ∈
         xn : xn = x0 + n · max(⌊ len3 ⌋, 10), n ∈ N, x0 = 0, provided a remains below the maxi-
         mum prompt result. This definition of range start and length allows for ranges to intersect
         or overlap.


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Modulo heuristic: A neuron that activates when a value (either operand or result) is
         congruent to m modulo n. The parameters are n ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15} and
         m ∈ [0, n − 1]. We exclude n = 10 or n = 100 as these are specific cases of the broader
         “pattern” heuristics, discussed next. Additionally, n = 12, 14, and n ≥ 16 are excluded, as
         no neurons were classified under these parameter values.
       • Pattern heuristic: A neuron that activates when a value (either operand or result) matches
         a specific regular expression p. The parameter p is a 3-digit regular expression, potentially
         padded with leading zeros. For example, a neuron classified under the “operand pattern
         1.2” heuristic activates when one of the operands has 1 in the hundreds place and 2 in the
         units place.
       • Identical operands heuristic: A neuron that activates when both operands are equal (op1
         == op2 ). The tokens embedded in the value vector change depending on the operator for
         which the neuron activates. For instance, in subtraction, such neurons have been observed
         to promote the “0” token (the result of subtracting a number from itself).
       • Multi-result heuristic: A neuron that promotes a set S of several unrelated results (For
         example, a neuron that promote the results [4, 5, 7]). This heuristic type is defined exclu-
         sively for division, where the parameter S can consist of several values, where |S| ∈ [2, 4].
         This range was chosen based on observations of activation patterns. The values included
         in S are chosen according to the result tokens that the neuron contributes the most to: we
         determine S by examining the top prompts for which the neuron promotes their answer.
         From these top answers, we identify a minimal set of 2 to 4 distinct result values. This
         set of result values is chosen if it accounts for more than a threshold percentage of the re-
         sults. This approach captures the most significant result values that the neuron consistently
         promotes in division operations. If no such set of different results exists, a neuron is not
         classified as this heuristic.

F    H EURISTIC N EURON C LASSIFICATION A LGORITHM
We present the full algorithm used to match between each neuron and each heuristic type in Algo-
rithm 1 (as exemplified in Figure 6). The goal of this process is to check if a neuron implements a
specific heuristic. We repeat this process for each pair of neuron n in layer l and heuristic H. This
method allows a single neuron to be classified as several heuristics. The matching of each neuron to
heuristics is done separately for each arithmetic operator.

Algorithm 1 Neuron Classification To Heuristic Type
Inputs: Heuristic H, Layer l ∈ [1, lmax ], Neuron Index n ∈ [1, nmax ],
         Operator o ∈ {+, −, ×, ÷}, Threshold t ∈ [0, 1.0]
 1: A ← GenerateActivationPattern(l, n, o)                                ▷ 2D Activation pattern
 2: if H is a direct heuristic then
                            l,n
 3:     l ← LogitLens(vout      )                                        ▷ Logits over vocabulary
 4:     L ← ConvertToPattern(l)                                               ▷ 2D Logits Pattern
 5:     A←A◦L                                                       ▷ Element-wise multiplication
 6: end if
 7: promptsheuristic ← GetAssociatedPrompts(H)                ▷ Expected prompts to activate in H
 8: k ← |promptsheuristic |
 9: promptsneuron ← GetTopKActivatingPrompts(A, k)                  ▷ Prompts that activate neuron
10: promptsintersection ← promptsheuristic ∩ promptsneuron
               |promptsintersection |
11: score ←                                                     ▷ Normalize intersection to [0, 1.0]
                          k
12: return score ≥ t


The algorithm first calculates the neuron’s activations hl,n
                                                          post for all prompts, yielding a 2D activation
pattern (Line 1), as those seen in Appendix J. When checking if a neuron implements a direct
heuristic (heuristics that directly promote relevant result tokens (Section 3.2)), we also need to take
                                                                                 l,n
into consideration the tokens that are embedded in the neuron’s value vector vout    . This is not done in
indirect heuristics because we do not expect relevant result tokens to be promoted in such heuristics.
Thus, we extract the logits of all numerical tokens (“0”, “1”, “2”, ... “999”) from the value vector


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  l,n
vout  (Line 3), using Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020). To match the logit of each result token to the
prompts that result in it (e.g., match the logit of “151” with the prompts “1 + 150 =”,“2 + 149 =”,
etc.), we convert the logits to a 2D pattern L, where Lij is the logit of applying the operator on i
and j (Line 4). Multiplying the 2D activation pattern and 2D logit pattern element-wise (Line 5)
yields the neuron’s effective logit contribution to the correct answer of each prompt, i.e., the value at
each index i, j marks how much the neuron promotes the answer token to the result of applying the
operator on i and j. We then create two lists of prompts. One list contains prompts associated with
the heuristic (Line 7), to be used as the “ground truth”. We mark the number of associated prompts
as k (Line 8), and find a second list, containing the top-k prompts that are most contributed to by the
neuron (Line 9). We measure if the intersection of these two lists, normalized by k, is larger than
the threshold t = 0.6 (Line 10–Line 12) to decide if the neuron implements the heuristic.


G    A DDITIONAL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

All experimental procedures were executed using the TransformerLens library Nanda & Bloom
(2022). Experiments involving Llama3-8B, GPT-J, and Pythia-6.9B were conducted on a single
Nvidia-L40 GPU with 48GB of GPU memory. Llama3-70B was loaded in 16-bit precision across
four Nvidia A100 GPUs, each with 80GB of GPU memory.

Arithmetic prompts. Unless otherwise specified, our experiments utilize prompts of the form
op1 ◦ op2 =”, where op1 , op2 ∈ [0, 300] and ◦ ∈ {+, −, ×, ÷}. The division operator (÷) is inter-
preted as integer division, considering only the integer part of the result (e.g., the ground truth result
for 45 ÷ 4 =” is 11). For each prompt, we compute the ground-truth result and exclude prompts
whose results are not tokenized to a single token. This filtering process eliminates prompts with neg-
ative results and prompts for which the correct answer exceeds the single-token limit (The highest
token from which the model splits numbers into two tokens). The single-token limit s for Llama3-8B
and Llama3-70B is sllama3 = 1, 000, while for GPT-J and Pythia-6.9B, it is sgptj = spythia = 520.

Circuit discovery via activation patching. In Section 2.1, we quantify the effect of patching on
probabilities. We find that applying our effect measure (Equation (1)) on logits instead of prob-
abilities, does not alter the result significantly—the most effective components remain consistent,
differing only in the scale of the effect.

Circuit faithfulness evaluation. Thus far, to measure the faithfulness of the circuit, we have per-
formed mean ablation on all non-circuit components. For that, we calculate the mean activation
output of each component, across all arithmetic prompts. In this context, we do not filter correct
prompts exclusively, but instead use all prompts of the form “op1 ◦ op2 =”, for op1 , op2 ∈ [0, 300].
This leads to an equal amount of prompts per operator, thus maintaining the mean activation bal-
anced across the different operators. When evaluating a circuit with partial MLP layers (Section 3.1),
we mean ablate lower-effect neurons in middle- and late-layer MLPs only, starting and ending in the
earliest and latest layers from which the answer is extractable via linear probe (Section 2.2). These
layer ranges are [16, 32], [39, 80], [14, 32], [17, 28] In Llama3-8B, Llama3-70B, Pythia-6.9B, and
GPT-J, respectively.

Linear probing for correct answers. We define a linear probe fl,p : R → Rs , where s is the
single-token limit, to predict the correct answer token from the output representation at layer l and
position p. We compute these outputs by using all correctly completed prompts, with 80% used for
training the classifier and 20% for evaluation. Each probing classifier is implemented as a one-layer
fully connected model. We train it using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning
rate of 0.0003 and a batch size of 32, optimizing a cross-entropy loss function.

Heuristic classification. In applying the heuristic classification algorithm (Section 4.1), we use
all activations from the last position p = 4 and employ a classification score threshold t = 0.6. Due
to a lack of ground truth data for neuron-to-heuristic matches, the threshold is chosen to achieve a
Pareto-optimal balance of false positives, that occur more for a lower threshold, and false negatives,
that occur more in a higher threshold. The amount of false classifications is estimated manually.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table 3: Accuracy of the analyzed models on arithmetic prompts.

                                                Operator
                       Model             +      −       ×       ÷     Average
                       Llama3-8B       0.97    0.96    0.84   0.92      0.95
                       Llama3-70B      0.97    0.99    0.99   0.73      0.88
                       Pythia-6.9B     0.30    0.04    0.27   0.75      0.43
                       GPT-J           0.23    0.09    0.46   0.64      0.37


H    M ODEL ACCURACIES ON ARITHMETIC PROMPTS
Table 3 presents the accuracy of the analyzed models on arithmetic prompts. The accuracy is eval-
uated across prompts where the result is represented by a single token, with both operands con-
strained to the interval [0, 300], where 300 represents the maximum value of operands in the an-
alyzed prompts (Section 2.1), chosen for efficiency. It is noteworthy that the high accuracy rates
observed in division operations for the smaller-scale models (GPT-J, Pythia-6.9B) can be attributed
to the non-uniform distribution of answers in integer division, i.e. - half of the legal prompts result
in the token ‘0’.

I   R ESULTS ON ADDITIONAL MODELS
To demonstrate the generalizability of our findings across differently-trained LLMs, we conduct
our primary experiments on Llama3-70B (Dubey et al., 2024), Pythia-6.9B (Biderman et al., 2023),
and GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021). We replicate the experiments for circuit discovery and
evaluation (Section 2.1), linear probing for answer token embeddings (Section 2.2), top-k neuron
faithfulness analysis (Section 3.1), and heuristic analysis (Section 4.2). The results obtained are
similar to those of Llama3-8B across all three LLMs:

       • The circuit comprises a sparse subset of attention heads that project operand and operator
         information to the final position, along with all MLP layers. Early-layer MLPs process in-
         formation at the operand and operator positions, while middle- and late-layer MLPs process
         the combined information at the last token. These findings are illustrated for Llama3-70B
         (Figure 16a), Pythia-6.9B (Figure 17a), and GPT-J (Figure 18a).
       • Linear probing results indicate that the correct answer can only be extracted with high
         accuracy in the final position, following the processing initiated by middle-layer MLPs.
         These observations are presented for Llama3-70B (Figure 16b), Pythia-6.9B (Figure 17b),
         and GPT-J (Figure 18b).
       • The circuit requires a sparse subset of middle- and late-layer MLP neurons to achieve
         maximal faithfulness. These results are depicted for Llama3-70B (Figure 16c), Pythia-
         6.9B (Figure 17c), and GPT-J (Figure 18c).
       • The heuristic neurons in the middle- and late-layer MLPs are the model components that
         write the correct answer to the model output. This is shown by repeating the prompt-guided
         knockout experiment (Section 4.2). The ablation of specific heuristic neurons associated
         with prompts results in a more significant reduction in model accuracy compared to the
         ablation of a random set of neurons of equivalent size. These findings are illustrated for
         Llama3-70B (Figure 8), Pythia-6.9B (Figure 17d), and GPT-J (Figure 18d).

The results observed in Llama3-70B exhibit the highest similarity to those reported in Llama3-8B,
with a more pronounced knockout effect compared to the other two models. We hypothesize that
this indicates a more sophisticated development of the bag of heuristics in Llama3-70B, potentially
facilitated by its larger size and modern training methodology.

J   A DDITIONAL EXAMPLES FOR ARITHMETIC HEURISTICS
We present supplementary examples of heuristic neurons (Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, and Table 7 for
the four arithmetic operators, respectively). Each neuron hl,n
                                                           post found to be important for a specific


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


arithmetic operator (Section 3.1) is categorized as one or more heuristics. For each designated oper-
ator, we randomly present four neurons. We compute and report each neuron’s activation pattern, the
                                                                                     l,n
ten numerical tokens with the strongest embeddings in each neuron’s value vector vout    , and provide
a non-exhaustive list of the heuristics it implements.
Furthermore, we present in Table 8 several examples of causally significant neurons that have not
been classified as specific heuristics. These neurons are relevant to the aforementioned limitation in
our methodology (Section 8); it is conceivable that they too may be considered components of the
bag of heuristics, depending upon our ability to comprehend the abstractions they implement.

                                                                                                    Answer token
                          Eﬀect Map Per Attn Head / MLP                                            probe accuracy
                                                                              log             0
             Attention Heads (Last Position)                        MLPs      scale                                   0.8
                                                                                              20
        0


                                                                                      Layer
                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                4             40
        20                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                              60
Layer


                                                                                                                      0.2
        40                                                                      2                                     0
                                                                                                    Op Op Op =
        60                                                                                            er er er
                                                                                                        an at an
                                                                                                          d1 or  d2
                                                                                0
         0           20                40                60        0 1 2 3                            Position
                     Attention Head                                Position
                                                                                      (b) Llama3-70B linear probing re-
                     (a) Llama3-70B localization results.                             sults.
                                                    Faithfulness of using only top-k neurons

                                              0.8
                               Faithfulness


                                              0.6

                                              0.4

                                              0.2

                                                0             5k      10k       15k           20k
                                                           Neurons used Per Layer
                                                             +      -    ×      ÷

                               (c) Llama3-70B faithfulness as function of MLP neu-
                               rons in each layer.

                                                Figure 16: Llama3-70B analysis results


                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                  Answer token
                                         Eﬀect Map Per Attn Head / MLP                                           probe accuracy
                                                                                          log               0
                           Attention Heads (Last Position)                     MLPs       scale
                                                                                                            8                         0.6
                       0                                                                      6


                                                                                                    Layer
                                                                                                            16                        0.4

                10                                                                            4                                       0.2
                                                                                                            24
Layer


                                                                                                                                      0
                20                                                                                               Op Op Op =
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                   er er er
                                                                                                                     an at an
                                                                                                                       d1 or  d2
                30
                                                                                              0
                           0          10             20          30           0 1 2 3                               Position
                                      Attention Head                          Position
                                                                                                    (b) Pythia-6.9B linear probing re-
                                       (a) Pythia-6.9B localization results.                        sults.
                           Faithfulness of using only top-k neurons

               0.8
Faithfulness


               0.6

               0.4

               0.2

                       0                5k                10k          15k
                                     Neurons used Per Layer
                                       +      -    ×      ÷

(c) Pythia-6.9B faithfulness as function of MLP neu-
rons in each layer.                                                                 (d) Pythia-6.9B prompt-specific heuristic knockout.

                                                  Figure 17: Results for all analyses on Pythia-6.9B.

                                         Eﬀect Map Per Attn Head / MLP                                            Answer token
                                                                                          log                    probe accuracy
                           Attention Heads (Last Position)                     MLPs       scale             0
                       0                                                                      8
                                                                                                            7                         0.6
                                                                                                    Layer


                                                                                              6                                       0.4
                                                                                                            14
                10
Layer


                                                                                              4             21                        0.2


                20                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                              2                  Op Op Op =
                                                                                                                   er er er
                                                                                                                     an at an
                                                                                              0                        d1 or  d2
                           0            5            10           15          0 1 2 3
                                      Attention Head                          Position                              Position
                                            (a) GPT-J localization results.                            (b) GPT-J linear probing results.
                               Faithfulness of using only top-k neurons

                       0.8
        Faithfulness


                       0.6

                       0.4

                       0.2

                           0                5k             10k           15k
                                       Neurons used Per Layer
                                         +      -    ×      ÷

        (c) GPT-J faithfulness as function of MLP neurons in
        each layer.                                                                   (d) GPT-J prompt-specific heuristic knockout.

                                                     Figure 18: Results for all analyses on GPT-J.


                                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 4: Examples of heuristic neurons for the addition operator

                                                                 Top-10
  Neuron                                                        numerical
  number                      Activation pattern             logits in value     Classified Heuristics
   hl,n
    post                                                                l,n
                                                               vector vout

                        250


                        200
                                                             ’254’, ’255’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’253’, ’256’,     rangeresult ∈ [240, 270],
 h31,9208
  post                                                       ’250’, ’257’,     rangeresult ∈ [250, 300],
                        100
                                                             ’252’, ’251’,         patternresult .5.
                        50
                                                             ’258’, ’259’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’164’, ’163’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’464’, ’363’,
                                                                                  patternresult .6.,
 h31,2919
  post                                                        ’63’, ’063’,
                        100                                                       patternresult .64
                                                             ’364’, ’963’,
                        50
                                                             ’263’, ’663’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                              ’2’, ’542’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’792’, ’979’,
  17,1463                                                                         op1 ≡ 2 (mod 5),
 hpost                                                       ’372’, ’502’,
                        100                                                       op2 ≡ 2 (mod 5)
                                                             ’882’, ’962’,
                        50
                                                              ’602’, ’02’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’922’, ’169’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’322’, ’258’,        rangeop1 ∈ [0, 50],
 h16,10226
  post                                                       ’873’, ’753’,       rangeop1 ∈ [0, 100],
                        100
                                                             ’129’, ’852’,       rangeop2 ∈ [0, 100]
                        50
                                                               ’41’, ’33’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 5: Examples of heuristic neurons for the subtraction operator

                                                                 Top-10
  Neuron                                                        numerical
  number                      Activation pattern             logits in value   Classified Heuristics
   hl,n
    post                                                                l,n
                                                               vector vout

                        250


                        200
                                                               ’0’, ’000’,
             Operand1


                        150                                   ’00’, ’006’,
                                                                               identical operands,
 h30,8806
  post                                                       ’002’, ’004’,
                                                                                patternresult 000
                        100                                  ’001’, ’005’,
                                                             ’003’, ’009’
                        50


                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2



                        250


                        200
                                                             ’192’, ’384’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’288’, ’576’,
  29,1647
 hpost                                                       ’336’, ’672’,     result ≡ 0 (mod 8)
                        100                                   ’96’, ’224’,
                                                             ’608’, ’768’
                        50


                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2



                        250


                        200
                                                               ’15’, ’5’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’015’, ’535’,
   16,747
  hpost                                                       ’764’, ’3’,       patternresult 0.5
                        100                                  ’762’, ’021’,
                                                               ’4’, ’13’
                        50


                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2



                        250


                        200
                                                             ’369’, ’271’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’761’, ’762’,
   16,360
  hpost                                                      ’522’, ’918’,        patternop2 ..8
                        100                                  ’972’, ’783’,
                                                             ’325’, ’531’
                        50


                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 6: Examples of heuristic neurons for the multiplication operator

                                                                 Top-10
  Neuron                                                        numerical
  number                      Activation pattern             logits in value     Classified Heuristics
   hl,n
    post                                                                l,n
                                                               vector vout

                        250


                        200
                                                             ’320’, ’360’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’770’, ’630’,      result ≡ 0 (mod 5),
 h31,8084
  post                                                       ’820’, ’510’,        patternresult ..5,
                        100
                                                             ’420’, ’240’,         patternop2 010
                        50
                                                             ’370’, ’380’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’585’, ’936’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’546’, ’637’,       op1 ≡ 0 (mod 13),
  30,9988
 hpost                                                       ’975’, ’455’,       op2 ≡ 0 (mod 13),
                        100
                                                             ’910’, ’819’,      result ≡ 0 (mod 13)
                        50
                                                             ’715’, ’364’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’170’, ’162’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’171’, ’169’,
                                                                               rangeresult ∈ [150, 180],
 h21,12521
  post                                                        ’17’, ’156’,
                        100                                                      result ≡ 0 (mod 2)
                                                              ’160’, ’16’,
                        50
                                                             ’785’, ’168’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’844’, ’848’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’873’, ’985’,
 h16,2956
  post                                                       ’548’, ’858’,          patternop2 0.1
                        100
                                                             ’657’, ’995’,
                        50
                                                             ’788’, ’716’

                          0    50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Table 7: Examples of heuristic neurons for the division operator

                                                                 Top-10
  Neuron                                                        numerical
  number                      Activation pattern             logits in value    Classified Heuristics
   hl,n
    post                                                                l,n
                                                               vector vout

                        250


                        200
                                                               ’5’, ’005’,
             Operand1


                        150                                   ’05’, ’948’,
                                                                                patternresult 005,
 h30,3168
  post                                                       ’891’, ’349’,
                        100                                                    rangeresult ∈ [4 − 6]
                                                             ’324’, ’544’,
                        50
                                                             ’905’, ’801’

                               50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                                 ’23’, ’33’,
             Operand1


                        150                                      ’38’, ’08’,     rangeop2 ∈ [0, 10],
  25,1402
 hpost                                                           ’22’, ’00’,   rangeresult ∈ [0, 100],
                        100
                                                                 ’26’, ’30’,      patternresult ..3
                        50
                                                                 ’07’, ’32’

                               50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                              ’8’, ’446’,
             Operand1


                        150                                   ’770’, ’7’,
                                                                                multi-valueresult ∈
 h24,9306
  post                                                       ’740’, ’674’,
                        100                                                         {1, 2, 7, 8}
                                                             ’449’, ’741’,
                        50
                                                              ’08’, ’433’

                               50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                        250


                        200
                                                             ’568’, ’316’,
             Operand1


                        150                                  ’773’, ’405’,
                                                                                  patternop1 ..0,
 h17,10704
  post                                                       ’621’, ’822’,
                        100                                                       patternop1 .50
                                                             ’582’, ’549’,
                        50
                                                             ’587’, ’598’,

                               50   100   150   200   250
                                      Operand2


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Table 8: Examples of neurons that failed to classify as one of the defined heuristic types

                                                                       Top-10 numerical
  Neuron number                                                      logits in value vector
                                       Activation pattern
      hl,n
       post                                                                     l,n
                                                                              vout
                                              Operand2
                                   0   50   100   150   200    250



                                 50


                                 100                                 ’844’, ’839’, ’568’,
     h22,14024
                      Operand1
      post     ,                                                     ’216’, ’636’, ’877’,
                                 150
     Addition                                                        ’786’, ’832’, ’084’,
                                                                            ’536’
                                 200


                                 250


                                 250


                                 200
                      Operand1


                                 150                                   ’344’, ’3’, ’444’,
     h19,12469
      post     ,
                                                                       ’509’, ’4’, ’456’,
    Subtraction                  100                                 ’445’, ’2’, ’333’, ’5’
                                  50


                                   0   50   100   150   200   250
                                              Operand2


                                 250


                                 200
                      Operand1


                                                                     ’270’, ’409’, ’257’,
                                 150
    h27,4900
      post    ,                                                      ’454’, ’451’, ’570’,
   Multiplication                100                                 ’290’, ’287’, ’470’,
                                                                            ’439’
                                  50


                                   0   50   100   150   200   250
                                              Operand2


                                 250


                                 200
                      Operand1


                                                                     ’823’, ’983’, ’801’,
                                 150
     h20,11020
      post     ,                                                     ’731’, ’501’, ’751’,
     Division                    100
                                                                     ’070’, ’663’, ’985’,
                                                                            ’713’
                                  50


                                       50   100   150   200   250
                                              Operand2


                                                          27
