Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A T HEORETICAL F RAMEWORK FOR PARTIALLY-
O BSERVED R EWARD S TATES IN RLHF
 Chinmaya Kausik                                                       Mirco Mutti
 University of Michigan                                                Technion
 ckausik@umich.edu                                                     mirco.m@technion.ac.il

 Aldo Pacchiano˚                                             Ambuj Tewari˚
 Boston University                                           University of Michigan
 Broad Insitute of MIT & Harvard                             tewaria@umich.edu
 pacchian@bu.edu

                                                A BSTRACT

             The growing deployment of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
             calls for a deeper theoretical investigation of its underlying models. The prevalent
             models of RLHF do not account for neuroscience-backed, partially-observed “inter-
             nal states” that can affect human feedback, nor do they accommodate intermediate
             feedback during an interaction. Both of these can be instrumental in speeding
             up learning and improving alignment. To address these limitations, we model
             RLHF as reinforcement learning with partially observed reward-states (PORRL).
             We accommodate two kinds of feedback – cardinal and dueling feedback. We
             first demonstrate that PORRL subsumes a wide class of RL problems, including
             traditional RL, RLHF, and reward machines. For cardinal feedback, we present two
             model-based methods (POR-UCRL, POR-UCBVI). We give both cardinal regret
             and sample complexity guarantees for the methods, showing that they improve over
             naive history-summarization. We then discuss the benefits of a model-free method
             like GOLF with naive history-summarization in settings with recursive internal
             states and dense intermediate feedback. For this purpose, we define a new history
             aware version of the Bellman-eluder dimension and give a new guarantee for GOLF
             in our setting, which can be exponentially sharper in illustrative examples. For
             dueling feedback, we show that a naive reduction to cardinal feedback fails to
             achieve sublinear dueling regret. We then present the first explicit reduction that
             converts guarantees for cardinal regret to dueling regret. In both feedback settings,
             we show that our models and guarantees generalize and extend existing ones.

1       I NTRODUCTION
As automated systems become more ubiquitous, the need to understand how to align their objectives
with the needs of humans that interact with them has become increasingly important (Ji et al., 2023).
The development and study of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has been an
important way of formalizing these problems and design methods for alignment (Wirth et al., 2017).
RLHF is concerned with the study of how to find a policy that maximizes an objective defined in
terms of human labeled data in an RL domain (Christiano et al., 2017).
Many RLHF methods entail learning a reward function from human data, and then using the learned
reward function as an input to a traditional reinforcement learning algorithm such as PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017). These reward-based RLHF methods have been pivotal in the development of several
technologies such as robotics (Brown et al., 2019; Shin et al., 2023), recommender systems (Xue
et al., 2022), and the training of large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022).
It is important to emphasize that reward-based RLHF is not limited to preferential feedback. In
fact, there exist two dominant kinds of feedback, namely cardinal and dueling feedback. Cardinal
feedback requires the human labeler to provide a single label over an entire trajectory of interaction
between the agent and the environment. Dueling feedback requires the human to specify a preference
between two trajectories. In practice, cardinal feedback has been used for LLM alignment algorithms
    ˚
        Joint senior authorship.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


like KTO (Ethayarajh et al., 2024), while dueling feedback has been used in algorithms like DPO
(Rafailov et al., 2023) and PPO-RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022). Past theoretical work (Chatterji et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023b; Saha et al., 2023) has designed algorithms for both cardinal and dueling
feedback under various metrics – standard/cardinal regret, sample complexity or dueling regret.
We observe that current models of reward-based RLHF assume a very specific model of non-
Markovian rewards. Modeling rewards as non-Markovian is natural, since human responses to stimuli
are known to be affected by partially-observed and evolving “internal states” (Flavell et al., 2022). For
example, when a human reads a piece of text (possibly generated by an LLM), their assessment may
oscillate between opposing sentiments in different parts of the text. Unfortunately, current models do
not explicitly incorporate such “internal states” that affect rewards, and are limited to a specific linear
model of rewards. While one can incorporate internal states using naive history-summarization, i.e.
by treating the entire trajectory τ rhs so far as the state, we show below that better general algorithms
can be designed with improved guarantees.
Additionally, current models assume that feedback is received only once at the end of an episode
or pair of episodes. In many applications such as robot motion (Lee et al., 2021) and mathematical
reasoning (Uesato et al., 2022), correctly incorporating intermediate or “snippet-level” feedback can
speed up learning as well as improve alignment. With this in mind, we ask the following questions:

How do we generalize the RLHF setting to incorporate internal states and intermediate feedback?
    What algorithms and guarantees can improve over naive history-summarization here?

Contributions:
• Introducing PORRL: In Section 2, we introduce PORRL, which generalizes current RLHF models
  to incorporate “internal states” and intermediate feedback.
• Improving over naive history-summarization (model-based algorithms): In Section 3.1, we
  design model-based optimistic algorithms  ? that, POR-UCRL and POR-UCBVI, achieving a2 re-
                                  ?
  gret of OpppolypH, S, Aq ` p dE dC q T q and a sample complexity of OpppolypH,
          r                                                                    r           S, Aq{ε `
  p dE dC {ε q under minimal assumptions. The polypH, S, Aq term would be pSAqΩpHq under
   2         2                                  1

  naive history-summarization. We show that our guarantees subsume and improve over past results.
• Leveraging recursive structure on internal states (model-free algorithms): In Section 3.2, we
  study the model-free algorithm GOLF, applied using history-summarization. We define a new
                                                                                        ?
  “history-aware” notion of dimension, dHABE and show that GOLF has regret OppH   r       dHABE dC T q.
  We show using an example that when internal states have a recursive structure, our guarantee can
  be exponentially smaller than existing guarantees and guarantees for our model-based methods.
• Reduction from Dueling to Cardinal PORRL: In section 4, we show that a naive blackbox
  reduction from dueling to cardinal PORRL always fails. We design a whitebox reduction from
  dueling PORRL to a large class of optimistic algorithms for cardinal PORRL. To the best of our
  knowledge, this is the first explicit reduction from cardinal to dueling regret guarantees for MDPs.
• Practical Implications: While the aim of our work is largely theoretical, we extract practical
  insights from our results throughout the text. These are summarized in section 5.
1.1 R ELATED W ORK
RLHF. RL with human preferences has a long history (Akrour et al., 2012; Busa-Fekete &
Hüllermeier, 2014; Sadigh et al., 2017). It has been successfully used in disparate domains such as
robotics, games, and LLMs. The problem of learning from cardinal feedback has been theoretically
studied in (Efroni et al., 2021; Chatterji et al., 2021). Theoretical guarantees for utility-based
preferential (dueling) feedback can be found in (Novoseller et al., 2020; Saha et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2022b; Zhan et al., 2023). The non-Markovian nature of the optimal policy under these RLHF models
contributes greatly to why the problem is harder than traditional RL.
Internal states and intermediate feedback. There is evidence in neuroscience research indicating
that human responses to stimuli are affected by “internal states” — partially hidden variables that
profoundly shape perception, cognition, and action” (see Flavell et al., 2022). Despite not explicitly
     1
       dE is a relevant eluder dimension and dC is a relevant covering dimension. We are working under general
function-approximation for the reward model. It is straightforward to also add general function-approximation
for the transition model, abstracting out the S, A dependence. See remark 4 and Appendix F.


                                                      2
                                                   feedback               1                      0


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     a1        a2         a3
                                                    agent       s1        s2         s3         s4
                   Cardinal        trajectory τ
                   Feedback                        human        🙂         😐          😒          🤩
                                                   feedback               0                      1

                                                                     a1        a2         a3
                                                    agent       s1        s2         s3         s4
                                   trajectory τ1
                                                    human       🙂         😐          😒          🤩
                   Dueling
                                                                     a1         a2         a3
                   Feedback                         agent       s1        s2         s3          s4
                                   trajectory τ2
                                                    human       🙂         🙂          😐          😒
                                                   feedback               0                      1


Figure 1: Illustrating how a human’s internal states (represented by emojis) affect their feedback to
an agent or LLM. Top: Cardinal or good/bad feedback. Bottom: Dueling or preferential feedback. In
line with Definition 1, uh P U are represented by the emojis, p “ 2 and Hp “ t2, 4u in both cases.
recognizing the phenomenon of human internal states, several works in RLHF incorporate richer
forms of feedback. For example, Wu et al. (2023) consider human labeling over sub-sections of
the text. In work on process supervision (Uesato et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023), humans give
feedback on intermediate steps. Our work aims to lay out the groundwork for a theoretical treatment
of internal human states and intermediate feedback in RLHF, using partially observed reward-states.
Partial observability in RL. Although learning in POMDP S (Åström, 1965) is statistically
intractable in general (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2020), a flurry of recent works have
studied POMDP S under various assumptions (Du et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022a;b; Golowich et al.,
2022; Zhan et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhong et al.,
2023). Our model is distinct from POMDP S since it does not require the latent state evolution to be
Markovian, but assumes Markovian transitions for observed states. See Section 2.3 for a discussion.

2    D EFINING RL WITH PARTIALLY-O BSERVED R EWARD S TATES (PORRL)
In this paper, we consider an episodic reinforcement learning setting in which a learner interacts with
an MDP having a state space S, an action space A, transitions dynamics P, and episode length H.
At each time-step h P rHs of an episode, the learner observes the state sh and takes an action ah ,
generating a trajectory τ “ ps1 , a1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , sH , aH q P Γ, where Γ denotes the space of trajectories.2 In
a typical RLHF setting, the learner observes a human feedback oH P O at the end of the episode,
which is associated to but potentially different from a reward r : Γ Ñ R encoding the task. We
now describe how internal states and intermediate feedback shall be incorporated in the latter RLHF
framework through a guiding example, and we use this to formally introduce the PORMDP model.
2.1 PORMDP S
Let us consider the example of a human interacting with a language model, as in Figure 1. Here, an
action is a token, the state is the text so far, and the reward is some score representing the human’s
satisfaction, which induces stochastic feedback. The internal states could be the human’s emotional
reaction to the text (e.g., happy, frustrated, or amused), or numbers in r0, 1s encoding a confidence
level that the text is progressing towards a coherent response. While an agent goes through a sequence
of states and actions, the system (i.e., the human) progresses through internal states, which inevitably
affect, together with agent’s actions and the state of the process, the human’s satisfaction.
Formally, this can be modeled by introducing internal states u P U and defining the set of underlying
histories Γuh´1 that incorporate internal states by Γuh´1 :“ tτ u rh ´ 1s “ tpsl , ul , al quh´1
                                                                                               l“1 | sl P
S, al P A, ul P Uu. We model the dynamics of internal states by saying that there exists an internal
state generator wh : Γuh´1 ˆ S ˆ A Ñ ∆pUq so that the human’s internal state uh is sampled from
the distribution defined by wh pτ u rh ´ 1s, sh , ah q. The human’s satisfaction at time h should then be
a function of the current state and action, but also the current internal state, given by rh psh , uh , ah q.
The agent does not observe the reward rh directly, but a feedback oh depending on rh . Typically, oh
will be t0, 1u feedback reflecting whether the human says that they are satisfied or not. In general, this

   2
     We will further denote τ rhs “ ps1 , a1 , . . . , sh , ah q the sub-trajectory of τ of length h and Γh the corre-
sponding space of sub-trajectories of length h.


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


could be stochastic. For instance, this could be Berpσh prh qq for some function σh . So, oh „ eh prh q
for some distribution eh prh q. This leads to the general definition below, where we have introduced
new objects U, Hp , w, e not seen in traditional RL:
Definition 1. A PORMDP M with cardinal feedback is a tuple pS, A, U, O, P, Hp , r, w, eq, where:
• S, A are fully observable states and actions, U are unobserved internal reward-states, O is a space
  of feedback, Pp¨ | s, aq is a Markovian transition matrix, s1 P S is an initial state.3
• Hp Ă rHs is a set of timesteps where reward and feedback is obtained with size |Hp | “ p.
• r :“ trh uhPHp so that rh : S ˆ U ˆ A Ñ R are reward functions at time h.
• w :“ twh uhPHp so that wh : Γuh´1 ˆ S ˆ A Ñ ∆pUq are internal state generators that map
  underlying histories of ps, a, uq tuples to distributions over U.
• e :“ teh uhPHp are feedback functions so that the feedback oh „ eh prh q is sampled from an
  ηh -subgaussian distribution eh with mean σh prh q for some activation function σh : R Ñ R.4
In some relevant RLHF applications, the human is presented with two trajectories and they pro-
vide feedback based on the pair. In most cases, this involves indicating a 0-1 preference between
trajectories. To accommodate this setting, we extend the framework to dueling feedback.
Definition 2. A PORMDP M with dueling feedback is a tuple pS, A, U, O, P, Hp , r, w, eq, where
everything is identical to Definition 1, except that every episode now involves running two trajectories
τ1 , τ2 that produce rewards rh,1 , rh,2 @h P Hp , and feedback is distributed as oh „ eh prh,1 ´ rh,2 q.
We note that PORMDP S subsume and model a wide class of RL settings, including RLHF. A brief
list of settings that PORMDP S subsume is as follows: (i) traditional MDPs, by setting U “ t‹u; (ii)
existing linear models of RLHF, setting U “ tϕpτ qJ wu for a known feature map ϕ and unknown w
(Chatterji et al., 2021; Efroni et al., 2021; Saha et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b); (iii) learning reward
models with stochastic feedback by setting U to be the set of reward states (Icarte et al., 2019; 2018;
2022; Icarte, 2022). By using U to model implicit intentions, PORMDP S can also model learning
from the following feedback: (iv) process supervision (Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022), (v)
fine-grained feedback (Wu et al., 2023) and (vi) snippet-level feedback (Lee et al., 2021). Further,
one can show that in all these settings, we can define the U generators wh to be deterministic.
One illustrative hard example of PORRL is that of a combination lock,5 which we will also use later
in the paper. Consider an H-digit numerical lock with a set A of options at each digit. Let the true
combination be a‹1 , . . . a‹H . An agent tries to unlock it by listening for “clicks” while rotating the dial
at each digit h. Naturally, we only hear clicks at digit h if the entire combination Ť      so far is correct.
We thus model this as a PORMDP with non-Markovian rewards, S “ t‹u, U “ t h Ah u and the
appropriate dynamics. Arguing that the click might sometimes be too faint, we consider stochastic
rewards. Specifically, we model this as rh psh , uh , ah q “ Berpq1a‹1 ,...a‹h puh qq for some uncertainty
parameter q. Notice that the internal states have a recursive structure here, and they evolve in a
Markovian way. This is a toy model for the problem of learning to take desirable sequences of actions
using intermediate feedback. It can be viewed as a simplified version of many such tasks – navigating
mazes, writing structured essays with guidance, writing a proof with feedback on correctness.
2.2 R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING IN PORMDP S WITH C ARDINAL AND D UELING F EEDBACK
Due to the complex nature of observability in our problem, we will use this subsection to carefully set
up a meaningful set of RL problems, in which an agent interacts with a PORMDP to optimize a policy.
At each step h, the agent observes a history τ rh´1s P Γh´1 and takes an action ah „ πpτ rh´1s, sh q.
The agent does not observe the reward rh , but receives an observation oh „ eh prh q.
Defining the learning objective. Since rewards are partially observed and dependent on the entire
history, there is a subtlety in defining value functions. We first choose and fix some subclass Π of
history-dependent policies and we define the total expected reward of a policy π P Π as
                                                   „ÿ                          ȷ
                           Vw pM, πq :“ Eτ u „Pw,π          rh psh , uh , ah q
                                                          hPHp

    3
     Recall that choosing a formal state s1 to serve as a placeholder initial state is not restrictive.
    4
     This subsumes and generalizes the example of Bernoulli feedback in RLHF.
   5
     This is a variant of a common example used to generate lower bounds in POMDP S (Krishnamurthy et al.,
2016; Jin et al., 2020). In contrast, we will use it to illustrate the power of our upper bounds.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vw pM, πq is taking an expectation over the dynamics of underlying trajectories τ u “
tpsh , uh , ah quH
                 h“1 „ P
                          w,π
                              . Since the states u are never revealed, these dynamics can never be learnt,
making Vw hard to directly deal with. In this light, we introduce stochastic functions gh : Γh Ñ ∆pUq
that marginalize the internal state generator wh over the sequence u1 , . . . uh´1 . That is, given an
ps, aq history τ rhs, we can define6 gh pτ rhsq „ uh | τ rhs. Now define
                                            „ÿ                                             ȷ
                      Vg pM, πq :“ Eτ „Pπ              Euh „gh pτ rhsq rrh psh , uh , ah qs
                                                  hPHp


Vg pM, πq is a much more tractable object, where the outer expectation is taken over the dynamics of
the observed trajectories τ . The following result establishes that as one would hope, Vw “ Vg .
Lemma 1 (Replacing w with g). For any history-dependent policy π that selects an action ah „
πpτ rh ´ 1s, sh q, Vw pM, πq “ Vg pM, πq holds for any M.
For the purposes of value functions, M is fully specified by pS, A, U, O, P, Hp , r, g, eq. Henceforth we
replace w with g and denote Vg pM, πq by V pM, πq. The optimal policy is π‹ :“ arg maxπPΠ V pM, πq.
Cardinal PORRL. Consider an algorithm producing a sequence of policies π1 , . . . , πT P Π, where
πt is chosen only using trajectories tτi ut´1                   t´1
                                          i“1 generated by tπi ui“1 . We measure the performance of
such an algorithm by its cardinal regret under model M‹ :
                                                 T
                                                 ÿ
                                RegretpT q “           V pM‹ , π‹ q ´ V pM‹ , πt q
                                                 t“1
One can also ask for the sample complexity of learning a good policy. Given a randomized algorithm
that completes N episodes of interaction and outputs πN , the sample complexity N pε, δq of the
algorithm is the minimum N so that V pM‹ , π‹ q ´ V pM‹ , πN q ď ε with probability at least 1 ´ δ
over the randomness of the feedback and the algorithm. It makes sense to study cardinal regret and
sample complexity in two RLHF settings:
• Using a learnt reward model: In most deployments of offline RLHF, an offline dataset of dueling
  feedback from humans is typically used to create a cardinal feedback oracle (a reward model),
  which is then used to train the policy using RL. In fact, Anonymous (2024) do exactly this under
  our model. The sample complexity of the algorithm is important in this setting.
• Improving a deployed model with batched feedback: One can learn from batches of interaction with
  humans and hope to improve the model/policy adaptively over multiple batches. This is compatible
  with deploying LLMs or recommender systems to users, collecting a batch of good/bad feedback,
  and then fine-tuning the model offline using this batch. This approach is also discussed in (Swamy
  et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024). Regret is a better metric than sample complexity here, since we
  want users to be satisfied (exploiting) while improving the model (exploring). Instead of good/bad
  feedback, we can also ask for dueling feedback against a fixed π0 and treat it as cardinal feedback.7
Dueling PORRL. In dueling PORRL, we play a duel by running two policies pπ1 , π2 q P Π ˆ Π in
parallel to obtain trajectories pτ1 , τ2 q and receive feedback toh uhPHp . Again, note that the rewards
of the policies are not observed. While the definitions of V pM, πq and π‹ are the same as before,
we define a new measure of regret accordingly. If we play T duels pπ1,1 , π2,1 q, . . . , pπ1,T , π2,T q
according to an algorithm, we aim to minimize the dueling regret given by
                                       T
                                       ÿ                      V pM‹ , π1,t q ` V pM‹ , π2,t q
                     RegretD pT q “          V pM‹ , π‹ q ´
                                       t“1
                                                                             2
It makes sense to consider this metric when improving a deployed model with batched dueling
feedback. We can do the same batching as the batched feedback example above, but instead compare
our model/policy πt to a fixed base policy π0 and ask for dueling feedback. The induced feedback can
be treated as cardinal feedback. This is similar to the ideas in Wang et al. (2023b), who consider this
setting and give cardinal regret/sample complexity guarantees. However, when deploying a model,
we typically want humans to be satisfied with both the options they are given. Cardinal regret only
accounts for one of the options being good. Dueling regret demands that both policies used are good.
    6
      More technically, define gh pτ rhsq to be the regular conditional distribution of the random variable
wh ppτ rh ´ 1s, u1 , . . . uh´1 q, sh , ah q, conditioned on τ rhs.
    7
      If the activation function is Lipschitz and monotone, then we can get cardinal regret guarantees for this
problem by using the difference function class.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 1. PORRL subsumes the settings of (Saha et al., 2023; Chatterji et al., 2021), which in turn
subsume the feedback models of RLHF (Wang et al., 2023b). Crucially, (Wang et al., 2023b; Chatterji
et al., 2021) measure performance using only sample complexity or cardinal regret, while (Saha et al.,
2023) only study dueling regret. We have discussed above why both metrics are important.

2.3 A G ENERAL Y ET T RACTABLE C ASE
The nature of the feedback in PORMDP S , which depends on a reward that is function of the entire
history, signals that PORRL may be intractable in general. We now instantiate the model into a
statistically tractable sub-class that still subsumes most existing work on RLHF and all the examples
provided at the end of Section 2.1. Specifically, we assume that the internal reward-state functions gh
are deterministic and the feedback is emitted according to a Bernoulli distribution depending on the
reward. We will work under this assumption in the remainder of the paper.
Assumption 1. We work in a realizable setting. That is, the unknown transition kernel P lies in a
known class P, and the unknown reward function rh : S ˆ U ˆ A Ñ R lies in a known class Rh
with |rh | ď B for all h. Assume that gh is deterministic8 (but unknown) and belongs to a known
class of “decoder functions” Gh . Let O “ t0, 1u and let eh only depend on the rewards. For dueling
feedback, let eh prh,1 ´ rh,2 q be ηh -subgaussian with unknown mean σh pr1,h ´ r2,h q. Also assume
that σh and σh´1 are Lipschitz with unknown Lipschitz constants κ1,h and κ2,h respectively. Call the
resulting class of PORMDP S M.
We also define a function class induced by Rh and Gh .
Definition 3. Let us then consider the decoder-induced function classes Fh given by
          !              ˇ                                                                        )
 Fh :“ fh : Γh Ñ R ˇ Dgh P Gh , rh P Rh s.t. fh pτ rhsq “ rh psh , gh pτ rh ´ 1sq, ah q, @τ
                         ˇ

                   ś
Also define F :“ hPHp Fh so that f “ tfh uhPHp P F. A model M is then fully determined by
                                                                              ”ř               ı
pP, f q, so we denote V pP, f, πq :“ V pM, πq. Note that V pP, f, πq “ Eτ PPπ   hPHp fh pτ rhsq .

Remark 2. We note that all examples from Section 2.1 satisfy Assumption 1.
Giving statistically efficient algorithms for this framework comes with numerous challenges:
• Traditional RL incurs linear regret: We show in Lemma 3 that any method returning a possibly
  time-dependent but memoryless policy can incur linear regret.
• POMDP results do not apply: PORMDP S cannot be viewed as a subcase of POMDP S with
  latent states S ˆ U since s, u, a Ñ s1 , u1 is not Markovian.9 Even if we considered the subclass of
  PORMDP S where s, u, a Ñ s1 , u1 is Markovian, which would be a subclass of reward machines,
  this is a specific kind of overcomplete POMDP . Literature on overcomplete POMDP S is much
  more scarce than their undercomplete counterpart. The only paper that gives guarantees for
  overcomplete POMDP S to our knowledge is (Liu et al., 2022a), where they assume that the reward
  function is fully observable and only depends on observed states. This cannot apply to our setting,
  since our rewards have to be partially observable, and fundamentally depend on latent states too.
  Also, this is not a minor difference, since the number of latent states can be pSAqΩpHq .
• Naive history-summarization is inefficient: It is overkill to use naive history-summarization –
  where one treats the history τ rhs as the state sh and executes traditional RL. This is because while
  policies are non-Markovian, state transitions are Markovian. It is unclear if we can leverage this
  structure without running into explicit exponential dependence on H. Moreover, most work on
  MDPs works with known rewards, but not knowing the rewards is a truly non-trivial problem here,
  since exploring the reward at each latent state could take pSAqΩpHq steps.
• Ensuring satisfactory utilization of additional structure: Examples like the combination lock
  signal that there are intuitive ways to leverage a recursive structure on the internal states. In
  the combination lock, one should wait for the “click” at each digit before moving onto the next
  digit, giving us a polynomial dependence on A, H in sample complexity. It is unclear if general
  algorithms for PORRL can implicitly leverage such structure to achieve polynomial guarantees.

   8
     We make this assumption for simplicity of exposition, it is not necessary. As long as fh is ηh subgaussian
conditioned on τ rhs, all our theory follows verbatim irrespective of whether gh is deterministic or stochastic.
   9
     Since observed state transitions are Markovian, PORMDP S are also not more general than POMDP S .


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    O PTIMISTIC A LGORITHMS FOR C ARDINAL PORRL
3.1 I MPROVING OVER NAIVE H ISTORY-S UMMARIZATION WITH M ODEL -BASED M ETHODS
We present two optimistic methods that leverage Markovian transitions in PORMDP S – POR-UCRL
and POR-UCBVI. The methods explicitly learn both the unknown reward model and the unknown
transition model, while still accounting for the Markovian nature of transitions. We describe them
below and provide formal versions in Appendix D, E.
• POR-UCRL: At each timestep t, we maintain a least squares estimate fˆt`1 of f and an MLE
   estimate P̂t and define confidence sets Cht pδq that consider all fh with a small mean squared error
                                       śH
   against fˆht`1 , such that CF
                               t
                                 pδq “ h“1 Cht pδq. The probability transition confidence sets CP
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                  pδq are
   the same as UCRL (Jaksch et al., 2010). At timestep t, following confidence-set optimism, we play
                                                                                              t     t
   an optimistic policy π  rt that maximizes its highest value V pM, πq over all models M P CF  ˆ CP  .
• POR-UCBVI: It is trickier to adapt ideas from UCBVI (Azar et al., 2017). Yet again, we maintain
   a least squares estimate fˆt and an MLE estimate ř       P̂t . Instead of confidence sets, we define
   trajectory-dependent bonuses for F as btF pτ, δq :“ hPHp maxfh ,fh1 PCht pδq fh pτ rhsq ´ fh1 pτ rhsq.
  We use these to define policy-level bonuses for F as btF pP, π, δq :“ Eτ „Pπ rbtF pτ, δqs. Then, the
   standard UCBVI bonuses provide policy-level bonuses for P. At timestep t, following bonus-based
   optimism, we play an optimistic policy π̃t that maximizes its bonus-boosted value under fˆt , P̂t .
   POR-UCBVI bonuses are in fact computable for many U and F, such as those in remark 3.
We show that POR-UCRL enjoys the guarantee below.
Theorem 1 (POR-UCRL Regret). Under Assumption 1, the regret RegretpT q of POR-UCRL is
bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ
                            ´´ ?             ÿ       a            ¯? ¯
                          O
                          r pS HA `                     dE,h dC,h   T
                                                hPHp
                    `      ˘
where dE,h “ dimE Fh , B T and dC,h “ logpN pFh , 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq.

Here, the first term comes from uncertainty in P. Under naive history-summarization, the first term
would be exponential in H since the modified state space of trajectories would have size ΩppSAqH q.
Similar regret guarantees are given for POR-UCBVI in Theorem 8. Both guarantees are proved
by viewing each algorithm as a specific instance of a generic optimistic algorithm for PORRL (see
Appendix C, D, E). ´ By  a simple regret-to-PAC
                                          ¯      conversion, we also show that POR-UCRL has sample
                     p2 HS 2 A   p2 dE dC
complexity of O  r
                        ε2     ` ε2        , where dE :“ maxhPHp dE,h , and dC :“ maxhPHp dC,h .
                                            ´ 2                  2
                                                                                        ¯
POR-UCBVI has sample complexity O         r p HSA maxpH,Sq   ` p dE maxpdεC2,Hq logp1{δq .
                                                    ε2

Challenges: There are three main technical challenges in proving these guarantees. First, we have to
handle non-Markovian reward functions with Markovian transitions. Second, in POR-UCBVI, we
have the added challenge of ensuring that the bonus is uniformly optimistic over all history-dependent
                                                             H
policies. This is typically a doubly exponential set (ApSAq ), so a union bound does not help us.
Third, we are working with general function approximation for reward functions using F.
Remark 3 (Comparison to past results). Notice that with U “ ϕpτ qJ w with w P Rd and Hp “ tHu,
we are in the setting of (Chatterji et al., 2021). Here, dE,H “ dC,H “ d, so POR-UCRL and POR-
UCBVI both improve over their regret guarantees. With respect to sample complexity guarantees, we
compare to (Wang et al., 2023b). While they use dueling feedback, our methods use cardinal feedback.
In their setting, U´ is the set of all histories
                                              ¯ and Hp “ tHu. Their best guarantee is from P-OMLE,
                     H 2 S2 A   H 2 dE,H dC,H
which makes O   r
                      ε  2    `    ε   2         dueling oracle queries for tabular P. Both POR-UCRL
and POR-UCBVI have a smaller complexity for cardinal feedback queries.
Remark 4 (General function approximation for P). For clearer exposition, we have assumed that P
is a tabular class with finite S, A in the results stated above. This is because handling general function
approximation for F is the non-trivial part of this work. We provide straightforward extensions to
general function approximation for P with continuous S, A in Appendix F, using existing work.
3.2 L EVERAGING R ECURSIVE S TRUCTURES U SING M ODEL -F REE M ETHODS
We have established that the model-based methods POR-UCRL and POR-UCBVI improve over naive
history-summarization and have a polypS, A, Hq guarantee in terms of transition function estimation.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, we recall the last challenge mentioned in Section 2.3 – can they adapt to examples like the
combination lock, where there is a recursive structure on the internal states? Disappointingly, we
will see in Proposition 1 that the answer is no – they are exponentially worse than the ideal solution.
Intuitively, learning the reward and transition models separately is needlessly expensive here. At the
more technical level, since POR-UCRL and POR-UCBVI decouple the learning of reward functions
across timesteps, they are unable to incorporate a recursive structure on the reward functions.
In this light, we consider model-free methods. Unlike model-based methods that have to account for
Markovian transitions, we can simply use naive history-summarization here and treat τ rhs as the state
for Q-functions Qh . However, under history-summarization, there is a subtlety involved in choosing
the class Q of Q-functions given a known class M of models. Using product classes Q1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ QH
is wasteful, since often exponentially many tuples in a product class cannot be realized by any model
M.10 Instead, one should consider the class of only the tuples pQ1 , . . . , QH q that can be realized by
a model M. In practice, this translates to the problem of good representation learning – one should
use a shared network for all Q-functions instead of using a different network for each timestep. This
is reflected in the experimental choices of Anonymous (2024).
Model-free methods rely on the Bellman error, which relates consecutive Q-functions and couples
their learning. It is thus natural to expect model-free methods like GOLF (Jin et al., 2021) to adapt
to a recursive structure on internal states and perform better than model-based methods. However,
existing guarantees do not reflect this. It turns out from Proposition 1 below that the Bellman-eluder
(BE) dimension of the combination lock problem is AH , even with the minimal Q-function class.
The issue is that the proof of GOLF bounds the h-step Bellman errors in a decoupled manner, which
is why it still fails to incorporate a recursive structure on internal states. Intuitively, one wants to wait
for Bellman errors at timesteps 1, . . . , h ´ 1 to become small before bounding the Bellman error at h.
In this light, given a parameter α, we define the function class
                                 ␣                                                        (
                     Qpα, hq :“ Q P Q | |Eµl pQq rQl ´ Tl Ql`1 s| ď α, @1 ď l ď h
that considers all tuples pQ1 , . . . , QH q where the Bellman errors until step h are already low. We
can use this class to define the α-history aware Bellman-eluder dimension (HABE) of Q as follows.
Recall that πQ is the policy that acts greedily according to Q “ pQ1 , . . . QH q.
                                                     ␣              ˇ                 (
Definition 4. Consider the Bellman errors Φh :“ Qh ´ Th Qh`1 ˇQ P Qpα, h ´ 1q . Denote µh pQq
the distribution induced on τ rh´1s, ah by πQ and let Dh,Q :“ tµh pQq | Q P Qu. Let dimDE the dis-
tributional eluder dimension and define dimHABE pQ, α, εq :“ maxh dimDE pΦh , Dh,Qpα,h´1q , εq.
Intuitively, α-HABE dimension measures how hard it is to reduce the Bellman error at timestep h if
the errors at previous timesteps 1, . . . , h ´ 1 are already small. This captures the hardness of adapting
to the recursive structure on internal states one/a few timesteps at a time. We discuss in Appendix G.1
how the α-HABE dimension compares to the Bellman-eluder dimension in general. We now give a
new guarantee for GOLF using the α-HABE dimension.
Theorem 2 (Modified GOLF Regret).  a Let Assumption 1 hold, let Q be Bellman complete, let
dHABE “ dimHABE pQ, α, minpα, 1{T qq and let dC,Q :“ logpN pQ Y G, 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq. Choose
hyperparameter β “ cplogpHT q ` dC,Q q for some universal constant c and
                                                                      ` the
                                                                         aauxiliary function
                                                                                        ˘
class G used in GOLF, and define . Then, GOLF satisfies RegretpT q “ O pH dHABE dC,Q T .
Using´ a regret-to-PAC¯conversion, we also show in Corollary 7 that the sample complexity of GOLF
        2  2
   r p H dHABE
is O
                  dC,Q
                        . As foreshadowed above, we now show in Proposition 1 that these guarantees
              ε2
can be polynomial even when the the usual guarantees for GOLF as well as guarantees for our
model-based algorithms are exponential. Note that this improvement is achieved only given dense
intermediate feedback. Under sparse intermediate? feedback, one cannot adapt to internal states "a
few timesteps at a time," and we in fact have Ωp AH T q regret under any algorithm. However, dense
feedback case is quite realistic for many applications, such as automated mathematical reasoning.
Proposition 1 (Dimensions for the Combination Lock). Consider the combination lock problem with
model class M “ P ˆ F and induced Q-function class Q.


   10
        The reader can use the example of the combination lock to convince themselves of this.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Under dense intermediate feedback with Hp “ rHs, dimHABE pQ, αq “ A for all α ă q, while its
  BE dimension is at least AH ´ 2. The eluder dimension for reward functions dimE pFh , B
                                                                                        T q is at
  least Ah for any h ď H.
• For sparse intermediate feedback with Hp “ tHu and any α ą 0, the α-HABE dimension, the BE
  dimension and the eluder dimension
                                  ?    of FH are all at least AH ´ 2. Moreover, any algorithm in
                                    H
  this setting will have regret Ωp A T q.
We discuss in Appendix G.1 that in general, we do not have an inequality in either direction between
the α-HABE dimension and the BE dimension. However, the α-HABE dimension is typically
smaller.

4     D UELING TO O PTIMISM R EDUCTION
The dueling and cardinal feedback models are intimately related. It is thus tempting to use algorithms
for cardinal PORRL to solve dueling PORRL. However, we detail why the “obvious” reduction from
dueling feedback to cardinal feedback fails. This both demonstrates the hardness of the problem and
motivates our reduction.

4.1   T HE NAIVE R EDUCTION A LWAYS FAILS
Consider a modified PORMDP M with S :“ S ˆ S, A :“ A ˆ A, P :“ P b P, where we run
the pair of policies π :“ pπ1 , π2 q and obtain observations based on the decoder-induced function
f h pτ1 rhs, τ2 rhsq :“ fh pτ1 rhsq ´ fh pτ2 rhsq. Consider the space of all such PORMDP S induced by
M, and denote it by M. Since cardinal feedback in M exactly corresponds to dueling feedback in M,
it is tempting to restrict to searching over Π ˆ Π and run any algorithm for cardinal PORRL on this
modified PORMDP M to achieve low dueling regret.
This fails because the feedback model and regret metric are fundamentally non-aligned in dueling
feedback, unlike in cardinal feedback. While the agent receives dueling feedback over the duel for
pπ1,t , π2,t q, dueling regret is instead concerned with duels for pπ‹ , π1,t q and pπ‹ , π2,t q. Running an
algorithm for cardinal PORRL on the modified MDP will maximize the dueling feedback itself. This
is achieved by playing one good and one really bad policy, unlike the two good policies needed for
low dueling regret. We formalize this in Lemma 4, showing that the naive reduction leads to linear
dueling regret for any PORMDP and any cardinal PORRL algorithm with sublinear regret.

4.2   R EDUCING D UELING TO O PTIMISTIC C ARDINAL PORRL
The naive reduction fails because maximizing dueling feedback can lead to bad policies being
played. In this subsection, we present a white-box reduction where we ensure that we only play
potentially good policies for both π1,t and π2,t . We detail here how we can obtain an algorithm for
the dueling feedback problem from any optimistic algorithm for cardinal PORRL. We will focus
on the case of confidence sets here for smoother exposition, the much harder case of bonuses is
treated in Appendix H.2. A generic optimistic algorithm using confidence sets maintains confidence
sets CM pDt , δq using the collected dataset Dt of trajectories and feedback. We define it formally in
Appendix C.1. For the reduction to work, we require that the confidence sets are well-designed, as
demanded by Assumption 2. This assumption is satisfied for confidence sets used by POR-UCRL.
Assumption 2 (Controlling Value Error       ˇ řdue to Confidence Sets). M‹ P CM        ˇ pDt , δq for arbitrary
                                                 T
sequences pPt , f t q P CM pDt , δq, both ˇ t“1 V pPt , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt qˇ “ OpC
                                                                                           r P pM, T, δqq
    ˇ řT              t
                                               ˇ
and    t“1 V pP‹ , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f‹ , πt q “ OpCF pM, T, δqq hold with probability 1 ´ δ{2 each.
    ˇ                                          ˇ   r

The key insight is to use confidence sets from cardinal PORRL to search for π1,t and π2,t only
among policies that both have a chance of being optimal. Then one plays the most uncertain duel
among all possible choices for π1,t and π2,t . This generalizes and abstracts out ideas in (Pacchiano
et al., 2021), which presents a specific algorithm to achieve low dueling regret in their model. We
present the reduction to optimism over confidence sets in Algorithm 1, the version for bonuses is
in Appendix H.2. Define VD pM, π, π 1 q “ V pM, πq ´ V pM, π 1 q. We compute the confidence sets
CP pD, δq as the image of CP pD, δq under P ÞÑ P. We compute CF pD, δq by treating toh uhPHp as
cardinal feedback in M. As an example, for POR-UCRL, we perform a least squares fit for f and use
Lemma 7 to define our confidence sets again. We then get the following regret guarantee.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Reduction from Dueling to Cardinal Confidence-Set Optimism
 1: Input Known reward function trh uH
                                     h“1 , method to compute CM pD, δq Ø CP pD, δq ˆ CF pD, δq
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu, CM pD1 , δq :“ P ˆ F
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do !    ˇ                                           )
       Compute Πt “ π P ΠˇDM P CM pDt , δq s.t. V pM, π, π1 q ě 0 @π1 P Π           {Candidates π‹ }
                         ˇ
 4:
                                                                      1
 5:    Play pπ1,t , π2,t q P arg max   1
                                         max VD pM, π, π 1 q ´ VD pM , π, π 1 q {Most uncertain duel}
                          π,π 1 PΠt M,M PCM pDt ,δq
                                    ␣              (H
 6:    Observe trajectories τi,t “ psti,h , ati,h q h“1 along with feedback toh uhPHp
 7:   Update Dt to Dt`1 using the data and compute CP pDt`1 , δq, CF pDt`1 , δq
 8: end for


Theorem 3 (Reduction from Dueling to Confidence-Set-Based Optimism). If the confidence sets
CM pDt , δq satisfy Assumption 2, then the dueling regret RegretD pT q of Algorithm 1 is given by
                         RegretD pT q “ OpC
                                        r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq

Note that complexity parameter CF depends on M. It is a priori unclear how the complexity of M
relates to that of M. Fortunately, Lemma 2 below settles this, and we can then use our results for
POR-UCRL to get Corollary 1 below. See Appendix F.3 for a straightforward extension to general
function approximation for P, abstracting out the S, A dependence.
Lemma 2 (Relating F and F). For any function class F, dimE pF, εq ď 9 dimE pF, ε{2q.
Corollary 1 (Dueling Regret using POR-UCRL Confidence Sets). The confidence sets from POR-
UCRL satisfy Assumption
                    ´´ ? 2 and ř  using them in Algorithm
                                                     ¯ ? ¯1 leads to the following regret bound
                                         a
RegretD pT q “ O pS HA ` hPHp dE,h dC,h
                  r                                      T .

5     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we have introduced PORMDP S and their analysis as a way to better model internal
states of humans and intermediate feedback in RLHF. We have introduced two statistically efficient
algorithms for handling partially observed reward-states and have shown that they improve over naive
history summarization. We have noted that these methods subsume as well as improve over a lot of
past work in RLHF. We have studied how one can further leverage a recursive structure over internal
states using model-free methods. For this purpose, we have defined a new notion of dimension, the
α-HABE dimension, that captures the hardness of utilizing the recursive structure. Finally, we have
also provided a novel reduction from dueling regret to optimistic algorithms for cardinal regret.
Besides our theoretical contributions, we would like to note the practical implications of our work.
• When the feedback is suspected to have a recurrent structure, we conclude in sections 3.1 and 3.2
  that it can be exponentially more statistically efficient to use practical model-free methods like
  learning history-dependent Q-functions or using actor-critic methods. In the absence of such a
  structure, a model-based approach learning f‹ and P‹ explicitly will also suffice.
• We note in section 3.2 that in practice, using a single network for the Q-function or critic across
  timesteps h is important for the “exponential improvement” mentioned above, as opposed to using
  a different network for the Q-function or critic for each timestep.
• We are hoping that our work inspires new practical algorithms for PORRL. Theoretical advances in
  optimistic algorithms are known to inspire practical (e.g. perturbative) versions of the algorithms.
• The dueling to optimism reduction in section 4 can inspire future practical algorithms that achieve
  low dueling regret, which we have established in section 2.2 as an important metric for online (and
  online iterative) RLHF applications, like in Dong et al. (2024); Xiong et al. (2023).
We hope that our ideas lay the groundwork for further understanding of both statistical and algorithmic
aspects of learning good policies when interacting with “stateful” feedback, such as that of humans.
Our algorithms and proofs are presented in high generality and modularity in the appendix, and we
hope that they can be used to provide novel algorithms and bounds in the future.
Acknowledgement. CK would like to acknowledge the support of the Rackham International
Student Fellowship (the Indian Alumni Fellowship) for this work.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Riad Akrour, Marc Schoenauer, and Michèle Sebag. April: Active preference learning-based
  reinforcement learning. In European Conerence on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
  in Databases, 2012.
Anonymous. Enhancing multi-step reasoning via process-supervised reinforcement learning from
  human feedback. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=3pIeOI1yPG, 2024. [Accessed 21-05-2024].
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal control of Markov processes with incomplete state information. Journal
  of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10(1):174–205, 1965.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Róbert Busa-Fekete and Eyke Hüllermeier. A survey of preference-based online learning with bandit
  algorithms. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, 2014.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Reinforcement learning from partial observation: Linear
  function approximation with provable sample efficiency. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2022.
Jeffrey Chan, Aldo Pacchiano, Nilesh Tripuraneni, Yun S Song, Peter Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan.
   Parallelizing contextual linear bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10590, 2021.
Niladri Chatterji, Aldo Pacchiano, Peter Bartlett, and Michael Jordan. On the theory of reinforcement
  learning with once-per-episode feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022a.
Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, Song Mei, and Yu Bai. Lower bounds for learning in
  revealing pomdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Xiaoyu Chen, Han Zhong, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Liwei Wang. Human-in-the-loop:
  Provably efficient preference-based reinforcement learning with general function approximation.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022b.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Bo Pang, Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, Yingbo Zhou, Nan Jiang, Doyen
  Sahoo, Caiming Xiong, and Tong Zhang. Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863, 2024.
Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2019.
Yonathan Efroni, Nadav Merlis, and Shie Mannor. Reinforcement learning with trajectory feedback.
  In AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2021.
Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Niklas Muennighoff, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela. Kto: Model
  alignment as prospect theoretic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01306, 2024.
Steven W Flavell, Nadine Gogolla, Matthew Lovett-Barron, and Moriel Zelikowsky. The emergence
  and influence of internal states. Neuron, 2022.
Noah Golowich, Ankur Moitra, and Dhruv Rohatgi. Learning in observable pomdps, without
  computationally intractable oracles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rodrigo Andrés Toro Icarte. Reward Machines. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, Canada, 2022.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila McIlraith. Using reward machines
  for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2107–2116. PMLR, 2018.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Klassen, Rick Valenzano, Margarita Castro, and Sheila
  McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learning. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila A McIlraith. Reward machines:
  Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 73:173–208, 2022.
Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1563–1600, 2010.
Jiaming Ji, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang, Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan,
   Zhonghao He, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, et al. Ai alignment: A comprehensive survey. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2310.19852, 2023.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E. Schapire. Contex-
  tual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable, 2016.
Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sebastien Bubeck, and Michael I Jordan. Is q-learning provably efficient?
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Chi Jin, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Qinghua Liu. Sample-efficient reinforcement
  learning of undercomplete pomdps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Pac reinforcement learning with rich
  observations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and Pieter Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive reinforcement
  learning via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05091,
  2021.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Qinghua Liu, Alan Chung, Csaba Szepesvári, and Chi Jin. When is partially observable reinforcement
  learning not scary? In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022a.
Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mle–a generic
  model-based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14997, 2022b.
Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Ellen Novoseller, Yibing Wei, Yanan Sui, Yisong Yue, and Joel Burdick. Dueling posterior sampling
  for preference-based reinforcement learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
  2020.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Aldo Pacchiano, Aadirupa Saha, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling rl: reinforcement learning with trajectory
  preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04850, 2021.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learning
  of reward functions. Technical report, EECS Berkeley, 2017.
Aadirupa Saha, Aldo Pacchiano, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling rl: Reinforcement learning with trajectory
  preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Daniel Shin, Anca D Dragan, and Daniel S Brown. Benchmarks and algorithms for offline preference-
  based reward learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01392, 2023.
Gokul Swamy, Christoph Dann, Rahul Kidambi, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Alekh Agarwal. A minimaxi-
  malist approach to reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04056,
  2024.
Csaba Szepesvári. Lecture notes in theoretical foundations of reinforcement learning: Lecture 23,
  tabular mdps. https://rltheory.github.io/lecture-notes/online-rl/lec23/, 2023.
Andrea Tirinzoni, Aymen Al-Marjani, and Emilie Kaufmann. Optimistic pac reinforcement learning:
  the instance-dependent view. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, 2023.
Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia
  Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process-and
  outcome-based feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.
Andrew J Wagenmaker, Max Simchowitz, and Kevin Jamieson. Beyond no regret: Instance-dependent
  pac reinforcement learning. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2022.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Represent to control partially observed
  systems: Representation learning with provable sample efficiency. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023a.
Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. Is rlhf more difficult than standard rl? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14111, 2023b.
Christian Wirth, Riad Akrour, Gerhard Neumann, Johannes Fürnkranz, et al. A survey of preference-
  based reinforcement learning methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(136):1–46,
  2017.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023.
Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang.
 Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under
 kl-constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11456, 2023.
Wanqi Xue, Qingpeng Cai, Zhenghai Xue, Shuo Sun, Shuchang Liu, Dong Zheng, Peng Jiang, Kun
 Gai, and Bo An. Prefrec: Recommender systems with human preferences for reinforcing long-term
 user engagement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02779, 2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. How to query human feedback
 efficiently in rl? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18505, 2023.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  Gec: A unified framework for interactive decision making in mdp, pomdp, and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.01962, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L EMMAS AND D ISCUSSION
A.1    R ELATION BETWEEN Vw AND Vg
Lemma 1 (Replacing w with g). For any history-dependent policy π that selects an action ah „
πpτ rh ´ 1s, sh q, Vw pM, πq “ Vg pM, πq holds for any M.

Proof. By a slight abuse of notation, the following chain of equalities holds. Here, piq holds since
rh psh , uh , ah q is a function of sh , uh , ah . Equation piiq holds since we have already conditioned on
τ rhs, which includes sh , ah . Equation piiiq holds by the definition of gh pτ rhsq as the conditional
distribution of uh given τ rhs.
                                              »                         fi
                                                  ÿ
                    Vw pM, πq “ Eτ u „Pw,π –          rh psh , uh , ah qfl
                                                hPHp
                                   ÿ
                           “            Eτ u „Pw,π rrh psh , uh , ah qs
                                 hPHp
                                   ÿ
                           “            Eτ u rhs„Pw,π rrh psh , uh , ah qs
                                 hPHp
                                   ÿ             ”                                   ˇ     ı
                                        Eτ rhs„Pπ Eτ u rhs„Pw,π rrh psh , uh , ah qs ˇτ rhs
                                                                                     ˇ
                           “
                                 hPHp
                                                 ”                                       ˇ     ı
                           piq     ÿ
                                        Eτ rhs„Pπ Euh ,sh ,ah „Pw,π rrh psh , uh , ah qs ˇτ rhs
                                                                                         ˇ
                           “
                                 hPHp
                                                  ”                               ˇ     ı
                           piiq    ÿ
                                         Eτ rhs„Pπ Euh „Pw,π rrh psh , uh , ah qs ˇτ rhs
                                                                                  ˇ
                            “
                                  hPHp
                           piiiq   ÿ               “                                    ‰
                            “             Eτ rhs„Pπ Euh „gh pτ rhsq rrh psh , uh , ah qs
                                   hPHp
                                   ÿ          “                                     ‰
                           “            Eτ „Pπ Euh „gh pτ rhsq rrh psh , uh , ah qs
                                 hPHp
                                          »                                             fi
                                              ÿ
                           “ Eτ „Pπ –                Euh „gh pτ rhsq rrh psh , uh , ah qsfl
                                              hPHp

                           “ Vg pM, πq


A.2 I GNORING I NTERNAL R EWARD -S TATES IS BAD FOR A LIGNMENT
We define traditional RL methods as those that output possibly time-dependent Markovian policies.
In this section, we provide a toy example showing that there is a PORMDP with good sublinear
regret guarantees where any time-dependent Markovian policy has value bounded away from the
maximum value. This means that traditional RL methods will always incur linear regret. We hope
that this illustrates that RL methods that ignore internal reward-states can be bad for alignment.
Lemma 3 (Markovian policies are ? not enough). There is a PORMDP where POR-UCRL and
POR-UCBVI achieve polypH, S, Aq T regret, but any Markovian policy is at least 14 -suboptimal
and so any method that outputs Markovian (possibly time-dependent) policies will lead to linear
regret.

Proof. Consider a PORMDP M in the setting of Chatterji et al. (2021) (see point (ii) below Def-
inition 2) and set S “ ts1 , s2 u, A “ ta1 , a2 u and w “ 1 P R. Let the transition matrix be
Pps1 | s, aq “ 12 for all s, a, s1 . Let the starting state always be s1 .
Consider the set T of all trajectories that have a2 until s2 appears, and then only have a1 . Choose
ϕpτ q “ 1pτ P T q. The best non-Markovian policy π‹ can follow this rule and achieve ϕpτ q “ 1 for
all τ „ Pπ‹ . Thus, maxπPΠ V pM, πq “ 1, where Π is given by all history-dependent policies.


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


On the other hand, consider a Markovian but potentially time-dependent policy π. If πpa2 q “ 0, then
its value is zero. If πpa2 q ą 0, then conditioned on the event that s2 appears first at timestep 1, the
expected total reward is at most π1 pa2 qp1 ´ π2 pa2 qq. Conditioned on the event that s2 appears first
at timestep 2, the expected total reward is at most π1 pa2 qπ2 pa2 q. Conditioned on seeing s2 at or after
h “ 3, the expected total reward is certainly at most 1. Using these crude inequalities, we can bound
the expected reward of a Markovian policy π by
                                              H
   π1 pa2 qp1 ´ π2 pa2 qq π1 pa2 qπ2 pa2 q   ÿ    1   π1 pa1 qp2 ´ π2 pa2 qq 1 1 1  3
                         `                 `      h
                                                    ď                       ` ď ` “
             2                   4           h“3
                                                 2              4            4 2 4  4

This means that the value of any time-dependent Markovian policy is at most 34 and so any time-
dependent Markovian policy is at least 41 -suboptimal and incurs T4 regret.

Recall that we defined traditional RL algorithms as those that output (possibly time-dependent)
Markovian policies. Clearly, any traditional RL algorithm in this sense will have at least T4 regret,
which is linear regret.
A.3 T HE NAIVE R EDUCTION FROM D UELING TO C ARDINAL PORRL FAILS
Lemma 4 (Naive Reduction Lower Bound). Using any algorithm for cardinal PORRL with sublinear
cardinal regret on M with policy class Π1 :“ Π ˆ Π to get a sequence pπ1,1 , π2,1 q, . . . , pπ1,T , π2,T q
leads to linear dueling regret for M whenever all policies π do not have the same value V pM, πq.

Proof. Define π‹ :“ arg maxπPΠ V pM, πq and let πmin :“ arg minπPΠ V pM, πq. Then note that
                         max VD pM, π, π 1 q “ max      V pM, πq ´ V pM, π 1 q
                        π,π 1 PΠ               π,π 1 PΠ
                                                                      “             ‰
                                             “ max V pM, πq ` max  1
                                                                        ´V pM, π 1 q
                                                        πPΠ              π PΠ
                                                     “ max V pM, πq ´ min
                                                                       1
                                                                          V pM, π 1 q
                                                        πPΠ              π PΠ
                                                     “ V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πmin q

Under the naive reduction described in Section 4, a cardinal PORRL algorithm is used to maxi-
mize dueling feedback. If the algorithm has sublinear cardinal regret, then it will produce duels
pπ1,t , π2,t q, t “ 1 Ñ T , satisfying
                            T
                            ÿ
                                   max VD pM, π, π 1 q ´ VD pM, π1,t , π2,t q “ opT q
                                   π,π 1 PΠ
                           t“1

From above, this means that
                 T
                 ÿ
                       rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π1,t qs ` rV pM, π2,t q ´ V pM, πmin qs “ opT q
                 t“1

Now note that by definition of π‹ and πmin , both terms are positive. This is the key point. We thus
have
                                           T
                                           ÿ
                                                 V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π1,t q “ opT q
                                           t“1
                                       T
                                       ÿ
                                              V pM, π2,t q ´ V pM, πmin q “ opT q
                                       t“1

This means that for dueling regret RegretD pT q, we have the following.
                                    T
                                    ÿ
             RegretD pT q “               rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π1,t qs ` rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π2,t qs
                                    t“1
                                    T
                                    ÿ
                              “           rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π1,t qs ` rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πmin qs
                                    t“1


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    T
                                    ÿ
                                `         rV pM, πmin q ´ V pM, π2,t qs
                                    t“1
                           “ opT q ` T rV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πmin qs
                           “ ΘpT q
Where the last line holds since all policies π do not have the same value V pM, πq, and so V pM, π‹ q ´
V pM, πmin q ą 0.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    R EGRET- TO -PAC C ONVERSION
When learning in MDPs, we can turn any guarantee on the regret into a corresponding PAC guarantee,
the so-called “regret-to-PAC conversion” (Jin et al., 2018; Ménard et al., 2021; Wagenmaker et al.,
2022; Tirinzoni et al., 2023). Similarly, we want to convert guarantees on the cardinal and dueling
regret (see Section 2) into corresponding PAC guarantees, which are more adherent to an offline
setting. We provide distinct results for the cardinal and dueling regret below.

Lemma 5 (Cardinal regret to PAC). For T P N and δ P r0, 1s, let A LG be an algorithm for cardinal
PORRL producing a sequence of policies pπt qtPrT s with cardinal regret bounded with probability at
least 1 ´ δ as
                           ÿT
                              V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πt q ď RpT, δq P R.
                                t“1
Then, a policy π
               pT „ π1 , . . . , πT sampled uniformly satisfies with probability at least 1 ´ 2δ
                                                                   c
                                                  RpT, δq             logp1{δq
                     V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π  pT q ď           ` 8Bp               .
                                                     T                   T

Proof. We consider the sequence of random variables Yt “ V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πt q @t P rT s. Through
the Hoeffding’s inequality on Yt and |rh | ď B we have
            V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π
                               pT q “ ErV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πt qs
                                         T
                                                                           c
                                      1 ÿ´                          ¯        logp1{δq
                                    ď        V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πt q ` 8Bp
                                      T t“1                                     T

with probability at least 1 ´ δ. Then, combining the latter inequality with the upper bound on the
regret and a union bound, we get
                                                                c
                                                 RpT, δq           logp1{δq
                       V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π
                                          pT q ď         ` 8Bp
                                                   T                   T
with probability at least 1 ´ 2δ.

The latter result implies a PAC guarantee of the form PpV pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, πpT q ě εq ď δ for some
                                                              2
ε ą 0 and δ P r0, 1s with a number of episodes of order Op1{ε
                                                        r       q. An analogous result can be stated
for the dueling setting.

Lemma 6 (Dueling regret to PAC). For T P N and δ P r0, 1s, let A LG be an algorithm for dueling
PORRL producing a sequence of policy pairs pπ1,t , π2,t qtPrT s with dueling regret bounded with
probability at least 1 ´ δ as
                     T
                     ÿ                    V pM, π1,t q ` V pM, π2,t q
                           V pM, π‹ q ´                               ď RD pT, δq P R.
                     t“1
                                                       2

Then, a policy π
               pT „ π1 , . . . , πT sampled uniformly satisfies with probability at least 1 ´ 4δ
                                                                     c
                                                 RD pT, δq              logp1{δq
                    V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π  pT q ď            ` 16Bp               .
                                                     T                     T

Proof. The proof proceeds as in the previous lemma by applying Hoeffding separately on the
sequences Y1,t “ V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π1,t q and Y2,t “ V pM, π‹ q ´ V pM, π2,t q, then applying a union
bound.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P ROOFS FOR G ENERAL O PTIMISTIC A LGORITHMS FOR C ARDINAL PORRL
C.1 G ENERIC M ODEL -BASED O PTIMISM USING C ONFIDENCE -S ETS
We present a template to get regret bounds for a generic model-based optimistic algorithm using
confidence sets, which we will later instantiate into POR-UCRL and also use in our reduction from
the dueling PORRL to optimistic algorithms for cardinal PORRL.
A generic algorithm using confidence sets is determined by confidence sets CM pD, δq based on a
dataset D. Maintaining a running dataset Dt , at each step t, we run πt given by
                                    πt , M
                                         r t :“       arg max        V pP, f, πq
                                                  πPΠ,MPCM pDt ,δq

We obtain a trajectory τt „ Pπ‹ t and append it to Dt to get Dt`1 , recompute confidence sets
CM pDt`1 , δq, and continue. This algorithm is formally presented in Appendix C.1 below.

Algorithm 2 Generic Confidence-Set Optimism
 1: Input Known family of reward functions tRh uH
                                                h“1 , known model class M induced by known
    probability transition kernel class P and known decoder-induced function class F, confidence
    level δ.
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu and CM pD1 , δq Ð M.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:    Compute the optimistic history dependent policy,
                                           πt , M
                                                rt “      arg max        V pM, πq
                                                       π, MPCM pDt ,δq

                                                  H
 5:   Observe trajectory τt “ tpsth , ath quh“1 and feedback toh uhPHp .
 6:   Update Dt`1 Ð Dt Y tτt u and compute new confidence set CM pDt`1 , δq.
 7: end for


We now make the following assumption about our confidence sets. It essentially controls the effect of
shrinking confidence sets for P and F on the value. Showing this assumption is the core of proving
regret bounds for any instantiation of this generic algorithm. We will see later that it is satisfied by
the confidence sets for POR-UCRL.

Assumption 3 (Controlling Value Error due to Confidence Sets, Refined Version). For a transition
kernel P‹ and function f‹ , consider any sequence of policies πt and datasets Dt that contain tτi uti“1
generated under pPπ‹ t , f ‹ q. We require that M‹ P CM pDt , δq for all t with probability 1 ´ δ{16.
We require that there exist problem dependent functions CP pM, T, δq and CF pM, T, δq so that for
arbitrary sequences pPt , f t q P CM pDt , δq, the following hold with probability 1 ´ δ{2 each.
                      ˇ                                        ˇ
                      ˇÿ T                                     ˇ
                      ˇ V pPt , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt qˇ “ OpC P pM, T, δqq
                      ˇ                                        ˇ r
                      ˇt“1                                     ˇ
                      ˇ                                        ˇ
                      ˇÿ T                                     ˇ
                      ˇ V pP‹ , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f‹ , πt qˇ “ OpC  F pM, T, δqq
                      ˇ                                        ˇ r
                      ˇt“1                                     ˇ

Theorem 4 (Regret for Confidence-Set Optimism). Under Assumption 3, any generic optimistic
algorithm using confidence sets CM pD, δq satisfies the regret bound
                           RegretpT q “ O
                                        r pCP pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq

Proof. Let M                r t and frt . Note the following inequalities, where piq holds with probability
            r t be given by P
1 by the optimistic definition of πt .

                         T
                         ÿ
         RegretpT q “          V pP‹ , f ‹ , π‹ q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                         t“1


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          T
                      piq ÿ
                      ď            r t , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                                V pP
                          t“1
                          T
                          ÿ
                      ď         V pPr t , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , frt , πt q ` V pP‹ , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                                looooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooon       looooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooon
                          t“1
                                                 pIq                                        pIIq

We now apply Assumption 3 to bound pIq and pIIq. We can use the assumption since Dt contains
trajectories tτi uti“1 generated by Pπ‹ t , frt P CF pDt , δq Ă F and P
                                                                      r t P CF pDt , δq. This immediately
gives us that with probability 1 ´ δ
                           RegretpT q “ OpC
                                        r F pM, T, δq ` CP pM, T, δqq

as desired.


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2 G ENERIC M ODEL -BASED O PTIMISM USING B ONUSES
We present a template to get regret bounds for a generic model-based optimistic algorithm using
bonuses, which we will later instantiate into POR-UCBVI and also use in our reduction from the
dueling PORRL to optimistic algorithms for cardinal PORRL.
A generic optimistic algorithm using bonuses relies on bonuses bD                D
                                                                   P pP, π, δq, bF pP, π, δq that depend
on a policy π, transition kernel P and dataset D. It also relies on estimates P̂D and fˆD that depend
on D. Maintaining a running dataset Dt , at each step t, we run πt :“ arg maxπPΠ Vr pP̂Dt , fˆDt , πq,
where Vr pP̂Dt , fˆDt , πq is given by:
                       V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , πq ` bD                       Dt
                                              F pP̂Dt , π, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π, δq
                                               t


where z is defined below. We obtain a trajectory τt „ Pπ‹ t and append it to Dt to get Dt`1 , compute
new bonuses and estimates, and continue. This algorithm is formally presented in Appendix C.2.

Algorithm 3 Generic Bonus-Based Optimism
 1: Input Known family of reward functions tRh uH                                       ˆ
                                                h“1 , method EstpDq to estimate P̂D and fD
    from dataset D, bonus functions bD                    D
                                        F pP, π, δq and bP pP, π, δq, confidence level δ
 2: Initialize D1 Ð tu, initialize fˆD1 , P̂D1 arbitrarily.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:    Compute optimistic history dependent policy,
                  πt “ arg max V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , πq ` bD                        Dt
                                                      F pP̂Dt , π, δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , π, δqq
                                                       t

                            π

                                               H
 5:   Observe trajectory τt “ tpsth , ath quh“1 and feedback toh uhPHp .
 6:   Compute new estimates fˆDt`1 , P̂Dt`1 Ð EstpDt`1 q and compute new bonus functions
       D                       D
      bF t`1 pfˆDt`1 , ¨, δq, bP t`1 pP̂Dt`1 , ¨, δq.
 7: end for


We now make the following assumption about our bonuses. Showing this assumption is the core
of proving regret bounds for any instantiation of this generic algorithm. We will see later that it is
satisfied by the bonuses for POR-UCBVI.

Assumption 4 (Controlling Value Error via Bonuses). For a transition kernel P‹ and function f‹ ,
consider any sequence of policies πt and datasets Dt that contain tτi uti“1 generated under pPπ‹ t , f ‹ q.
We require that for sequences P̂Dt and fˆDt and any sequence f t P F, the following hold.

       • Bounding effect of error in F: With probability 1 ´ δ{32, for any P and uniformly over all
         policies π, |V pP, fˆDt , πq´V pP, f ‹ , πq| ď bDF pP, π, δq and there is a function CF pM, T, δq
                                                           t
                 řT Dt
         so that t“1 bF pP‹ , πt , δq “ OpC r F pM, T, δqq with probability 1 ´ δ{32
       • Bounding effect of error in P: For any function µ : ΓH Ñ R bounded by D, there is a
         function zpDq ě D so that the following holds uniformly over all policies π with probability
         1 ´ δ{32.
                               Eτ „pP̂D qπ µpτ q ´ Eτ „Pπ‹ µpτ q ď zpDqbD P pP‹ , π, δq
                                                                            t
                                       t

         The statement also holds if we switch P‹ and P̂Dt . Additionally, the statement holds for
         a suitable D if we replace Eτ „Pπ µpτ q with bP pP, π, δq or bF pP, π, δq.11 Finally, there is
                                         řT
         a function CP pM, T, δq so that t“1 bD  P pP‹ , πt , δq “ OpCP pM, T, δqq with probability
                                                  t                r
         1 ´ δ{32.

Theorem 5 (Regret for Bonus-Based Optimism). Under Assumption 4, with z1 pDq “ zpDq `
zp2Dq ` zp2zpDqq, any generic optimistic algorithm using bonuses satisfies
                        RegretpT q “ O
                                     r pCF pM, T, δq ` z1 pBpqCP pM, T, δqq
   11
      This would instantly hold with D “ Bp if bF pP, π, δq :“ Eτ „Pπ bF pτ, δq for some trajectory level bonus
bF pτ, δq, and similarly for P.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Note that we can use Assumption 4 since Dt contains trajectories tτi uti“1 generated by
Pπ‹ t , fˆDt P F is computed using Dt and P̂Dt is computed using Dt . Also note that WLOG,
bD
 P pP, π, δq ď 2 always holds since we can otherwise clip it at 2 and our assumption will still hold.
   t


Similarly, WLOG bD  F pP, π, δq ď 2zpBpq, otherwise we can clip it at 1 and our assumption will still
                      t

hold. Now note the following inequalities.

                     T
                     ÿ
RegretpT q “               V pP‹ , f ‹ , π‹ q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                    t“1
                    T
                piq ÿ
                ď          V pP̂Dt , f ‹ , π‹ q ` zpBpqpbD                             ‹
                                                         P pP̂Dt , π‹ , δqq ´ V pP‹ , f , πt q
                                                          t

                     t“1
                     T
                piiq ÿ
                ď           V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π‹ q ` bD                          Dt                            ‹
                                                     F pP̂Dt , π‹ , δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , π‹ , δqq ´ V pP‹ , f , πt q
                                                      t

                     t“1
                      T
                piiiq ÿ
                 ď           V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , πt q ` bD                          Dt                            ‹
                                                      F pP̂Dt , πt , δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , πt , δqq ´ V pP‹ , f , πt q
                                                       t

                      t“1
                     T
                     ÿ
                “          V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π‹ q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q ` bD                          Dt
                                                                         F pP̂Dt , πt , δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , πt , δqq
                                                                          t

                    t“1
                     T
                     ÿ
                “          V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π‹ q ´ V pP̂Dt , f ‹ , π‹ q ` V pP̂Dt , f ‹ , π‹ q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                    t“1
                            T
                            ÿ
                      `           bD                          Dt
                                   F pP̂Dt , πt , δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , πt , δqq
                                    t

                            t“1

Here, inequality piq holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16 by the second point in Assumption 4. Inequality
piiq holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16 by the first point in Assumption 4. Inequality piiiq holds with
probability 1 by the optimistic definition of πt . Continuing, we have

                         pivq     T
                                  ÿ
       RegretpT q ď 2                   bD                          Dt
                                         F pP̂Dt , πt , δq ` zpBpqpbP pP̂Dt , πt , δqq
                                          t

                                  t“1

                         pvq      T
                                  ÿ
                          ď 2           bD                         Dt                        Dt
                                         F pP‹ , πt , δq ` 2zpBpqpbP pP‹ , πt , δqq ` zpBpqpbP pP‹ , πt , δqq
                                          t

                                  t“1

                            ` 2zpzpBpqqpbD P pP‹ , πt , δqq
                                              t

                            ˜                                                 ¸
                              ÿT
                                  Dt                         Dt
                         “O      bF pP‹ , πt , δq ` z1 pBpqpbP pP‹ , πt , δqq
                                    t“1


Here, inequality pivq holds with probability 1 ´ δ{8 by a union bound over the first and the second
point in Assumption 4. Finally, inequality pvq holds with probability 1 ´ δ{4 by a union bound over
four applications of the second point of Assumption 4. Finally, we use a union bound over both points
of Assumption 4 to conclude that with probability 1 ´ δ{8
       ˜                                                             ¸
           T
           ÿ
   O           bD                          Dt
                F pP‹ , πt , δq ` z1 pBpqpbP pP‹ , πt , δqq
                 t
                                                                         “O
                                                                          r pCF pM, T, δq ` z1 pBpqCP pM, T, δqq
       t“1

By taking a union bound over the events of all inequalities above, we have that with probability 1 ´ δ

                                RegretpT q “ O
                                             r pCF pM, T, δq ` z1 pBpqCP pM, T, δqq


as desired.


                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   G ENERIC M ODEL -F REE O PTIMISM
Algorithm 4 Generic Model-Free Optimism
 1: Input Known Bellman-complete class of Q-functions Q, confidence level δ.
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu and CQ pD1 , δq Ð Q.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:   τ r0s Ð pq
 5:   for h “ 1, . . . H do
 6:      Play ath , Qth Ð arg maxa,QPCQ pDt ,δq Qh pτ rhs, aq and observe feedback oth
 7:   end for
 8:   Update Dt`1 Ð Dt Y tτ, pot1 , . . . otH u
 9:   Compute CQ pDt`1 , δq
10: end for


Note that the method for choosing actions ath at time t induces a history dependent policy πt , whose
suboptimality is what we use to define regret. Regret is still given by
                                               T
                                               ÿ
                              RegretpT q “           V pM‹ , π‹ q ´ V pM‹ , πt q
                                               t“1

We now make the following assumption about our confidence sets. Showing this assumption is the
core of proving regret bounds for any instantiation of this generic algorithm. We know that this
is satisfied by GOLF using the BE-dimension. We will show that in our case, it is also satisfied
by a more refined notion known as the α-HABE dimension (the α-history aware Bellman eluder
dimension).

Assumption 5. For a Q-function Q‹ induced by model M‹ , consider any sequence of policies πt and
datasets Dt that contain tτi uti“1 generated under M‹ . We require that Q‹ P CQ pDt , δq for all t with
probability 1 ´ δ{16. We require that there exists a problem dependent function CQ pQ, T, δq, so that
for arbitrary sequences Qt P CQ pDt , δq, the following holds for all h with probability 1 ´ δ{2.
                            t
                            ÿ
                                  |Eµh pQt q rQth ´ Th Qj`1
                                                        h s| ď CQ pQ, T, δq
                            j“1


Theorem 6 (Regret for Generic Model-Free Optimism). If the confidence sets CQ pD, δq used in
Algorithm 4 satisfy Assumption 5, then the regret of Algorithm 4 is bounded by
                                    RegretpT q “ O pHCQ pQ, T, δqq

Proof. Note that V pM‹ , π‹ q “ maxa Q‹1 ps1 , aq ď maxa Qt1 ps1 , aq for all t, giving us the following
result by the policy loss decomposition in Jiang et al. (2016).
                                             T
                                             ÿ
                           RegretpT q “            V pM‹ , π‹ q ´ V pM‹ , πt q
                                             t“1
                                             T
                                             ÿ
                                         ď         max Qt1 ps1 , aq ´ V pM‹ , πt q
                                                     a
                                             t“1
                                             T ÿ
                                             ÿ H
                                         “               Eµh pQt q rQth ´ Th Qj`1
                                                                              h s
                                             t“1 h“1
                                             H ÿ
                                             ÿ T
                                         “               Eµh pQt q rQth ´ Th Qj`1
                                                                              h s
                                             h“1 t“1
                                         “ OpHCQ pQ, T, δqq
where the last line holds by Assumption 5.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     D ETAILS AND P ROOFS FOR C ARDINAL POR-UCRL
We now instantiate Algorithm 2 using standard confidence sets to get POR-UCRL. We show that
they satisfy Assumption 3 and get regret bounds for the algorithm. Note that our algorithm is
crucially different from naively summarizing the history to define a modified state space, since we
are separating the use of history summarization for getting confidence sets f from using only the
current state while learning the Markovian transitions P. In this case, it is a priori unclear if we can
use ideas from optimism to prove guarantees with a favorable (non-exponential) dependence on the
complexity of transitions.
Recall that given a dataset of the first t trajectory samples tτi uti“1 and an index h P rHs, we consider
the following least squares objective to estimate f :
                                                              t
                                                              ÿ `                            ˘2
                              fpht`1 “ arg min                      σh pfh pτi rhsqq ´ oih
                                               fh PFh i“1

Simple least squares guarantees imply the lemma below.

Lemma 7 (Concentration for σ ˝ fh ). Define
                                                    t
                                                    ÿ `                                           ˘2
                      MSEh,t pfh , fh1 q :“                   σh pfh pτi rhsqq ´ σh pfh1 pτi rhsqq
                                                   i“1
                                  ˆ                           ˙
                                      Np   Fh , B
                                                T ,}¨}8   q              tB`tηh logp δt q
Also define β̄h,t pδq “ ηh2 log                δ   ` αh,t with αh,t :“        T           . Then fh‹ simulta-
                                  pt`1q          `     ˘
neously satisfies MSEh,t pfh‹ , fph     q ď β̄h,t 2t2δH for all h, t with probability 1 ´ δ{32.

Proof. We apply Lemma 6 in Chan et al. (2021) and the last statement in its proof to each h separately
with the function class in the lemma set to tσh ˝ fh |fh P Fh u, P “ 1, xt,p “ xt,1 “ τt rhs and
misspecification ε “ 0 (decoupled from the Eluder dimension’s ε). We also note that oth are ηh -
subgaussian samples with mean σh pfh pτ rhsqq. This gives us that each of event indexed by h, t below
holds with probability at least 1 ´ 2t2δH .
                       t                                                ˆ       ˙
                      ÿ   `                         1
                                                               ˘2           δ
                            σh pfh pτi rhsqq ´ σh pfh pτi rhsqq ď β̄h,t
                      i“1
                                                                          2t2 H

So, the events all simultaneously hold with probability at least 1 ´ δ by a union bound.

Recall the definition of our confidence sets below.
Confidence Sets for POR-UCRL. We instantiate the generic optimistic algorithm using confi-
                                       t         t
dence sets by defining CM pDt , δq :“ CP pδq ˆ CF   pδq as our confidence sets below. We name the
resulting algorithm POR-UCRL.     We use the data  from  trajectories tτi uti“1 to build
                                                                                    ` the˘ confidence
      t`1       ś t`1              t`1
sets CF pδq “ h Ch pδq with Ch pδq defined below, where βh,t pδq :“ β̄h,t 2t2δH .
                                  !        ˇ                                   )
                                                            pt`1q
                     Cht`1 pδq :“ fh P Fh ˇMSEh,t pfh‹ , fph      q ď βh,t pδq
                                           ˇ

                                                                                                       1
We also use the MLE estimate for P after t episodes to define P̂t p¨ | s, aq :“ NNt ps,a,s
                                                                                    t ps,aq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                              . Now for
           b
              S logp2q`logpnpn`1qSA{δq              t
ζpn, δq “ 2               2n            , define CP pδq as below:
                       ! ˇ                                                       )
                         Pˇ}Pp¨ | s, aq ´ P̂t p¨ | s, aq}1 ď ζpNt ps, aq, δq@s, a
                          ˇ


Confidence Sets for POR-UCRL in case P‹ is known.                             For known-model UCRL, the confidence
      t                              t
sets CF pδq are still as above, but CP pδq :“ tP‹ u
For completeness, we repeat the algorithm POR-UCRL here, which is an instantiation of Algorithm 2,
the generic optimistic algorithm using confidence sets.


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 POR-UCRL
 1: Input: Known family of reward functions tRh uH
                                                 h“1 , known probability transition kernel class P
      and known decoder-induced function class F, confidence level δ.
                                                 śH
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu and CF pD1 , δq Ð h“1 Fh , CP pD1 , δq Ð P.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:   Compute the optimistic history dependent policy,

                                     πt , frt , P
                                                rt “             arg max                  V pP, f, πq
                                                       π, F PCF pDt ,δq,PPPpDt ,δq

                                                       H
 5:      Collect trajectory τt “ tpsth , ath quh“1 and feedback toh uhPHp by sampling from Pπ‹ t with
         true decoder-induced function f‹ .
 6:      Update Dt`1 Ð Dt Y tτt u, P̂t`1 , fˆht`1 for all h
                                                          śH
 7:      Compute new confidence sets CF pDt`1 , δq Ð h“1 Cht`1 pδq and CP pDt`1 , δq where
                                 !             ˇ                              )
                                                            pt`1q
                      Cht`1 pδq Ð fh P Fh ˇMSEh,t pfh‹ , fph      q ď βh,t pδq
                                               ˇ
                                 ! ˇ                                                         )
                 CP pDt`1 , δq Ð Pˇ}Pp¨ | s, aq ´ P̂t`1 p¨ | s, aq}1 ď ζpNt`1 ps, aq, δq@s, a
                                    ˇ

 8: end for


We will now show our regret bound.

Theorem 1 (POR-UCRL Regret). Under Assumption 1, the regret RegretpT q of POR-UCRL is
bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ
                            ´´ ?             ÿ       a            ¯? ¯
                          O
                          r pS HA `                     dE,h dC,h   T
                                                hPHp
                    `      ˘
where dE,h “ dimE Fh , B T and dC,h “ logpN pFh , 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq.

D.1 S HOWING THAT A SSUMPTION 3 IS S ATISFIED
D.1.1 B OUNDING R EWARD M ODEL D EVIATIONS
Lemma 8 (Bounding Reward Model Deviations). Consider decoder-induced functions tfh uhPHp
satisfying |fh | ď B that induce value functions V pP, f, πq. For any sequence of policies πt , if the
              t
confidence CF    pδq is generated using data τi „ Pπ‹ i , i “ 1 Ñ t and frt P CF
                                                                               t
                                                                                 pδq is an arbitrary
sequence of functions, then we have the following with probability 1 ´ δ{4.
                                  ˇ                                        ˇ
                                  ˇÿT                                      ˇ
                                  ˇ V pP‹ , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt qˇ
                                  ˇ                                        ˇ
                                  ˇt“1                                     ˇ
is bounded by
                    ¨                                                       ˛
                        a              ÿ              ÿ     b
                   O ˝Bp T logpT {δq `   Bκ2,h dE,h `   κ2,h dE,h βh,T pδqT ‚
                                               hPHp                           hPHp


Proof.
                                                                 «                   ff                 «                    ff
T
ÿ                                              T
                                               ÿ                      H
                                                                      ÿ                                     H
                                                                                                            ÿ
              rt                 ‹
      V pP‹ , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f , πt q “          Eτ „Pπ‹ t            frht pτ rhsq    ´ Eτ „Pπ‹ t            fh‹ pτ rhsq
t“1                                            t“1                h“1                                   h“1
                                                                 »                        fi                »                     fi
                                               T
                                               ÿ                      ÿ                                         ÿ
                                           “         Eτ „Pπ‹ t –             frht pτ rhsqfl ´ Eτ „Pπ‹ t –              fh‹ pτ rhsqfl
                                               t“1                    hPHp                                      hPHp
                                                                 »                                      fi
                                               T
                                               ÿ                      ÿ
                                           “         Eτ „Pπ‹ t –             frht pτ rhsq ´ fh‹ pτ rhsqfl
                                               t“1                    hPHp



                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                        »                                                     fi
                                                  T
                                                  ÿ           ÿ
                                             “          –           frht pτt rhsq ´ fh‹ pτt rhsq ` X1,t ` X2,t fl
                                                  t“1        hPHp
                                                         »                                         fi
                                                  T
                                             piiq ÿ           ÿ                                          ´ a            ¯
                                             ď           –             frht pτt rhsq ´ fh‹ pτt rhsqfl ` O Bp T logpT {δq
                                                  t“1         hPHp

where                                             »                        fi   »                       fi
                                                      ÿ                              ÿ
                          X1,t :“ Eτ „Pπ –                    frht pτ rhsqfl ´ –            frht pτt rhsqfl
                                                      hPHp                           hPHp
                                       »                          fi            »                       fi
                                           ÿ                                          ÿ
                          X2,t :“ –               fh‹ pτt rhsqfl ´ Eτ „Pπ –                 fh‹ pτ rhsqfl
                                           hPHp                                      hPHp


Inequality piq follows by the definition of πt and frht – that is, by optimism. Inequality piiq holds
with probability at least 1 ´ δ since X1,t and X2,t are both martingales with respect to the filtration
Gt given by the data of trajectories tτs ut´1
                                           s“1 . Also, |X1,t |, |X2,t | ď Bp. We can thus apply the
Azuma-Hoeffding inequality twice to obtain inequality piiq.
Continuing, note the following.

          T
          ÿ
                V pP‹ , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
          t“1
              «                                         ff
                  H
                  ÿ                                              a
          ď           fht pτt rhsq ´ fh‹ pτt rhsq            ` Bp T logpT {δq
                h“1
              «                                                                 ff
                  H
                  ÿ                                                       a
          ď           κ2,h σh pfht pτt rhsqq ´ κ2,h σh pfh‹ pτt rhsqq ` Bp T logpT {δq
                h“1
                      T
                      ÿ ÿ                                                                 a
                                                                          1
          ď κ2,h                   max  t pδq
                                              σ h pfh pτt rhsqq ´  σ h pf h pτt rhsqq `Bp  T logpT {δq
                              fh ,fh1 PWh
                     t“1 hPHp loooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                         “:γ̄h,t pτt rhs,δq
                             «                          ff
                      ÿ          T
                                 ÿ                         a
          “ κ2,h                     γ̄h,t pτt rhs, δq ` Bp T logpT {δq
                     hPHp     t“1

The sum of these maximum uncertainty evaluations can be upper bounded using the Eluder dimension.
The inequality below holds by applying Lemma 3 in (Chan et al., 2021) for each h separately, with the
function class in the lemma set to tσh ˝fh |fh P Fh u, P “ 1, xt,p “ xt,1 “ τt rhs and misspecification
ε “ 0 (decoupled from the Eluder dimension’s ε). We also recall that oth are ηh -subgaussian samples
with mean σh pfh pτt rhsqq. We obtain
                         T
                         ÿ                       ˆ         b                 ˙
                            γ̄h,t pτt rhs, δq ď O BdE,h ` dE,h βh,T pδqT
                             t“1
                         `
                         ˘                                                 ` δ ˘
Where dE,h “ dimE Fh , B
                       T is the Eluder dimension of Fh and βh,T pδq “ β̄h,t 2t2 H . Therefore,
we have our result.
                            ÿT
                                V pP‹ , frt , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , πt q
                                           t“1
is bounded by
                  ¨                                                                              ˛
                      ÿ                            ÿ             b                   a
                O˝           Bκ2,h dE,h `                    κ2,h dE,h βh,T pδqT ` Bp T logpT {δq‚
                      hPHp                        hPHp



                                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that this entire argument can be repeated with f‹ and frt switched, by the symmetry of the
definition of γ̄h,t pτt rhs, δq and the fact that the negative of a martingale is also a martingale.

D.1.2 B OUNDING P ROBABILITY M ODEL D EVIATIONS
Lemma 9 (Bounding Probability Model Deviations). Consider an arbitrary sequence of functions
f t P F satisfying |fh | ď B that induce value functions V pP, f, πq. For any sequence of policies πt ,
                   t
if the confidence CP pδq is generated using data that includes τi „ Pπ‹ i , i “ 1 Ñ t and P
                                                                                          r t P C t pδq is
                                                                                                 P
an arbitrary sequence of transition structures, then we have the following with probability 1 ´ δ{4.
   ˇ                                    ˇ
   ˇÿT                                  ˇ    ´      ?                                a                ¯
                t                t
   ˇ V pPt , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f , πt qˇ ď O cδ Bp SAHT ` cδ BpHSA ` Bp pT logpT {δq
   ˇ       r                            ˇ
   ˇt“1                                 ˇ
               a
where cδ :“ 8 S logp2q ` logpHT SA{δq.

Proof. We first show the following.

Lemma 10.
     T
     ÿ                                                  T ÿ
                                                        ÿ H                                  ´ a             ¯
              r t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt q ď
           V pP                                                   2pζpNt psth , ath q, δq ` O Bp pT logpT {δq
     t“1                                                t“1 h“1


Recall that we denote the Bellman operator by T π where T π f “ Ea„π Pf . Momentarily define the
following for τ “ pτl´1 , sl , τ 1 q, where τl´1 is an arbitrary trajectory of length l ´ 1 ď H, and sl is
an arbitrary state.
                                                         «                ff
                                                           ÿH
                           V t pτl´1 , sl q :“ Eτ 1 „Pπt
                                    l,P                        frt pτ rhsq    h
                                                                        h“l
                                                                    »                          fi
                                                                           ÿ
                                                    “ Eτ 1 „Pπt –                   frht pτ rhsqfl
                                                                        hPHp ,hěl



So in the definition above, the first l ´ 1 observations in τ come from τl´1 while the rest are generated
by the input P starting with state sl . Note that V pP, f t , πt q “ V1,Pt
                                                                            pH, s1 q. Also note that by the
Bellman equation, we have the following.
       t
                                    “           ‰         “                                                ‰
     Vl,P pτt rl ´ 1s, sl q “ Ea„πt flt pτt rlsq ` Ea„πt Es1 „Pp¨|sl ,aq Vl`1,P
                                                                           t
                                                                                ppτt rl ´ 1s, s, aq, s1 qq
                                    “           ‰         “                                              ‰
                            “ Ea„πt flt pτt rlsq ` Ea„πt Pp¨ | sl , aqJ Vl`1,P
                                                                           t
                                                                                ppτt rl ´ 1s, sl , aq, ¨q

Now use τt to set τl´1 :“ τt rl ´ 1s and define the following.
                               ∆tl psl q :“ Vl,P
                                              t
                                                 ‹
                                                   pτt rl ´ 1s, sl q ´ Vl,Pr t pτt rl ´ 1s, sl q
Note that
                                 ∆t1 ps1 q “ V pPr t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt q                                 (1)
The computation above then gives us the following.
                        ”                                                         ı
      ∆tl pstl q “ Ea„πt Pr t p¨ | st , aqJ V t
                                    l        l`1,Pt
                                                 r  ppτ  t rl ´   1s, st
                                                                       l , aq, ¨qq
                               “                                                         ‰
                     ´ Ea„πt P‹ p¨ | stl , aqJ Vl`1,P
                                                   t
                                                           ‹
                                                             ppτt rl ´ 1s, stl , aq, ¨qq
                   r t p¨ | st , at qJ V t
                  “P                                                 t t J t
                             l    l         r pτt rls, ¨q ´ P‹ p¨ | sl , al q Vl`1,P‹ pτt rls, ¨q ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
                                        l`1,P   t

where Yl,t and Zl,t are stochastic processes defined below.
                                                              “                                                    ‰
    Yl,t :“ P‹ p¨ | stl , aqJ Vl`1,P
                                 t
                                       ‹
                                         pτt rls, ¨q ´ Ea„πt P‹ p¨ | stl , aqJ Vl`1,P
                                                                                 t
                                                                                       ‹
                                                                                         ppτt rl ´ 1s, stl , aq, ¨q
                    ”                                                      ı
   Zl,t :“ Ea„πt P     r t p¨ | st , aqJ V t                     t                     t     J t
                                                r ppτt rl ´ 1s, sl , aq, ¨q ´ Pt p¨ | sl , aq Vl`1,P r pτt rls, ¨qq
                                                                              r
                                 l         l`1,P    t                                                  t


                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider the filtration Gl,t induced by the data of tτs ut´1                                          t           t
                                                                          s“1 Y τt rl ´ 1s Y tsl u. Since al „ πt and
pτt rl ´ 1s, stl , atl q “ τt rls, we get that ErYl,t |Gl,t s “ ErZl,t |Gl,t s “ 0. So, one can see that both
processes are martingales over Gl,t . Also note that |Yl,t |, |Zl,t | ď p. We thus have that
            ”                                       ı
∆tl pstl q “ Pr t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t
                         l   l              l    l      l`1,Pr t pτt rls, ¨qq
                                      ”                                                  ı
               ` P‹ p¨ | stl , atl qJ Vl`1,
                                          t
                                               Pt
                                               r  pτt rls, ¨qq ´   V  t
                                                                     l`1,P  ‹
                                                                              pτt rls, ¨q  ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
            ”                                       ı
           “ Pr t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t                                   t t J t          1
                         l   l              l    l      l`1,Pr t pτt rls, ¨qq ` P‹ p¨ | sl , al q ∆l`1 ps q ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
            ”                                       ı                                                “ t        ‰
           “ Pr t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t                                                      1
                         l   l              l    l      l`1,Pr t pτt rls, ¨qq ` Es1 „P‹ p¨|stl ,atl q ∆l`1 ps q ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
            ”                                       ı
           “ Pr t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t                             t     t
                         l   l              l    l      l`1,Pr pτt rls, ¨qq ` ∆l`1 psl`1 q ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
                                                               t

where                                                          “           ‰
                                  Ul,t :“ Es1 „P‹ p¨|stl ,atl q ∆tl`1 ps1 q ´ ∆tl`1 pstl`1 q
Consider the filtration Ḡl,t defined by the data of tτs ut´1       s“1 Y τt rls. Clearly, Ul,t is a martingale over
Ḡl,t . Also note that |Ul,t | ď p To conclude, we have that
                                 ”                                       ı
    ∆tl pstl q ´ ∆tl`1 pstl`1 q “ Pr t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t
                                             l    l              l    l    l`1,Pr pτt rls, ¨qq ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
                                                                                  t


Using a telescoping sum over l for a fixed t and equation 1, we get that for any t, the following holds.
                   r t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt q
                V pP
                “ ∆t1 ps1 q
                  H ”
                  ÿ                                           ı
                        r t p¨ | st , at q ´ P‹ p¨ | st , at q V t
                        P
                “                 l    l              l    l        r pτt rls, ¨qq ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
                                                                l`1,P  t
                    l“1



   r t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt q
V pP
   ÿH          ›                                      ›
                           t t                 t t ›
         Bp ›P            s  , a      P       s  , al › ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
               ›r
ď                  t p¨ |  l    l q ´  ‹ p¨ |  l     q
                                                      1
    l“1
    H
    ÿ        ›                                       ›      ›                                      ›
                        t t                  t t ›                    t t                  t t ›
          Bp ›P t p¨ | sl , al q ´ P̂t p¨ | sl , al q› ` Bp ›P‹ p¨ | sl , al q ´ P̂t p¨ | sl , al q› ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
             ›r                                             ›
ď
                                                      1                                           1
    l“1
                                                                                                                        (2)

Until equation 2, all statements have held with probability 1 and did not use any facts about Pr t . The
last inequality also holds with probability 1 and uses the design of the confidence sets. Now, note the
following well known concentration lemma. See, for example, Szepesvári (2023).
                         b
Lemma 11. For ζpn, δq “ 8 S logp2q`logpnpn`1qSA{δq
                                       2n               and
                       ! ˇ                                                      )
                t
              CP  pδq “ Pˇ}Pp¨ | s, aq ´ P̂t p¨ | s, aq}1 ď ζpNt ps, aq, δq@s, a
                          ˇ

                     t
the true model P‹ P CP pδq for all t ě 1 with probability at least 1 ´ δ{32.

Applying the lemma twice and applying a union bound imply that the following holds with probability
1 ´ δ{8.
                      T
                      ÿ
                              r t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt q
                           V pP
                     t“1
                          H
                      piq ÿ
                      ď         2BpζpNt pstl , atl q, δq ` Ul,t ` Yl,t ` Zl,t
                          l“1


                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                               »                                 fi
                      T ÿ
                      ÿ H                                          T
                                                                   ÿ ÿ
                 “                2BpζpNt psth , ath q, δq ` –                Uh,t ` Yh,t ` Zh,t fl
                      t“1 h“1                                      t“1 hPHp

                      T ÿ
                 piiq ÿ H                                      ´ a              ¯
                  ď                2BpζpNt psth , ath q, δq ` O Bp pT logpT {δq
                      t“1 h“1

Note that inequality piq is subtle since we could have used more data than that from τi , i “ 1 Ñ t to
            t
construct CP  . The inequality still holds since ζpn, δq is decreasing in n. Also, inequality piiq holds
by the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality.
Now note that the whole argument above can be repeated with P‹ and P   r t switched, since the negative
of a martingale is also a martingale. So, we have that with probability 1 ´ δ{4

  ˇ                                          ˇ
  ˇÿT                                        ˇ ÿ T ÿ
                                                   H                             ´ a             ¯
       r t , f t , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt qˇˇ ď
  ˇ V pP
  ˇ
                                                     2BpζpNt psth , ath q, δq ` O Bp pT logpT {δq
  ˇt“1                                       ˇ t“1
                                                    h“1


Finally, we need the following easy lemma, proved in Szepesvári (2023).
                     a
Lemma 12. Let cδ :“ 8 S logp2q ` logpHT SA{δq. Then the following holds almost surely.
                     T ÿ
                     ÿ H                                       ?
                               2BpζpNt psth , ath q, δq ď cδ Bp SAHT ` cδ BpHSA
                     t“1 h“1


This establishes our claim.

D.2   P UTTING I T A LL T OGETHER
Theorem 1 (POR-UCRL Regret). Under Assumption 1, the regret RegretpT q of POR-UCRL is
bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ
                            ´´ ?             ÿ       a            ¯? ¯
                          O
                          r pS HA `                     dE,h dC,h   T
                                                       hPHp
                       `       B
                                 ˘
where dE,h “ dimE Fh , T and dC,h “ logpN pFh , 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq.

Proof. We can now combine Lemmas 7and 11 to conclude that M‹ P CM pDt , δq for all t with
probability 1 ´ δ{16. We can now combine this observation with Lemmas 8 and 9 to observe that
Assumption 3 is satisfied by POR-UCRL. By Theorem 4, the following holds with probability 1 ´ δ.
                 ¨                                                                            ˛
                         ?                       ÿ                  ÿ       b
RegretpT q “ O ˝cδ Bp SAHT ` cδ BpHSA `              Bκ2,h dE,h `       κ2,h dE,h βh,T pδqT ‚
                                                               hPHp                   hPHp

             a                                        `    B
                                                             ˘
                    ´ ` logpHT SA{δq, d¯E,h “ dimE Fh , T is the Eluder dimension of Fh
where cδ “ 8 S logp2q
                      δ    r 2 η 2 dC,h q . This is because all the terms dependent on p get
and βh,T pδq “ βh,t   2  “ OpB
                           2t H              h
absorbed by the first term in our expression below.
We further refine it by ignoring terms independent of T and using the fact that βh,T pδq “ Opd
                                                                                           r C,h q to
get that
                                         ¨                                   ˛
                                              ?           ÿ a
                         RegretpT q “ Or ˝pS AHT `               dE,h dC,h T ‚
                                                                     hPHp


Analogously, we can provide a sample complexity result for POR-UCRL.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Corollary 2 (POR-UCRL Sample complexity). Let ε ą 0, δ P r0, 1s. Ignoring polynomial terms
independent of ε, we can bound the sample complexity N pε, δq of POR-UCRL as follows
                                     ˆ 2
                                      p HS 2 A p2 dE dC
                                                            ˙
                                  Or            `
                                          ε2          ε2
where dE :“ maxhPHp dE,h , and dC :“ maxhPHp dC,h .

Proof. We invoke the regret-to-PAC conversion in Lemma 5 with confidence δ 1 “ δ{2 and we plug
the regret bound in Theorem 1 to write
                   ¨                                                               ˛
                     ˆ                                                 ˙ˆ        ˙
                          ?          ÿ       a              a                 1 ‚
            ε“O r ˝ BpS AH `             κ2,h dE,h dC,h ` Bp logp1{δq        ?
                                    hPHp
                                                                               T

from which we get the result by picking N “ T and the definition of dE , dC .

Also note the following theorem and corresponding corollary.

Theorem 7 (POR-UCRL Regret if P‹ is Known). If we know the transition matrix P‹ in POR-UCRL,
then our regret is given by the following with probability 1´δ, ignoring polynomial terms independent
of T .                                     ¨¨                          ˛     ˛
                                                       ÿ a               ?
                         RegretpT q “ O  r ˝˝Bp `            dE,h dC,h ‚ T ‚
                                                      hPHp


                                                        t
Proof. We can now use Lemmas 8 and the fact that CP       pδq is always a singleton to observe that
Assumption 3 is satisfied by this version of POR-UCRL as well. By Theorem 4, the following holds
with probability 1 ´ δ.
                            ¨                                                          ˛
                                   ?       ÿ                 ÿ        b
          RegretpT q “ O  r ˝Bp T `            Bκ2,h dE,h `       κ2,h dE,h βh,T pδqT ‚
                                         hPHp                hPHp


We further refine it by ignoring terms independent of T and using the fact that βh,T pδq “ Opd
                                                                                           r C,h q to
get that
                                      ¨¨                                  ˛      ˛
                                                 ÿ        b                  ?
                     RegretpT q “ O r ˝˝Bp `          κ2,h dE,h βh,T pδq‚ T ‚
                                                hPHp


Corollary 3 (POR-UCRL sample complexity if P‹ is Known). Let ε ą 0, δ P r0, 1s. Ignoring
polynomial terms independent of ε, we can bound the sample complexity N pε, δq of POR-UCRL
when P‹ is known as follows              ˆ 2       ˙
                                           p dE dC
                                       O
                                       r
                                              ε2
where dE :“ maxhPHp dE,h , and dC,h :“ maxhPHp dC,h .

Proof. The proof proceeds as in Corollary 2 by plugging Theorem 7 in Lemma 5.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    D ETAILS AND P ROOFS FOR C ARDINAL POR-UCBVI
We now describe how we instantiate POR-UCBVI from a generic optimistic algorithm using bonuses.
Note that again, this is crucially different from naively summarizing the history to define a modified
state space, since we are separating the use of history summarization for getting bonuses for f
from using only the current state while getting bonuses for the Markovian transitions P. Like with
confidence sets, it is a priori unclear if we can use ideas from optimism to prove guarantees with
a favorable (non-exponential) dependence on the complexity of transitions. In particular, we will
note that showing that the bonuses are optimistic would naively need a union bound over the doubly
                    H
exponential (ApSAq ) set of history-dependent policies, which is a non-trivial challenge to overcome.
Given a dataset of the first t trajectory samples tτi uti“1 and an index h P rHs, we consider the
following:
Estimates for POR-UCBVI:
                                                          t
                                                          ÿ `                          ˘2
                                  fpht`1 “ arg min              σpfh pτi rhsqq ´ oih
                                              fh PFh i“1

                                                                                                       1
We also use the MLE estimate for P after t episodes to define P̂t p¨ | s, aq :“ NNt ps,a,s
                                                                                    t ps,aq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                              . Now for
           b
              S logp2q`logpnpn`1qSA{δq
ζpn, δq “ 2               2n            , define CPt pδq as below:
                       ! ˇ                                                       )
                         Pˇ}Pp¨ | s, aq ´ P̂t p¨ | s, aq}1 ď ζpNt ps, aq, δq@s, a
                          ˇ


Recall the definition of our bonus below.
Bonuses for POR-UCBVI. Recall that simple least squares guarantees imply the lemma below.

Lemma 7 (Concentration for σ ˝ fh ). Define
                                                  t
                                                  ÿ `                                         ˘2
                      MSEh,t pfh , fh1 q :“               σh pfh pτi rhsqq ´ σh pfh1 pτi rhsqq
                                                  i“1
                                  ˆ                       ˙
                                      N pFh , B
                                              T ,}¨}8 q                  tB`tηh logp δt q
Also define β̄h,t pδq “ ηh2 log               δ    ` αh,t with αh,t :“        T           . Then fh‹ simulta-
                                  pt`1q          `     ˘
neously satisfies MSEh,t pfh‹ , fph     q ď β̄h,t 2t2δH for all h, t with probability 1 ´ δ{32.
                                                                          t`1                         t`1
We use the data from trajectories tτi uti“1 to build
                                                                                                   ś
 t`1
                                                      ˘ confidence sets CF pδq “
                                                ` δ the                                            h Ch pδq with
Ch pδq defined below, where βh,t pδq :“ β̄h,t 2t2 H .
                                  !           ˇ                                )
                                                            pt`1q
                     Cht`1 pδq :“ fh P Fh ˇMSEh,t pfh‹ , fph      q ď βh,t pδq
                                              ˇ


We first define a trajectory dependent bonus term below, with δ̄ :“ HS Hδ AH
                           γh,t pτ rhs, δq “              max       fh pτ rhsq ´ fh1 pτ rhsq
                                                             t δ̄
                                                   fh ,fh1 PCh pq

Note that according to the definition of β, this does not create any exponential dependence in the
confidence intervals used to define Cht`1 .
        ˆ           ˙
              δ              `                                                               ˘
   βh,t       H   H
                       ď 64 logpN pFh , α, } ¨ }8 qq ` B ` ηh logp1{δq ` ηh2 H logpT HSA{δq
          16S A
                       “ OpdC,h ` Hq

It follows by a union bound over all trajectory segments and all timesteps t that with probability at
least 1 ´ δ{16 and for any trajectory τ and t ě 1, h P Hp ,
                                   |fh‹ pτ rhsq ´ fˆht pτ rhsq| ď γh,t pτ rhs, δq                            (3)


                                                              30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 5. In the case of many popular function classes F, like the linear class FH “ tτ ÞÑ
ϕpτ qJ w | }w} ď W u, we can compute γh,t pτ rhs, δq quite easily. In this case γH,t is given by

                        sup ϕpτ qJ pw ´ w1 q “ }ϕpτ q}Vt                sup }w ´ w1 }V ´1
                                                                                          t
                      w,w1 PW   t                                     w,w1 PWt

for a suitable quadratic form Vt .

γh,t pτ rhs, δq induces a trajectory-dependent bonus, given by
                                                    ÿ
                                      btF pτ, δq :“   γh,t pτ rhs, δq
                                                        hPHp

This in turn induces a policy-level bonus (which depends on the transition kernel), given by:
                                                             »                     fi
                                        “          ‰           ÿ
                 btF pP, π, δq :“ Eτ „Pπ btF pτ, δq “ Eτ „Pπ –      γh,t pτ rhs, δqfl
                                                                             hPHp


Let us define a term ξ t ps, a, δq that will be used to define the probability bonus.
                             ˜ d                                                            ¸
        t                             H logp6HSAq ` S logp8t2 H 2 q ` logp32t2 Nt ps, aq{δq
       ξ ps, a, δq :“ min 2, 4
                                                               2Nt ps, aq

This induces a trajectory-dependent bonus, given by
                                                        H´1
                                                        ÿ
                                        btP pτ, δq :“          ξ t psh , ah , δq
                                                        h“1

This induces a policy-level bonus (which depends on the transition kernel), given by:
                                                         ˜           «                       ff¸
                                                                      H´1
                                                                       ÿ
                            `         “          ‰˘
        btP pP, π, δq :“ min 4, Eτ „Pπ btF pτ, δq “ min 4, Eτ „Pπ           ξ t psh , ah , δq
                                                                                    h“1


Estimates and Bonuses in case P‹ is known. If P‹ is instead known, keep fˆt and btF pP, π, δq the
same as above, but set P̂t :“ P‹ and btP pP, π, δq :“ 0 for all t.
For completeness we state POR-UCBVI here, which is an instantiation of Algorithm 3, the generic
optimistic algorithm using bonuses.

Algorithm 6 POR-UCBVI
 1: Input Known family of reward functions tRh uH                                        ˆt
                                                h“1 , methods EstpDq to estimate P̂t and f
      from dataset D, confidence level δ
 2: Initialize D1 Ð tu, initialize fˆD1 , P̂D1 arbitrarily.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:   Compute optimistic history dependent policy,
                     πt “ arg max V pP̂t , fˆt , πq ` btF pP̂t , π, δq ` zpBpqpbtP pP̂t , π, δqq
                                    π

                                                H
 5:   Observe trajectory τt “ tpsth , ath quh“1 and feedback toh uhPHp .
 6:   Compute new estimates fˆt`1 , P̂t`1 Ð EstpDt`1 q and compute new bonus functions
      bt`1  ˆt`1 , ¨, δq, bt`1 pP̂t`1 , ¨, δq.
       F pf                P
 7: end for


We will show the following regret bound.


                                                         31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 8 (POR-UCBVI Regret). Under Assumption 1, POR-UCBVI satisfies Assumption 4 and its
regret RegretpT q is bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ, ignoring polynomial
terms independent of T .
                         ¨¨                                          ˛     ˛
                                             ÿ b                        ?
                      Or ˝˝pCpH, S, Aq `            dE,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                                 hPHp
                         ?          ?
where CpH, S, Aq :“ H SA ` S HA

E.1 S HOWING THAT A SSUMPTION 4 IS S ATISFIED
E.1.1 B OUNDING EFFECT OF ERROR IN F
Lemma 13 (Bounding fˆt Value Error). Given any P, with fˆt computed using data from tτi uti“1 „
Pπ‹ i for any sequence of policies πi using least squares, the following holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16
uniformly over all π.

                             |V pP, fˆt , πq ´ V pP, f ‹ , πq| ď btF pP, π, δq

Proof. Recall that with probability at least 1 ´ δ{16, the following holds for any trajectory τ and any
t ě 1, h P Hp .

                               |fh‹ pτ rhsq ´ fˆht pτ rhsq| ď γh,t pτ rhs, δq                        (4)

Now note the following inequalities, where piq holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16 uniformly over all
policies due to inequality 4 above.
                                                          »                             fi
                                                            ÿ
                 V pP, fˆt , πq ´ V pP, f ‹ , πq “ Eτ „Pπ –   fˆht pτ rhsq ´ fh‹ pτ rhsqfl
                                                             hPHp
                                                            »                        fi
                                              piq               ÿ
                                              ď Eτ „Pπ –               γh,t pτ rhs, δqfl
                                                                hPHp

                                              “ btF pP, π, δq


Lemma 14 (Bounding Sum of F Bonuses). The following holds with probability 1.
                              ¨                                                 ˛
     T
     ÿ                          ÿ         ÿ b                       a
        btF pP‹ , πt , δq “ O
                            r˝    BdE,h `       dE,h βh,T pδ̄qT ` Bp T logpT {δq‚
       t“1                       hPHp                hPHp


Proof. First note the following inequality, which hold with probability 1 ´ δ{16 by the Azuma-
Hoeffding inequality.
                                                 »                  fi
                T
                ÿ                      T
                                       ÿ           ÿ
                   btF pP‹ , πt , δq “   Eτ „Pπt –
                                                 ‹
                                                     γt,h pτ rhs, δqfl
                t“1                   t“1             hPHp
                                      T
                                      ÿ ÿ                           ´ a             ¯
                                  ď              γt,h pτ rhs, δq ` O Bp T logpT {δq
                                      t“1 hPHp


Now apply Lemma 3 in (Chan et al., 2021) for each h separately, with the function class in the lemma
set to tσ ˝ fh |fh P Fh u, P “ 1, xt,p “ xt,1 “ τt rhs and misspecification ε “ 0 (decoupled from the


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Eluder dimension’s ε). We also note that oth are η-subgaussian samples with mean σpfh pτ rhsqq. We
obtain
          T
          ÿ                                                ˆ          b               ˙
                                             1
               max
                1   t
                        σpfh pτ rhsqq ´ σpfh pτ rhsqq ď O BdE,h ` dE,h βh,T pδ̄qT
                  fh ,fh PCh pδq
            t“1

                 `       ˘                                                     ´      ¯
where dE,h “ dimE Fh , B
                       T   is the Eluder dimension of F h and β h,T p δ̄q “ β̄     δ̄
                                                                                 2t H . Since the
                                                                                   2

Lipschitz constant of σ ´1 is κ2 , we have that the following holds with probability 1.
                     ÿT                      ˆ                b               ˙
                         γt,h pτ rhs, δq ď O Bκ2 dE,h ` κ2 dE,h βh,T pδ̄qT
                           t“1

This implies that the following holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16.
     T
     ÿ                             T
                                   ÿ ÿ                           ´ a             ¯
           btF pP‹ , πt , δq ď                γt,h pτ rhs, δq ` O Bp T logpT {δq
     t“1                           t“1 hPHp
                                     ¨                                                               ˛
                                         ÿ                 ÿ        b                    a
                             “O
                              r˝              Bκ2 dE,h `          κ2 dE,h βh,T pδ̄qT ` Bp T logpT {δq‚
                                       hPHp                hPHp


E.1.2 B OUNDING EFFECT OF ERROR IN P
We now restate Lemma B.2 of Chatterji et al. (2021) in our notation.

Lemma 15 (Change of Measure Inequality). For any function µ of trajectories bounded by D, if P̂t
is computed from data that includes trajectories tτi „ Pπ‹ i uti“1 for any sequence of policies πi , then
the following holds uniformly over all policies π with probability 1 ´ δ{16.
                                                           a
                     Eτ „Pπ‹ rµpτ qs ´ Eτ „P̂π rµpτ qs ď 2D logpDqbtP pP̂t , π, δq
                                                     t


The same statement holds if we switch the roles of P and P̂t on both sides.

Proof. For the order of P and P̂t in the statement, the following follows from Lemma B.2 of Chatterji
et al. (2021) with η “ D and ε “ t12 . We pull the additive logpDq in the square root outside to fit our
assumption’s phrasing.
                                         a                          1        a
     Eτ „P‹ rµpτ qs ´ Eτ „P̂t rµpτ qs ď D logpDqbtP pP̂t , π, δq ` 2 ď 2D logpDqbtP pP̂t , π, δq
                                                                   t
The only subtlety is that more data than that from tτi uti“1 could have been used to compute P̂t . The
proof still follows since cP pP̂t , π, Dq is decreasing in the counts Nt ps, aq.
Finally, if we switch P and P̂t on both sides, we can follow the proof of Lemma B.2 verbatim with P
and P̂t switched everywhere, except for the martingale argument. There, instead of switching the two
transition kernels, we negate the martingale to get our desired result. This exception is because we
still need the expectation to be over the true transition kernel P‹ for the stochastic process defined to
be a martingale.

Lemma 16 (Bounding P̂t Value Error). Consider any sequence of functions f t that induce value
functions V pP, f t , πq. For any sequence of policies πt , if the estimates P̂t , bonuses bP and costs cP
are generated using data including that of τi „ Pπ‹ i , i “ 1 Ñ t, then the following holds uniformly
over t and over all policies with probability 1 ´ δ{16.
                                                               a
                      V pP̂t , f t , πq ´ V pP‹ , f t , πq “ Bp logpBpqpbtP pP‹ , π, δqq
The statement also holds if we switch P̂t and P‹ .


                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Note the following two inequalities that immediately follow from Lemma 15
                                                            a
                   V pP‹ , f t , πq ´ V pP̂t , f t , πq ď Bp logpBpqpbtP pP̂t , π, δqq
                                                            a
                   V pP̂t , f t , πq ´ V pP‹ , f t , πq ď Bp logpBpqpbtP pP‹ , π, δqq
Our result follows immediately.

Lemma 17 (Bounding Sum of P Bonuses). The following holds with probability 1 ´ δ{16 whenever
the data used to compute btP pP, π, δq includes the data of trajectories τi , t “ 1 Ñ t.
                           ÿT                        ´          ?          ¯
                               btP pP‹ , πt , δq “ O
                                                   r SAc̄δ ` c̄δ HSAT
                              t“1
where                     c
                           H logp6HSAq ` S logp8t2 H 2 q ` logp32t2 NT ps, aq{δq
                c̄δ :“ 4
                                                           2
This means that for any s, a, ξ t ps, a, δq “ 2 until Nt ps, aq ě c̄2δ

Proof. First note that by the definition of the bonus and the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, we have
the following.
                  T
                  ÿ                           T
                                              ÿ
                        btP pP‹ , πt , δq ď         Eτ „Pπ btP pτ, δq
                  t“1                         t“1
                                              T
                                              ÿ                       a
                                         ď          btP pτt , δq ` Op4 T logpT {δqq
                                              t“1
                                              T H´1
                                              ÿ ÿ                                 a
                                         “               ξ t psth , ath , δq ` Op4 T logpT {δqq
                                              t“1 h“1

Now note that the first inequality holds even if more data beyond that of tτi uti“1 is used to compute
ξ t ps, a, δq, since ξ t ps, a, δq is decreasing in Nt ps, aq.
                   T H´1                                        T H´1
                   ÿ ÿ                                          ÿ ÿ          c̄δ
                               ξ t psth , ath , δq ď SAc̄δ `            b
                                                                              ptq ptq
                   t“1 h“1                                      t“1 h“1  Nt psh , ah q
                                                                              NTÿ
                                                                                ps,aq
                                                                        ÿ               1
                                               ď SAc̄δ ` c̄δ                            ?
                                                                  ps,aqPSˆA    l“1     l
                                                                        ÿ      a
                                               ď SAc̄δ ` 2c̄δ                    NT ps, aq
                                                                   ps,aqPSˆA
                                                             d                 ÿ
                                               ď SAc̄δ ` 2c̄δ SA                        NT ps, aq
                                                                            ps,aqPSˆA
                                          ´           ?      ¯
                                       “ O SAc̄δ ` c̄δ SAT H
                                      ?
This concludes our proof, since 1 “ Op
                                    r HSAq

E.1.3   P UTTING EVERYTHING TOGETHER
Theorem 8 (POR-UCBVI Regret). Under Assumption 1, POR-UCBVI satisfies Assumption 4 and its
regret RegretpT q is bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ, ignoring polynomial
terms independent of T .
                         ¨¨                                          ˛     ˛
                                             ÿ b                        ?
                      Or ˝˝pCpH, S, Aq `            dE,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                                       hPHp
                           ?            ?
where CpH, S, Aq :“ H SA ` S HA


                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Note that by Lemmas 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, Assumption 4 is satisfied by POR-UCBVI. Using
Theorem 5 and Lemmas 14 and 17, we have the following.

                            ´ ÿ                                        ÿ             b
          RegretpT q “ O             Bκ2,h dE,h ` BpHSAc̄δ `                  κ2,h    dE,h βh,T pδ̄qT
                             hPHp                                      hPHp
                                a                     ?    ¯
                            ` Bp T logpT {δq ` c̄δ BpH SAT

We further     ? it grouping terms and ignoring terms independent of T , and also noting that
        ? refine
c̄δ “ Op H ` Sq as well as βh,T pδ̄q “ OpdC,h ` Hq
      r
                       ¨¨                                                    ˛     ˛
                            ÿ     b                          ?        ?         ?
        RegretpT q “ O
                     r ˝˝       κ2 dE,h pdC,h ` Hq ` BppH SA ` S HAq‚ T ‚
                              hPHp
                         ¨¨                                  ˛   ˛
                                    ?      ÿ b ?               ?
                    “ O ˝˝ppH SA ` S HAq `    dE,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                                             hPHp


From the latter we derive a sample complexity result as follows.

Corollary 4 (POR-UCBVI Sample complexity). Let ε ą 0, δ P r0, 1s. Ignoring polynomial terms
independent of ε, we can bound the sample complexity N pε, δq of POR-UCBVI as follows
                      ˆ 2                      2
                                                                        ˙
                    r p HSA maxpH, Sq ` p dE maxpdC , Hq logp1{δq
                    O
                                 ε2                         ε2
where dE :“ maxhPHp dE,h , and dC :“ maxhPHp dC,h .

Proof. We invoke the regret-to-PAC conversion in Lemma 5 with confidence δ 1 “ δ{2 and we plug
the regret bound in Theorem 8 to write
             ¨                                                                          ˛
               ˆ                                                              ˙ˆ      ˙
                       ?         ?        ÿ b                       a              1
      ε“O  r ˝ BppH SA ` S HAq `                 dE,h βh,T pδ̄q ` Bp logp1{δq     ?     ‚
                                         hPHp
                                                                                    T

from which we get the result by noting N “ pT and the definition of dE , dC .

We also have the following theorem and corollary, in the same vein as Theorem 7.

Theorem 9 (Regret for POR-UCBVI if P‹ is Known). When P‹ is known, POR-UCBVI that sets
P̂t :“ P‹ and btP pP, πδq :“ 0 for all t ě 1 still satisfies Assumption 4 and its regret RegretpT q is
bounded by the following with probability at least 1 ´ δ, ignoring terms independent of T .
                                 ¨¨                              ˛    ˛
                                       ÿ b                         ?
                              Or ˝˝           dE,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                        hPHp

                 `       ˘
where dE,h “ dimE Fh , B
                       T .

Proof. Note that by Lemmas 13 and 14, Assumption 4 is satisfied by POR-UCBVI. Using Lemma 14,
we have the following.

                        ¨                                                                       ˛
                             ÿ                   ÿ           b                      a
       RegretpT q “ O ˝             Bκ2 dE,h `          κ2       dE,h βh,T pδqT ` Bp T logpT {δq‚
                            hPcHp                hPHp



                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We further    ? it grouping terms and ignoring terms independent of T , and also noting that
        ? refine
c̄δ “ Op H ` Sq
      r
                                  ¨¨                            ˛      ˛
                                       ÿ     b                    ?
                  RegretpT q “ Or ˝˝      κ2 dE,h βh,T pδq ` Bp‚ T ‚
                                       hPHp
                                   ¨¨                           ˛      ˛
                                               ÿ b                  ?
                              “ O ˝˝Bp `              dE,h βh,T pδq‚ T ‚
                                               hPHp
                                   ¨¨                 ˛   ˛
                                    ÿ b                 ?
                              “O
                               r ˝˝    dE,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                       hPHp


Corollary 5 (POR-UCBVI Sample complexity if P‹ is Known). Let ε ą 0, δ P r0, 1s. Ignoring
polynomial terms independent of ε, we can bound the sample complexity N pε, δq of POR-UCBVI
when P‹ is known as follows         ˆ 2                  ˙
                                      p HdE maxpdC , Hq
                                  O
                                  r
                                              ε2
where dE :“ maxhPHp dE,h , β :“ maxhPHp βT,h pδq, and dC :“ maxhPHp dC,h .

Proof. The proof proceeds as in Corollary 4 by plugging Theorem 9 in Lemma 5.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F   E XTENSION TO G ENERAL F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION FOR P ROBABILITY
    T RANSITIONS
Note that for simplicity of exposition and proofs, the confidence sets for P in POR-UCRL and the
bonuses for P in POR-UCBVI are given for tabular observed states and actions s, a. The function
approximation using G and F is relegated to the effect of latent states u. Using the work of Liu
et al. (2022b), it is quite straightforward to extend and modify the proofs here to general function
approximation for P.
Let us assume that we have a set of parameters Θ and a mapping from θ P Θ to probability transition
functions Pθ P P so that the image of Θ under this mapping is all of P. These functions Pθ mapping
from s, a to distributions over s1 act on a featurization ϕps, aq of s, a. This is the most general
function approximation setting for probability transition functions. Linear MDPs, tabular MDPs,
factored MDPs, kernel linear MDPs, and many other function approximation settings are special
cases of this.
For convenience of notation, we will occasionally drop the subscript θ. It is beneficial to remember
that throughout this section, we are working under general function approximation nevertheless.
F.1 POR-UCRL
For POR-UCRL, we redefine the confidence sets to be the ones in Algorithm 2 (reward-free OMLE)
in Liu et al. (2022b). That is, we first recursively define Dt`1 :“ Dt Y tpπt , τt qu instead of just
appending τt . We also recursively define CP pDt`1 , δq below. Note that we merely rephrased the
definition in Liu et al. (2022b) to use the negative log-likelihood instead of the log-likelihood.
    CP pDt`1 , δq :“
                       $     ˇ                                                                  ,
                       &     ˇ                                                                  .
                             ˇ ÿ                                     ÿ
         CP pDt , δq X θ P Θˇˇ            ´ logpPπθ pτ qq ď min             ´ logpPπθ pτ qq ` β
                      %      ˇpπ,τ qPDt`1                    θ                                  -
                                                                pπ,τ qPDt`1


We now simply need to replace Lemma 9 with a version involving function approximation. Recall
the following.
                                                      «              ff
                                                        H
                                                        ÿ
                                 t                          t
                          V pP, f , πt q :“ Eτ 1 „Pπt     fr pτ rhsq
                                                                 h
                                                          h“1
                                                      »                     fi
                                                          ÿ
                                          “ Eτ 1 „Pπt –          frht pτ rhsqfl
                                                          hPHp



So, by a simple change of measure inequality and the fact that |fht | ď B for all h, we have the
following.
                     ˇ                                     ˇ
                     ˇ r t                                             r πt t , Pπt q
                     ˇV pPt , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt qˇ ď BpdT V pP
                                                           ˇ
                                                                                              (5)
                                                                                 ‹

Where dT V represents the T V distance taken over all trajectories of length H. This implies the
following.
                 ˇ                                         ˇ
                 ˇÿT                                       ˇ      ÿT
                 ˇ V pP
                 ˇ              t                  t
                         r t , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f , πt qˇˇ ď Bp           r πt t , Pπt q
                                                                      dT V pP         ‹
                 ˇt“1                                      ˇ      t“1


Now, we have two options. We can either use the distributional eluder dimension directly, or we can
use the strong SAIL condition of Liu et al. (2022b). The former is more flexible and allows us to
address all function approximation scenarios. The latter approach has very crisp guarantees and is
still satisfied by most function approximation models.
F.1.1 U SE THE DISTRIBUTIONAL E LUDER DIMENSION
Note that by proposition B.2 and step 2 of the proof of Theorem 3.2 in Liu et al. (2022b), we have
the following upon setting Πexp pπq :“ π in their proofs. This way, we are not running any extra


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


“exploratory” policies at every step.
                                        t´1
                                        ÿ
                                                     r πt k , Pπk q ď Opβq
                                              d2T V pP                                              (6)
                                                               ‹
                                      k“1

Here, β “ c logpNbr,P p1{T qq ` c logpT {δq, where Nbr,P pεq is the ε-bracketing number of P “
tPθ uθPΘ as in definition 2.2 of Liu et al. (2022b), and c is a universal constant.
                                                                                   r π , Pπ q. Define
Now, consider the functions ϕt defined on the space of policies by ϕt pπq :“ dT V pP t    ‹
µt to be the Dirac-delta measures on πt . Let the class of Dirac-delta measures over policies be
DΠ , and let the class of possible ϕa
                                    t functions be Φ. Let dE,P be the corresponding distributional
Eluder dimension dimDE pΦ, DΠ , 1{T q, as defined in Jin et al. (2021). Then by equation 6 and
the properties of the distributional Eluder dimension (Lemma 41 of Jin et al. 2021), we have the
following.
                                T
                                ÿ                              a
                                            r πt t , Pπt q “ Op
                                      dT V pP                r  dE,P βT q
                                                      ‹
                                t“1

We can further define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P. By equation 5,
we have the following.
                         ˇ                                     ˇ
                         ˇ r t                                 ˇ r a
                         ˇV pPt , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f t , πt qˇ ď Op dE,P βT q

We can now follow the rest of the proof for the guarantee for POR-UCRL verbatim and establish the
following bound on POR-UCRL regret.

Theorem 10. Consider the functions ϕt defined on the space of policies by ϕt pπq :“ dT V pP r π , Pπ q.
                                                                                              t    ‹
Define µt to be the Dirac-delta measures on πt . Let the class of Dirac-delta measures over policies
be DΠ , and let the class of possiblea
                                     ϕt functions be Φ. Let dE,P be the corresponding distributional
Eluder dimension dimDE pΦ, DΠ , 1{T q. Define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing
dimension of P. Then, Then, we have the following bound for the regret of our modified POR-UCRL
algorithm, with probability 1 ´ δ.
                                     ¨¨                                     ˛   ˛
                                          a               ÿ a                 ?
                   RegretpT q “ O  r ˝˝p dE,P dC,P `              dE,h dC,h ‚ T ‚
                                                                 hPHp


Future work can investigate the choice of the distribution class DΠ and make other technical tweaks
to obtain crisper versions of the dE,P defined here.
F.1.2 U SE THE STRONG SAIL CONDITION
We make a minor modification to the POR-UCRL algorithm in the spirit of Algorithm 2 (reward-free
OMLE) in Liu et al. (2022b) to use this condition. Instead of merely running πt , we run all policies
in an exploratory set Πexp pπt q of size Πexp every time we collect trajectories. Recall that the strong
SAIL condition of Liu et al. (2022b) is satisfied by well conditioned PSRs, factored MDPs, kernel
linear MDPs, sparse linear bandits, etc. These automatically subsume tabular MDPs and linear MDPs.
                                                a
Assume that our model class P satisfies the p dS,P , κ, Cq strong SAIL condition. That is, we define
dS,P :“ d2 for the d in the original strong SAIL condition. Now by theorem 7.2 of Liu et al. (2022b),
we can conclude that since P r t P CP pDt , δq, we have that
                                                 ˜             c                             ¸
                                                   C|Π     |     β|Π      | 2
                  π    π
                                        a              exp            exp        2
          dT V pP
                r t , P t q ď polypHq dS,P
                    t
                       ‹                                     `κ               log pt{|Πexp |
                                                      t               t

Here, β “ c logpNbr,P p1{T qq ` c logpT {δq, where Nbr,P pεq is the ε-bracketing number of P “
tPθ uθPΘ and c is a universal constant. Adding these up across t and discarding logarithmic terms, we
get the following.
                       T
                       ÿ                           ˆ           b                  ˙
                   Bp           r πt t , Pπt q “ O
                          dT V pP                r polypHqBpκ dS,P β|Πexp |2 T
                                          ‹
                      t“1


                                                        38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This means that by equation 5, we have the following.
          ˇ                                    ˇ
          ˇÿT                                  ˇ    ˆ          b                ˙
                       t                t                                    2
          ˇ V pPt , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f , πt qˇ “ O polypHqBpκ dS,P β|Πexp | T
          ˇ       r                            ˇ r
          ˇt“1                                 ˇ

Let us also define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P. We can now
follow the rest of the proof for the guarantee for POR-UCRL verbatim and get the following bound
on POR-UCRL regret, with the caveat that we are ignoring the contribution of the non-optimal
exploratory policies. We have thus established the following theorem.
                                                              a
Theorem 11. Assume that our model class P satisfies the p dS,P , κ, Cq strong SAIL condition.
Define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P. Then, we have the following
bound for the regret of our modified POR-UCRL algorithm, with probability 1 ´ δ.
                           ¨¨                                                    ˛    ˛
                                            b                     ÿ a              ?
         RegretpT q “ O  r ˝˝polypHqpκ dS,P dC,P |Πexp |2 `            dE,h dC,h ‚ T ‚
                                                                    hPHp


F.2 POR-UCBVI
Again, we start with confidence sets that we will use to define the bonuses. That is, we define the
confidence sets to be the ones in Algorithm 2 (reward-free OMLE) in Liu et al. (2022b). That is, we
first recursively define Dt`1 :“ Dt Y tpπt , τt qu instead of just appending τt . We also recursively
define CP pDt`1 , δq below. Note that we merely rephrased the definition in Liu et al. (2022b) to use
the negative log-likelihood instead of the log-likelihood.
    CP pDt`1 , δq :“
                       $      ˇ                                                                  ,
                       &      ˇ ÿ                                     ÿ                          .
                              ˇ
          CP pDt , δq X θ P Θˇˇ            ´ logpPπθ pτ qq ď min             ´ logpPπθ pτ qq ` β
                       %      ˇpπ,τ qPDt`1                    θ                                  -
                                                                 pπ,τ qPDt`1


Defining bonuses is trickier than defining confidence sets. Like the case of POR-UCRL above, we
have two options again – we can use the distributional Eluder dimension or the strong SAIL condition.
While it is possible to work out the details for the former, they are much more involved and do
not cover significantly more useful examples than those covered by the strong SAIL condition.
So, we will focus on the latter. This is especially true when considering sample complexity, since
the use of exploratory policies under the strong SAIL condition creates no complications in giving
sample complexity guarantees, unlike it does for regret guarantees.
F.2.1 U SING THE STRONG SAIL CONDITION
Again, we make a minor modification to the POR-UCBVI algorithm in the spirit of Algorithm 2
(reward-free OMLE) in Liu et al. (2022b) to use this condition. Instead of merely running πt , we
run all policies in an exploratory set Πexp pπt q of size Πexp every time we collect trajectories. Again,
recall that the strong SAIL condition of Liu et al. (2022b) is satisfied by well conditioned PSRs,
factored MDPs, kernel linear MDPs, sparse linear bandits, etc. These automatically subsume tabular
MDPs and linear MDPs.
                                                                                          a
Let P̂t be the MLE model at time t. Assume that our model class P satisfies the p dS,P , κ, Cq
strong SAIL condition. That is, we define dS,P :“ d2 for the d in the original strong SAIL condition.
Now by theorem 7.2 of Liu et al. (2022b), we can conclude that since Pt P CP pDt , δq, we have that
the following holds with probability 1 ´ δ.
                                                   ˜              c                           ¸
                       π   π
                                         a           C|Πexp |        β|Πexp |2    2
         max dT V pP̂t , P‹ q ď polypHq dS,P                  `κ               log pt{|Πexp |
           π                                              t              t

Here, β “ c logpNbr,P p1{T qq ` c logpT {δq, where Nbr,P pεq is the ε-bracketing number of P “
tPθ uθPΘ and c is a universal constant. By a simple change of measure, for any policy π, we have the
following.
                         ˇ                                    ˇ
                         ˇV pP̂t , f t , πq ´ V pP‹ , f t , πqˇ ď BpdT V pP̂πt , Pπ‹ q
                         ˇ                                    ˇ


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


holds for any policy π with probability 1, the following holds simultaneously for all policies with
probability 1 ´ δ.
                                                      ˜              c                          ¸
 ˇ
            t                t
                                  ˇ            a        C|Πexp |       β|Πexp |2     2
 ˇV pP̂t , f , πq ´ V pP‹ , f , πqˇ ď polypHqBp dS,P             `κ              log pt{|Πexp |
 ˇ                                ˇ
                                                            t              t

Define the right hand side as the bonus btP pP, π, δq. Adding these up across t and discarding
logarithmic terms, we get the following.
                     ÿT                    ˆ            b               ˙
                         btP pP, π, δq “ O
                                         r polypHqBpκ dS,P β|Πexp |2 T
                      t“1

This means that by equation 5, we have the following.
          ˇ                                    ˇ
          ˇÿT                                  ˇ     ˆ           b                 ˙
                       t                t
          ˇ V pPt , f , πt q ´ V pP‹ , f , πt qˇ “ O   polypHqBpκ dS,P β|Πexp |2 T
          ˇ       r                            ˇ r
          ˇt“1                                 ˇ

Let us also define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P. We can now follow
the rest of the proof for the guarantee for POR-UCBVI verbatim and get a bound on POR-UCBVI
regret, with the caveat that we are ignoring the contribution of the non-optimal exploratory policies.
We have thus established the following theorem.
                                                                a
Theorem 12. Assume that our model class P satisfies the p dS,P , κ, Cq strong SAIL condition.
Define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P. Then, we have the following
bound for the regret of our modified POR-UCBVI algorithm, with probability 1 ´ δ.
                            ¨¨                                                       ˛    ˛
                                            b                        ÿ a               ?
          RegretpT q “ O  r ˝˝polypHqpκ dS,P dC,P |Πexp |2 `               dE,h dC,h ‚ T ‚
                                                                  hPHp


F.3 D UELING PORRL
We have the following immediate corollary of Theorem 3, Theorem 10 and Lemma 2.

Corollary 6 (Dueling Regret using modified POR-UCRL Confidence Sets). Consider the functions
ϕt defined on the space of policies by ϕt pπq :“ dT V pPr π , Pπ q. Define µt to be the Dirac-delta
                                                          t    ‹
measures on πt . Let the class of Dirac-delta measures over policies be DΠ , and let the class
of possible ϕt functions
                a        be Φ. Let dE,P be the corresponding distributional Eluder dimension
dimDE pΦ, DΠ , 1{T q. Define dC,P “ logpNbr,P p1{T qq to be the bracketing dimension of P.
Then, the modified confidence sets for POR-UCRL described in section F.1.1 satisfy Assumption 2
and using them in Algorithm 1 leads to the following dueling regret bound with probability 1 ´ δ.
                                    ¨¨                                       ˛   ˛
                                         a                ÿ a                  ?
                 RegretD pT q “ Or ˝˝p dE,P dC,P `                 dE,h dC,h ‚ T ‚
                                                          hPHp


Similar corollaries can be immediately produced for the strong SAIL method, whenever |Πexp | “ 1.
The strong SAIL method doesn’t quite work for dueling regret guarantees when |Πexp | ą 1, so we
must stick to the distributional eluder dimension in that case.


                                                 40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    D ETAILS AND P ROOFS FOR PORRL WITH GOLF
For completeness and establishing notation, we recall GOLF here.

Algorithm 7 GOLF
 1: Input Known class of Bellman consistent Q-functions Q, confidence level δ.
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu and CQ pD1 , δq Ð Q.
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:   τ r0s Ð pq
 5:   for h “ 1, . . . H do
 6:      Compute ath , Qth Ð arg maxa,QPCQ pDt ,δq Qpτ rhs, aq
 7:      Play ath and observe feedback oth
 8:   end for
 9:   Update Dt`1 Ð Dt Y tτ, pot1 , . . . otH u
10:   Compute
                                    "                                          *
                     CQ pDt`1 , δq Ð LDt pQh , Qh`1 q ď inf LDt pg, Qh`1 q ` β
                                                           gPGh

11: end for


Theorem 2 (Modified GOLF Regret).  a Let Assumption 1 hold, let Q be Bellman complete, let
dHABE “ dimHABE pQ, α, minpα, 1{T qq and let dC,Q :“ logpN pQ Y G, 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq. Choose
hyperparameter β “ cplogpHT q ` dC,Q q for some universal constant c and
                                                                      ` the
                                                                         aauxiliary function
                                                                                        ˘
class G used in GOLF, and define . Then, GOLF satisfies RegretpT q “ O pH dHABE dC,Q T .

Proof. The meat of the theorem is in proving Lemma 18. We β “ c logpHT N pQ Y G, 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq
for some suitably large universal constant c, and use Theorem 6 and Lemma 18 to get that
                   ˜                          ˙ ˜h´1        ¸                                   ¸
               H               ˆ 2 2
               ÿ                 B p β            ÿ                                     a
RegretpT q “         T ω ` Bp            `1           dl pαq ` minpdh pωq, T qBp ` 2Bp βdh pωqT
              h“1
                                   α2             l“1

where dh pεq :“ dimDE pΦh , Dh , εq. Now set ω “ Bp
                                                 T and use the fact that dh pεq increases with
decreasing ε to get that
                                            ´ a           ¯
                            RegretpT q “ Or pH dHABE βT
                                            ´ a               ¯
                                       “O r pH dHABE dC,Q T


since dHABE :“ dimHABE pQ, minpα, Bp{T qq :“ maxh dh pminpα, Bp{T qq.

Corollary 7 (GOLF Sample complexity). Let ε ą 0, δ P r0, 1s. Ignoring polynomial terms indepen-
dent of ε, we can bound the sample complexity N pε, δq of GOLF as follows
                                      ˆ 2 2                ˙
                                    r p H dHABE dc,Q .
                                    O
                                               ε2

Proof. Again, we use Lemma 5 and a quick computation shows our result.

G.1 C OMPARING dimHABE AND dimBE
It is easy to see that since the function class Φh is a subset of the class Ψh of all Bellman errors,
dimHABE ď maxh dimDE pΨh , Dh,Q , εq. Recall that the Bellman eluder dimension is a minimum
over the RHS and another term that uses Dirac-δ distributions, but typically, the RHS is smaller.
So, in many cases, dimHABE ď dimBE . However, we don’t have a universal inequality in either
direction.


                                                41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2    C OMPUTING DIMENSIONS FOR THE COMBINATION LOCK
Proposition 1 (Dimensions for the Combination Lock). Consider the combination lock problem with
model class M “ P ˆ F and induced Q-function class Q.
• Under dense intermediate feedback with Hp “ rHs, dimHABE pQ, αq “ A for all α ă q, while its
  BE dimension is at least AH ´ 2. The eluder dimension for reward functions dimE pFh , B
                                                                                        T q is at
  least Ah for any h ď H.
• For sparse intermediate feedback with Hp “ tHu and any α ą 0, the α-HABE dimension, the BE
  dimension and the eluder dimension
                                  ?    of FH are all at least AH ´ 2. Moreover, any algorithm in
                                    H
  this setting will have regret Ωp A T q.

Proof. We separately resolve the cases of sparse and dense intermediate feedback.
G.2.1 D ENSE INTERMEDIATE FEEDBACK , Hp “ rHs
Notice that we get a reward Berpqq at every step as long as we are on the correct sequence of actions
a‹1 , . . . a‹H , and as soon as we take a wrong action, we always get a reward of 0 subsequently. It is then
easy to see that the induced function classes Q then are given by Q “ tpQ1 , . . . QH q | Da1 , . . . aH P
A s.t. Qh “ pH ´ h ` 1qq1a1 ,...ah u.
α-HABE dimension: It suffices to show the upper bound using Dh,Qpα,h´1q , since the α-HABE
dimension takes the minimum of distirbutional eluder dimensions over two distributions. For any
α ă q, consider the function class
                             !      ˇ                                            )
            Qpα, h ´ 1q “ Q P Q, ˇ|Eµl pQq rQl ´ Tl Ql`1 s| ď α, @1 ď l ď h ´ 1
                                    ˇ

Now note that Eµl pQq rQl ´ Tl Ql`1 s “ q1a1 ,...al ´ q1a‹1 ,...a‹l . If this is smaller than α, then this is
smaller than q and thus must be 0. So, pa1 , . . . ah´1 q “ pa‹1 , . . . a‹h´1 q for any Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q.
This also means that any ϕh P Φh , there is a Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q so that
                        ϕh “ Qh ´ Th Qh`1 “ q1a‹1 ,...a‹h´1 ,ah ´ q1a‹1 ,...a‹h´1 ,a‹h

Thus, the size of Φh is just A. More importantly, the set Dh,Qpα,h´1q of distributions µh pQq
induced by Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q only include indicators of the form 1a‹1 ,...a‹h´1 ,a for actions a. Thus,
the set of distributions DQpα,h´1q has size A. We know that the distributional eluder dimension
ˇ “ dimDEˇ pΦh , DDpα,h´1q , minpα, Bp{T qq is bounded by the number of possible distributions
d
ˇDQpα,h´1q ˇ. So, d ď A.
BE dimension: The Bellman differences, from above, are q1a1 ,...ah ´ q1a‹1 ,...a‹h . This is an affine
transformation of a family of AH indicator functions. The distributions µl pQq over trajectories
induced by Q include indicators 1a11 ,...a1l of all trajectories of length l. Now for any sequence
µ1 , . . . µn , µn`1 of different indicator distributions not including a‹1 , . . . a‹l , we consider the Bellman
difference gn`1 “ q1a1 ,...ah ´q1a‹1 ,...a‹h with action sequence given by µn`1 . Note that Eµi gn`1 “ 0
for all i ď n but Eµn`1 gn`1 “ q. This means that the longest possible sequence in the definition of
the distributional eluder dimension has length AH ´ 2. So, the BE dimension is at least AH ´ 2.
Eluder dimension: The reward function class Fh is given by all functions of the form q1a1 ,...ah .
This is a scaled version of a class of Ah indicator functions. Since it contains Ah indicator functions,
its eluder dimension is at least Ah .
G.2.2 S PARSE INTERMEDIATE FEEDBACK , Hp “ rHs
Notice that we get a reward Berpqq at the last step if we took correct sequence of actions a‹1 , . . . a‹H ,
and reward 0 otherwise. It is then easy to see that now, the induced function classes Q then are given
by Q “ tpQ1 , . . . QH q | Da1 , . . . aH P A s.t. Qh “ q1a1 ,...ah u.
α-HABE dimension: This time, note that Eµh pQq rQl ´ Th Qh`1 s “ 0 for all h ď H ´ 1. So,
the function class Φh “ t0u for all h ď H ´ 1. Only for h “ H do we have that EµH pQq rQH ´
TH QH`1 s “ q1a1 ,...aH ´ q1a‹1 ,...a‹H . Also note that Qpα, H ´ 1q “ Q for all α since Eµh pQq rQl ´
Th Qh`1 s “ 0 for all h ď H ´ 1. So, this is merely the BE dimension of the problem. Now, the
Bellman differences at timestep H are identical to those for the sparse feedback problem, and the


                                                      42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distributions DQpα,H´1q “ DQ since we have established that Qpα, H ´ 1q “ Q. This means that
by the argument for BE dimension in the dense feedback case, we have that the distributional eluder
dimension of ΦH is at least AH ´ 2, which is then also the α-HABE dimension of this problem.
BE dimension: From the argument for the α-HABE dimension in the sparse case, the BE dimension
and the α-HABE dimension match in this case, and are both at least AH ´ 2.
Eluder dimension: Again, the reward function class FH is given by all functions of the form
q1a1 ,...aH . This is a scaled version of a class of AH indicator functions. Since it contains AH
indicator functions, its eluder dimension is at least AH .
                                                                    a
Also note that this example also produces a universal lower bound of pAH T q under any algorithm.
That is, no algorithm can improve over our bounds under sparse feedback. This lower bound is an
immediate consequence of regret lower bounds for bandit algorithms by treating each sequence of
actions taken as a different arm.



G.3 P ROOFS OF L EMMAS
Recall that Qpα, hq “ tQ P Q | |Eµl pQq rQl ´ Tl Ql`1 s| ď α, @1 ď l ď hu, that µh pQq is the
distribution induced on τ rh ´ 1s, ah by πQ and Dh,Q :“ tµh pQq | Q P Qu.

Lemma 18. Let dh pεq :“ dimDE pΦh , Dh,Qpα,h´1q , εq with
                               !               ˇ            )
                         Φh :“ Qh ´ Th Qh`1 ˇQ P Qpα, h ´ 1q
                                               ˇ

                                                             řt
Then, we have that for β “ c logpHT N pQ Y G, 1{T, } ¨ }8 qq, j“1 |Eµh pQj q rQjh ´ Th Qjh`1 s| is
bounded by
                  ˆ 2 2         ˙ ˜h´1       ¸
                     B p β         ÿ                                     a
         tω ` Bp            `1         dl pαq ` minpdh pωq, tqBp ` 2Bp βdh pωqt
                       α2          l“1


Proof. We modify the proof of Lemma 41 in Jin et al. (2021). Pick arbitrary h and t and let Ψh be
the function class given by
            !                 ˇ          )
     Φh :“ Qh ´ Th Qh`1 ˇQ P Qpα, hq
                              ˇ
           !                ˇ                                                               )
         “ Qh ´ Th Qh`1 ˇpQ1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ QH q P Q, |Eµl pQq rQl ´ Tl Ql`1 s| ď α, @1 ď l ď h ´ 1
                            ˇ

Also note that we have the function class Φh of timestep h Bellman errors induced by "historically
α-accurate" functions - functions whose expected Bellman errors in previous timesteps are smaller
than α. The distribution used for computing the expected Bellman errors for previous timesteps is
µl pQq.
Now abbreviating ψlj :“ Qjl ´ Tl Qjl`1 gives a sequence ψl1 , . . . ψlt of functions in Ψl for every
1 ď l ď h. This must have a subsequence ϕ1l , . . . ϕrl l consisting of all the functions in the sequence
that lie in Φl , for every 1 ď l ď h. Also let dh pεq “ dimDE pΦh , Dh , εq for any ε. Now note that
 t
 ÿ
       |Eµh pQj q rQjh ´ Th Qjh`1 s|
 j“1
     t
     ÿ
 “         |Eµh pQj q rψhj s|
     j“1
     t ˇ                    ˇ ´                       ¯
 piq ÿ ˇ                 j ˇ                 j
 “          ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ď ω
     j“1
            h´1
            ÿ ÿ t ˇ                   ˇ ´                                                ¯
                                   j ˇ                 j
                      ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ą ω, Q P Qpα, l ´ 1qzQpα, lq
                      ˇ
        `
            l“1 j“1


                                                          43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              t ˇ
              ÿ                 ˇ ´                                        ¯
                             j ˇ                 j
                ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ą ω, Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q
                ˇ
         `
              j“1
        t ˇ
        ÿ                  ˇ ´                       ¯
                        j ˇ                 j
           ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ď ω
           ˇ
 ď
     j“1
              h´1
              ÿ ÿ t ˇ                   ˇ
                                     j ˇ
                        ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 pQ P Qpα, l ´ 1qzQpα, lqq
                        ˇ
         `
              l“1 j“1
              t ˇ
              ÿ                 ˇ ´                                        ¯
                             j ˇ                 j
                ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ą ω, Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q
                ˇ
         `
              j“1
               h´1
               ÿ ÿ t ˇ                   ˇ ´                                     ¯
                                      j ˇ                j
 ď tω `                  ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµl pQj q ψl | ą α, Q P Qpα, l ´ 1q
                         ˇ
               l“1 j“1
         t ˇ
         ÿ                     ˇ ´                                        ¯
                            j ˇ                 j
               ˇEµh pQj q rψh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rψh s| ą ω, Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q
               ˇ
         j“1

 piiq          h´1
               ÿ ÿ rl ˇ                   ˇ ´                      ¯ ÿrh ˇ               ˇ ´                       ¯
                                       j ˇ                 j                          j ˇ                 j
  ď tω `                  ˇEµh pQj q rϕh sˇ 1 |Eµl pQj q rϕl s| ą α `    ˇEµh pQj q rϕh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rϕh s| ą ω
                          ˇ                                              ˇ
                l“1 j“1                                                    j“1
                    ˆ     2 2
                                    ˙ ˜h´1              ¸
                                                              rh ˇ
 piiq                   B p β          ÿ                      ÿ               j ˇ
                                                                                 ˇ ´
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                           ¯
  ď tω ` Bp                   `1               dl pαq            ˇEµh pQj q rϕh sˇ 1 |Eµh pQj q rϕh s| ą ω
                                                                 ˇ
                                                            `
                         α2              l“1                  j“1


                                                                 ˇ               ˇ
Here, piq holds since one of three possibilities holds – either ˇEµh pQj q rψhj sˇ ď ω, or |Eµh pQj q ψlj | ą ω
                                                                 ˇ               ˇ

and there is a least l ď h ´ 1 so that Q P Qpα, l ´ 1q but Q R Qpα, h ´ 1q, or Q P Qpα, h ´ 1q.
piiq holds since if |Eµk pQj q ψkj | ď α for all k ď l ´ 1, then ψlj “ ϕil for some i. Finally, piiiq holds
                                                  řs´1
by Proposition 43 of Jin et al. (2021) since j“1 Eµl pQj q rpϕjl q2 s ď β by Lemma 39(a) of Jin et al.
(2021). While our rewards are stochastic and theirs are not, we can repeat their arguments verbatim
after noting that the martingale defined in the beginning of their proof continues to be a martingale
even for stochastic rewards that have second moments.
                              ˇ            ˇ
Now arrange the sequence ˇEµh pQj q ϕs ˇ in order to get e1 , . . . erh . We can then write
      t ˇ                                          ˆ 2 2           ˙ ˜h´1          ¸
                                                                                        rh
     ÿ               j          j
                                      ˇ              B p β              ÿ               ÿ
        ˇEµh pQj q rQh ´ Th Qh`1 sˇ ď tω ` Bp                   1           d               ej 1pej ą ωq
        ˇ                             ˇ
                                                              `              l pαq   `
    j“1
                                                        α2              l“1            j“1

For any ej ą ω, consider arbitrary γ such that ej ą γ ą ω. This means that by Proposition 43 of Jin
et al. (2021) again,
                                 rh               ˆ 2 2       ˙
                                 ÿ                  B p β
                            jď       1pei ą γq ď           ` 1   dh pωq
                                i“1
                                                      γ2
                             b
                                βdh pωq
This means that γ ď Bp j´d          h pωq
                                          for any such γ. Since ej ď Bp, we get that ej ď
      ´        b          ¯
                  βdh pωq
min Bp, Bp j´dh pωq . Finally, this means that
           t ˇ
           ÿ                           ˇ
                          j       j
             ˇEµh pQj q rQh ´ Th Qh`1 sˇ
             ˇ                         ˇ
           j“1
                                  ˙ ˜h´1       ¸
                                                    rh
                      B 2 p2 β
                           ˆ         ÿ             ÿ
           ď tω ` Bp           ` 1       dl pαq  `     ej 1pej ą ωq
                        α2           l“1           j“1
                                  ˙ ˜h´1       ¸            ˜       d            ¸
                     ˆ 2 2                          rh
                      B p β          ÿ             ÿ                   βdh pωq
           ď tω ` Bp           `1        dl pαq `      min Bp, Bp
                        α2           l“1           j“1
                                                                      j ´ dh pωq


                                                                44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               ˙ ˜h´1        ¸                            d
                                                                    rh
                   B 2 p2 β
                   ˆ               ÿ                               ÿ        βdh pωq
        ď tω ` Bp           `1         dl pαq ` minpdh , rh qBp `      Bp
                     α2            l“1                             j“1
                                                                               j
                  ˆ 2 2          ˜
                               ˙ h´1         ¸
                   B p β           ÿ                                       a
        ď tω ` Bp           ` 1        dl pαq  ` minpdh pωq, rh qBp `  2Bp   βdh pωqrh
                     α2            l“1
                  ˆ 2 2        ˙ ˜h´1        ¸
                   B p β           ÿ                                     a
        ď tω ` Bp       2
                            `1         dl pαq ` minpdh pωq, tqBp ` 2Bp βdh pωqt
                     α             l“1



as desired.


                                               45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    P ROOFS FOR D UELING F EEDBACK
H.1 P ROOF FOR R EDUCTION TO C ONFIDENCE -S ET O PTIMISM
Theorem 3 (Reduction from Dueling to Confidence-Set-Based Optimism). If the confidence sets
CM pDt , δq satisfy Assumption 2, then the dueling regret RegretD pT q of Algorithm 1 is given by

                              RegretD pT q “ OpC
                                             r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq

Remark 6. While the theorem states that we need Assumption 2 from the main paper, we actually
use its slightly more refined version – Assumption 3. The less refined version was added to the main
paper for brevity.

Proof. For ease of notation, let us use the sets CM pDt , δq given by the pre-image of CM pDt , δq under
the map M ÞÑ M from Section 4. We first recall that M‹ P CM pDt , δq and so π‹ P Πt for all t with
probability 1 ´ δ{16. Recall that the value of a duel pπ, π 1 q under model M Ø is denoted by
                  VD pM, π, π 1 q :“ V pM, πq ´ V pM, π 1 q “ V pP, f, πq ´ V pP, g, π 1 q
We overload notation and use the natural maps pP, f q Ø M ÞÑ M to define
                                               VD pM, π, π 1 q :“ VD pM, π, π 1 q

For ease of notation, we will then work with CM pDt , δq in this proof until we can. Since πi,t P Πt for
i “ 1, 2, there exists some Mi,t P CM pDt , δq for i “ 1, 2 so that VD pMi,t , π, π1,t q ď 0 for all π. Note
that dueling regret is given below. Inequality piq is by definition of Mi,t , since VD pMi,t , π‹ , πi,t q ď 0
for i “ 1, 2. Inequality piiq holds by definition of π1,t , π2,t .
                           T ÿ
                           ÿ 2
      RegretD pT q “                   VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q
                           t“1 i“1
                           T ”ÿ
                           ÿ  2                                                                2
                                                                                               ÿ                          ı
                      “                 VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD pMi,t , π‹ , πi,t q `             VD pMi,t , π‹ , πi,t q
                           t“1    i“1                                                         i“1
                          2 ÿ
                      piq ÿ T
                      ď       rVD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD pMi,t , π‹ , πi,t qs
                           i“1 t“1
                           T
                      piiq ÿ                              “                                                   ‰
                       ď          2      1
                                           max                VD pM, π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM1 , π1,t , π2,t q
                                      M,M PCM pDt ,δq
                            t“1


Continuing, we have
                  T
                  ÿ                             “                                                ‰
RegretD pT q ď         2      1
                                max                 VD pM, π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM1 , π1,t , π2,t q
                           M,M PCM pDt ,δq
                 t“1
                    T
                    ÿ                           ”
              “2              1
                                max              VD pM, π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q ` VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
                           M,M PCM pDt ,δq
                   t“1
                                                                                   ı
                                                           ´ VD pM1 , π1,t , π2,t q
                    T
                    ÿ
              ď2                 max            rVD pM, π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t qs `
                           M,M1 PCM pDt ,δq
                   t“1
                                          “                                                  ‰
                            max               VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM1 , π1,t , π2,t q
                    M,M1 PCM pDt ,δq
                    T ”
                    ÿ                                                  ı ”                                                 ı
              “2       VD pM                                                                           r 1 , π1,t , π2,t q
                           r t , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q ` VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM
                                                                                                         t
                   t“1


                                                                   46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where M       r 1 are the respective maximisers. It suffices to analyse only one of the terms, as a
      r t and M
                t
consequence of the symmetry of Assumption 3.
We can now use the fact that M is described by pP, f q to analyse the first term, letting M      r t , frt q.
                                                                                          r t Ø pP
T ”
ÿ                                                  ı
   VD pM
       r t , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pM‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
t“1
       T ”
       ÿ                                                              ı
“2            r t , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , f ‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
          VD pP
       t“1
       T ”
       ÿ                                                              ı ”                                                           ı
ď2            r t , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ` VD pP‹ , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , f ‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
          VD pP
       t“1
       T ”
       ÿ                                                              ı ”                                                           ı
ď2            r t , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ` VD pP‹ , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , f ‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
          VD pP
       t“1
       T ”                                            ı ”                                            ı
piq    ÿ
 “2          r t , frt , π1,t q ´ V pP‹ , frt , π1,t q ´ V pP
          V pP                                              r t , frt , π2,t q ´ V pP‹ , frt , π2,t q
       t“1
        ”                                                           ı
       ` VD pP‹ , frt , π1,t , π2,t q ´ VD pP‹ , f ‹ , π1,t , π2,t q
        T ”                                            ı ”                                            ı
piiq    ÿ
 “ 2          r t , frt , π1,t q ´ V pP‹ , frt , π1,t q ´ V pP
           V pP                                              r t , frt , π2,t q ´ V pP‹ , frt , π2,t q
       t“1
        ”              t                                  ‹
                                                                             ı
       ` V pP‹ b P‹ , f , pπ1,t , π2,t qq ´ V pP‹ b P‹ , f , pπ1,t , π2,t qq

Where piq holds by the definition of VD and V , and piiq holds in the product MDP M‹ once we define
  t
f h ppτ1 , τ2 qrhsq :“ frht pτ1 rhsq ´ frht pτ2 rhsq and recall that P‹ “ P‹ b P‹ . Now, we can immediately
apply Assumption 3 to the last line in two different ways. For the first two terms, we apply the first
point in the assumption to each under cardinal feedback for MDP M‹ , noting that the datasets Dt
contain trajectories from π1,t as well as π2,t . For the last term, we apply the second point in the
                                                                   ‹
assumption under cardinal feedback for the MDP pP‹ , f q.
This gives us that with probability 1 ´ δ,
                                RegretpT q “ OpC
                                             r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq



We have the following lemma, which is an immediate consequence of

Lemma 2 (Relating F and F). For any function class F, dimE pF, εq ď 9 dimE pF, ε{2q.

Proof. Let dh “ dimE pF h , εq. Pick the ε1 so that there is a sequence of dh pairs τ j , j “ 1 Ñ dh of
length h trajectories, where each one is ε1 -independent of its predecessors. Note that τ j “ pτ1,j , τ2,j q.
We now inductively build a sequence ij so that each τij ,j is ε1 {2-independent of its predecessors.
Pick the first i1 arbitrarily. Now assume that we have built thebřsequence until index j “ k. Also,
                                                    1              k                   1            1
by definition of this sequence, there exist f j , f j , we have                                 2
                                                                   j“1 pf j pτ j q ´ f j pτ j qq ď ε but
                  1
|f k`1 pτ j q ´ f k`1 pτ j q| ě ε1 . Since a2 ` b2 ď 2pa ` bq2 , we have that
    g                                     g
    f k                                   f k
    fÿ                                    fÿ
    e pfj pτi ,j q ´ f 1 pτi ,j qq2 ď e pfj pτi ,j q ´ f 1 pτi ,j qq2 ` pfj pτ3´i ,j q ´ f 1 pτ3´i ,j qq2
                  j         j  j                     j      j     j              j        j       j
       j“1                                     j“1
                                          g
                                          f k
                                          fÿ                1          ?
                                         ďe   2pf pτ j q ´ f pτ j qq2 ď 2ε1
                                                         j           j
                                               j“1



                                                             47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Additionally, since
                    1                                   1                                  1
 |fk`1 pτ1,k`1 q ´ fk`1 pτ1,k`1 q| ` |fk`1 pτ2,k`1 q ´ fk`1 pτ2,k`1 q| ě |f k`1 pτ j q ´ f k`1 pτ j q| ě ε1
. So, there is an ik`1 so that
                                                     1
                              |fk`1 pτik`1 ,k`1 q ´ fk`1 pτik`1 ,k`1 q| ě ε1 {2

So, we have a sequence xj :“ τij ,j and a sequence of pairs of functions fj , fj1 so that for any
               řk
1 ď k ď dh , j“1 pfj pxj q ´ fj1 pxj qq2 ď 2pε1 q2 but |fk`1 pxk`1 q ´ fk`1   1
                                                                                 pxk`1 q| ě ε1 {2. This
implies the following. Inequality piq holds by Proposition 43 of Jin et al. (2021) upon setting
β “ 2pε1 q2 and setting the proposition’s ε to ε1 {2. Inequality piiq holds since ε1 {2 ě ε{2.


                                          dh
                                          ÿ
                                 dh “           1p|fj pxj q ´ fj1 pxj q| ě ε1 {2q
                                          j“1

                                          2pε1 q2
                                          ˆ          ˙
                                    piq
                                    ď             ` 1 dimE pFh , ε{2q
                                         pε1 {2q2
                                    “ 9 dimE pFh , ε1 {2q
                                    ď 9 dimE pFh , ε{2q
This establishes our claim.

We have the following immediate corollary of Theorem 3, Theorem 7 and Lemma 2.

Corollary 1 (Dueling Regret using POR-UCRL Confidence Sets). The confidence sets from POR-
UCRL satisfy Assumption
                 ´´ ? 2 and ř   using them in Algorithm
                                                  ¯ ? ¯1 leads to the following regret bound
                                       a
RegretD pT q “ O pS HA ` hPHp dE,h dC,h
               r                                      T .


                                                         48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.2 R EDUCTION TO B ONUS -BASED O PTIMISM
We define the reduction using the algorithm below.

Algorithm 8 Reduction from Dueling to Cardinal Bonus-Based Optimism
 1: Input Known reward function trh uH
                                     h“1 , method EstpDq to estimate P̂D and f D from dataset
                          D
    D, bonus functions bF   pP, π, δq and bD
                                           P pP, π, δq, confidence level δ.
 2: Initialize dataset D1 Ð tu
 3: for t “ 1, ..., T do
 4:    Compute good set Πt                                                                 {Valid π‹ candidates}
                     !     ˇ
             Πt :“ π P ΠˇVD ppP̂Dt , f Dt q, π, π1 q ` bF pP̂Dt , pπ, π1 q, δq
                           ˇ
                                                                                                            )
                                    ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1 , δq ě 0, @π1 P Π

 5:    Pick pπ1,t , π2,t q given by                                                        {Most uncertain duel}

                 arg max bF pP̂Dt , pπ, π 1 q, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1 , δq
                  π,π 1 PΠt
                                        !                  )H
 6:    Collect trajectories τt,i “       psth,i , ath,i qq      along with feedback toh uhPHp by sampling
                                                          h“1
             π
       from P‹ i,t for i “ 1, 2.
 7:   Append the data to Dt to get Dt`1 , update estimates and bonuses.
 8: end for


Theorem 13 (Reduction from Dueling to Bonus-Based Optimism). If the bonuses and estimates
used in Algorithm 8 satisfy Assumption 3, then with probability 1 ´ δ, the dueling regret RegretD pT q
of Algorithm 8 is given by
                              RegretD pT q “ OpC
                                             r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq

Proof. Recall that the value of a duel pπ, π 1 q under model M Ø M Ø pP, f q is denoted by
                   VD pM, π, π 1 q :“ V pM, πq ´ V pM, π 1 q “ V pP, f, πq ´ V pP, g, π 1 q
We overload notation and use the natural bijection M Ø M to define
                                        VD pM, π, π 1 q :“ VD pM, π, π 1 q

For ease of notation in the proof, we often work with an arbitrary pre-image fˆD of f D under the map
f ÞÑ f . A careful read will confirm that this does not affect the correctness of any of the statements.
First note that π‹ P Πt for all T with probability 1 ´ δ{16 since the following hold uniformly over
all π1 P Π
´VD ppP̂Dt , fˆDt q, π‹ , π1 q “ V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π1 q ´ V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π‹ q
                                 ”                                            ı ”                                          ı
                               “ V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π1 q ´ V pP‹ , fˆDt , π1 q ´ V pP‹ , fˆDt , π1 q ´ V pP̂Dt , fˆDt , π1 q
                                    ` V pP‹ , f ‹ , π1 q ´ V pP‹ , f ‹ , π‹ q
                                    ` VD ppP‹ , f Dt q, π1 , π‹ q ´ VD ppP‹ , f ‹ q, π1 , π‹ q
                               ď zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π‹ , δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1 , δq
                                   `0
                                    ` bF pP̂Dt , pπ‹ , π1 q, δq`
                               “ bF pP̂Dt , pπ‹ , π1 q, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π‹ , δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1 , δq
where the inequality holds by Assumption 4 and the optimality of π‹ in the true model. Note let M̂t
be the model given by P̂Dt , fˆDt and let Mt be the corresponding model in M. We make the following


                                                         49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


abbreviation:
      bM pMt , pπ, π 1 q, δq :“ bF pP̂Dt , pπ, π 1 q, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π 1 , δq
                                T ÿ
                                ÿ 2
        RegretD pT q “                    VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q
                               t“1 i“1
                                T ”ÿ
                                ÿ  2
                          “                VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD pM̂t , π‹ , πi,t q ` bM pMt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq
                               t“1   i“1
                                             2
                                             ÿ                                                      ı
                                         `         VD pM̂t , π‹ , πi,t q ´ bM pMt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq
                                             i“1
                              2 ÿ
                          piq ÿ T ”                                                                                   ı
                          ď                VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD pM̂t , π‹ , πi,t q ` bM pMt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq
                                i“1 t“1


Inequality piq holds since VD pM̂t , π‹ , πi,t q “ ´VD pM̂t , πi,t , π‹ q, and πi,t P Πt for i “ 1, 2 implies
that
    VD pM̂t , πi,t , π‹ q ` bF pP̂Dt , pπ‹ , π1 q, δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π‹ , δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1 , δq ě 0

Now note that the following holds uniformly over all timesteps t with probability 1 ´ 3δ{8 for i “ 1, 2
simultaneously using Assumption 4 multiple times and applying a union bound.
                                                                     ‹
VD pM‹ , π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD pM̂t , π‹ , πi,t q “ VD ppP‹ , f q, π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD ppP̂Dt , f Dt q, π‹ , πi,t q
                                                                     ‹                             ‹
                                                   “ VD ppP‹ , f q, π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD ppP̂Dt , f q, π‹ , πi,t q
                                                                          ‹
                                                         ` VD ppP̂Dt , f q, π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD ppP̂Dt , f Dt q, π‹ , πi,t q
                                                                 ‹                       ‹                  ‹                   ‹
                                                   “ V pP‹ , f , π‹ q ´ V pP̂Dt , f , π‹ q ` V pP̂Dt , f , πi,t q ´ V pP‹ , f , πi,t q
                                                                          ‹
                                                         ` VD ppP̂Dt , f q, π‹ , πi,t q ´ VD ppP̂Dt , f Dt q, π‹ , πi,t q
                                                   “ zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π‹ , δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , πi,t , δq
                                                         ` bF pP̂Dt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq
                                                   “ bM pMt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq

So, with probability 1 ´ 3δ{16, we have that
                      T ÿ
                      ÿ 2
RegretD pT q ď                  bM pMt , pπ‹ , πi,t q, δq
                      t“1 i“1

                piq     T
                        ÿ
                ď2            bM pMt , pπ1,t , π2,t q, δq
                        t“1
                       T
                       ÿ
                “2            zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π1,t , δq ` zpBpqbP pP̂Dt , π2,t , δq ` bF pP̂Dt , pπ1,t , π2,t q, δq
                       t“1
                         ˜                                                                                                  ¸
                piiq          T
                              ÿ
                ď O
                  r               pz1 pBpqbP pP‹ , π1,t , δq ` z1 pBpqbP pP‹ , π2,t , δq ` bF pP‹ , pπ1,t , π2,t q, δq
                              t“1

where inequality piq holds since pπ1,t , π2,t q “ arg maxπ,π1 PΠt bM pMt , pπ, π 1 q, δq and inequality piiq
holds with probability 1´3δ{8 by 6 applications of the change of measure inequality in Assumption 4.
Now, we can use the fact that Assumption 4 is satisfied again to conclude that with probability
1 ´ δ{32.
T
ÿ
    pz1 pBpqbP pP‹ , π1,t , δq ` z1 pBpqbP pP‹ , π2,t , δq ` bF pP‹ , pπ1,t , π2,t q, δq “ OpC
                                                                                           r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq
t“1


                                                                 50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Taking a union bound over all inequalities stated so far, we have the following with probability 1 ´ δ
                         RegretD pT q “ OpC
                                        r P pM, T, δq ` CF pM, T, δqq

as desired.

Again, the following corollary is immediate from Theorem 5, Theorem 9 and Lemma 2.

Corollary 8. By using POR-UCBVI as the algorithm in the dueling reduction in Algorithm 8, we can
get a bound on the dueling regret given by
                                ¨¨                                         ˛     ˛
                                                  ÿ b                        ?
             RegretD pT q “ O r ˝˝pCpH, S, Aq `           d¯E,h pdC,h ` Hq‚ T ‚
                                                      hPHp

where d¯E,h “ dimE Fh , 2T .
                     `     B
                             ˘


                                                 51
