Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O NE S TEP D IFFUSION VIA S HORTCUT M ODELS
 Kevin Frans                         Danijar Hafner        Sergey Levine       Pieter Abbeel
 UC Berkeley                         UC Berkeley           UC Berkeley         UC Berkeley
 kvfrans@berkeley.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Diffusion models and flow-matching models have enabled generating diverse
         and realistic images by learning to transfer noise to data. However, sampling
         from these models involves iterative denoising over many neural network passes,
         making generation slow and expensive. Previous approaches for speeding up
         sampling require complex training regimes, such as multiple training phases,
         multiple networks, or fragile scheduling. We introduce shortcut models, a family
         of generative models that use a single network and training phase to produce
         high-quality samples in a single or multiple sampling steps. Shortcut models
         condition the network not only on the current noise level but also on the desired
         step size, allowing the model to skip ahead in the generation process. Across a
         wide range of sampling step budgets, shortcut models consistently produce higher
         quality samples than previous approaches, such as consistency models and reflow.
         Compared to distillation, shortcut models reduce complexity to a single network
         and training phase and additionally allow varying step budgets at inference time.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Iterative denoising methods such as diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2020) and flow-matching (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) have seen remarkable success
in modelling diverse images (Rombach et al., 2022; Esser et al., 2024), video (Ho et al., 2022; Bar-
Tal et al., 2024), audio (Kong et al., 2020), and proteins (Abramson et al., 2024). Yet, their weakness
lies in expensive inference. Despite producing high-quality samples, these methods require an it-
erative inference procedure—often requiring dozens to hundreds of forward passes of the neural
network—making generation slow and expensive. We posit that there exists a generative modelling
objective which retains the benefits of diffusion training, yet can denoise in a single step.


                       Flow Matching                              Shortcut Models (ours)

 128
Steps


Four
Steps


One
Step


Figure 1: Generations of flow-matching models and shortcut models for different inference
budgets. Shortcut models generate high-quality images across a wide range of inference budgets,
including using a single forward pass, drastically reducing sampling time by up to 128x compared
to diffusion and flow-matching models. In contrast, diffusion and flow-matching models rapidly
deteriorate when queried in the few-step setting. The same starting noise used within each column
and two models are trained on CelebA-HQ and Imagenet-256 (class conditioned).


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We consider the end-to-end setting, in which one-step denoising is acquired by a single model over
a single training run. Closely related are previous two-stage methods which take existing diffusion
models and later distill one-step capabilities into them. These stages introduce complexity and
require either generating a large synthetic dataset (Luhman & Luhman, 2021; Liu et al., 2022) or
propagating through a series of teacher and student networks (Ho et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2023).
Consistency models (Song et al., 2023) are step closer to the end-to-end setting, but their dependency
on large amounts of bootstrapping requires a careful learning schedule throughout training. Two-
stage or tightly-scheduled procedures suffer from a need to specify when to end training and begin
distillation. In contrast, end-to-end methods can be trained indefinitely to continually improve.
We present shortcut models, a class of end-to-end generative models that produce high-quality gen-
erations under any inference budget, including in a single sampling step. Our key insight is to
condition the neural network not only on the noise level but also the desired step size, enabling it
to accurately jump ahead in the denoising process. Shortcut models can be seen as performing self-
distillation during training time, and thus do not require a separate distillation step and are trained
over a single run. No schedules or careful warmups are necessary. Shortcut models are efficient to
train, requiring only ∼ 16% more compute than that of a base diffusion model.
Empirical evaluations display that shortcut models satisfy a number of useful desiderata. On the
commonly used CelebA-HQ and Imagenet-256 benchmarks, a single shortcut model can handle
many-step, few-step, and one-step generation. Accuracy is not sacrificed —- in fact, many-step gen-
eration quality matches those of baseline diffusion models. At the same time, shortcut models can
consistently match or outperform two-stage distillation methods in the few- and one-step settings.
The key contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We introduce shortcut models, a class of generative models that generate high-quality samples in
  a single forward pass, by conditioning the model on the desired step size. Unlike distillation or
  consistency models, shortcut models are trained in a single training run without a schedule.
• We perform a comprehensive comparison of shortcut models to previous diffusion and flow-
  matching approaches on CelebAHQ-256 and ImageNet-256 under fixed architecture and com-
  pute. Shortcut models match or exceed the distillation methods that require multiple training
  phases and significantly outperform previous end-to-end methods across inference budgets.
• To demonstrate the generality of shortcut models beyond image generation, we apply them to
  robotic control and replace diffusion policies with shortcut policies. We observe that shortcut
  models maintain comparable performance under an order-of-magnitude lower inference cost.
• We release model checkpoints and the full training code for replicating our experimental results:
  https://github.com/kvfrans/shortcut-models

2   BACKGROUND
Diffusion and flow-matching. A recent family of models, including diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) and flow-matching1 (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022) models, approach the generative modelling problem by learning an ordinary differ-
ential equation (ODE) that transforms noise into data. In this work, we adopt the optimal transport
flow-matching objective (Liu et al., 2022) for simplicity. We define xt as a linear interpolation be-
tween a data point x1 ∼ D and a noise point x0 ∼ N (0, I) of the same dimensionality. The velocity
vt is the direction from the noise to the data point:
                         xt = (1 − t) x0 + t x1        and      vt = x 1 − x 0 .                     (1)
Given x0 and x1 , the velocity vt is fully determined. But given only xt , there are multiple plausible
pairs (x0 , x1 ) and thus different values the velocity can take on, rendering vt a random variable.
Flow models learn a neural network to estimate the expected value v̄t = E[vt | xt ] that averages
over all plausible velocities at xt . The flow model can be optimized by regressing the empirical
velocity of randomly sampled pairings of noise x0 and data x1 pairs:
                                               LF (θ) = Ex0 ,x1 ∼D ||v̄θ (xt , t) − (x1 − x0 )||2

       v̄θ (xt , t) ≈ Ex0 ,x1 ∼D [vt | xt ]                                                         (2)
   1
     We consider flow-matching as a special case of diffusion modelling (Kingma & Gao, 2024), and use the
terms interchangeably.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



           Training pairings       Learned ODE           4 Steps            2 Steps            1 Step

 noise



    data

 Flow Matching Training                                  Flow Matching Inference

Figure 2: Naive diffusion and flow-matching models fail at few-step generation. Left: Training
paths are created by randomly pairing data and noise. Note that the paths overlap; there is inherent
uncertainty about the direction vt to the data point, given only xt . Right: While flow-matching
models learn a deterministic ODE, its paths are not straight and have to be followed closely. The
predicted directions vt point towards the average of plausible data points. The fewer inference steps,
the more the generations are biased towards the dataset mean, causing them to go off track. At the
first sampling step, the model points towards the dataset mean and thus cannot generate multi-modal
data in a single step (see red circles).


To sample from a flow model, a noise point x0 is first sampled from the normal distribution. This
point is then iteratively updated from x0 to x1 following the the denoising ODE defined as following
the learned flow model v̄θ (xt , t). In practice, this process is approximated using Euler sampling over
small discrete time intervals.

Few-step ambiguity. While a perfectly trained ODE deterministically maps the noise distribution
to the data distribution in continuous time, this guarantee is lost under finite step sizes. As illustrated
in Figure 2, flow-matching learns to predict the average direction from xt towards the data, so
following the prediction with a large step size will jump to an average of multiple data points. At
t = 0 the model receives pure noise as input and (x0 , x1 ) are randomly paired during training, so
the predicted velocity at t = 0 points towards the dataset mean. Thus, even at the optimum of the
flow matching objective, one step generation will fail for any multi-modal data distribution.

3     S HORTCUT M ODELS FOR F EW S TEP G ENERATION
We introduce shortcut models, a new family of denoising generative models that overcomes the large
number of sampling steps required by diffusion and flow-matching models. Our key intuition is that
we can train a single model that supports different sampling budgets, by conditioning the model not
only on the timestep t but also on a desired step size d.
As shown in Figure 2, flow-matching learns an ODE that maps noise to data along curved paths.
Naively taking large sampling steps leads to large discretization error and in the single-step case, to
catastrophic failure. Conditioning on d allows shortcut models to account for the future curvature,
and jump to the correct next point rather than going off track. We refer to the normalized direction
from xt towards the correct next point x′t+d as the shortcut s(xt , t, d):
                                        x′t+d = xt + s(xt , t, d) d.                                     (3)
Our aim is to train a shortcut model sθ (xt , t, d) to learn the shortcut for all combinations of xt , t, and
d. Shortcut models can thus be seen as a generalization of flow-matching models to larger step sizes:
whereas flow-matching models only learn the instantaneous velocity, shortcut models additionally
learn to make larger jumps. At d → 0, the shortcut is equivalent to the flow.
A naive way to compute targets for training sθ (xt , t, d) would be to fully simulate the ODE forward
with a small enough step size (Luhman & Luhman, 2021; Liu et al., 2022). However, this approach
is computationally expensive, especially for end-to-end training. Instead, we leverage an inherent
self-consistency property of shortcut models, namely that one shortcut step equals two consecutive
shortcut steps of half the size:
                           s(xt , t, 2d) = s(xt , t, d)/2 + s(x′t+d , t + d, d)/2                        (4)
This allows us to train shortcut models using self-consistency targets for d > 0 and using the flow-
matching loss (Equation 2) as a base case for d = 0. In principle, we can train the model on any


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                Regress



a) Diﬀusion / Flow Matching
                                                                                               Train
                                                                                               towards
                                                                                               two smaller
                                                                                               steps


      b) Shortcut Models


Figure 3: Overview of shortcut model training. At d ≈ 0, the shortcut objective is equivalent
to the flow-matching objective, and can be trained by regressing onto empirical E[vt |xt ] samples.
Targets for larger d shortcuts are constructed by concatenating a sequence of two d/2 shortcuts.
Both objectives can be trained jointly; shortcut models do not require a two-stage procedure or
discretization schedule.


distribution of d ∼ p(d). In practice, we split the batch into a fraction that is trained with d = 0
and another fraction with randomly sampled d > 0 targets. We thus arrive at the combined shortcut
model loss function:
                                      h                                                               i
  LS (θ) = Ex0 ∼N, x1 ∼D, (t,d)∼p(t,d) ∥sθ (xt , t, 0) − (x1 − x0 )∥2 + ∥sθ (xt , t, 2d) − starget ∥2 ,
                                        |              {z           } |
                                                                                                        (5)
                                                                                      {z            }
                                                  Flow-Matching               Self-Consistency

      where starget = sθ (xt , t, d)/2 + sθ (x′t+d , t + d, d)/2   and   x′t+d = xt + sθ (xt , t, d)d.
Intuitively, the above objective learns a mapping from noise to data which is consistent when queried
under any sequence of step sizes, including directly in a single step. The flow-matching portion of
the objective grounds the shortcut model at small step size to match empirical velocity samples. This
ensures that the shortcut model develops a base generation capability when queried with many steps,
exactly as an equivalent flow-matching model does. In the self-consistency portion, appropriate
targets for larger step-sizes are constructed by concatenating a sequence of two smaller shortcuts.
This propagates the generation capability from multi-step to few-step to one-step. The combined
objective can be trained jointly, using a single model and over a single end-to-end training run.

3.1     T RAINING D ETAILS

We now present a simple framework for training shortcut models via the objective described above.
At each stage, we opt for design decisions which encourage training stability and simplicity.
Regressing onto empirical samples. As d → 0, the shortcut is equivalent to instantaneous flow.
Thus, we can train the shortcut model at d = 0 using the loss given by Equation 2, i.e. by sampling
random (x0 , x1 ) pairs and fitting the expectation over vt . This term can be seen as grounding the
small-step shortcuts to match the data denoising ODE. We find that sampling t ∼ U (0, 1) uniformly
is the simplest and works as well as any other sampling scheme.
Enforcing self-consistency. Given that the shortcut model is accurate at small step-size, our next
goal is to ensure that the shortcut model maintains this behavior at larger step-size. We rely on
self-generated bootstrap targets for this purpose. To limit compounding approximation error, it is
desirable to limit the total length of the bootstrap paths. We therefore opt for a binary recursive
formulation in which two shortcuts are used to construct a twice-as-large shortcut (Figure 3).
We must decide on a number of steps M to represent the smallest unit of time for approximating
the ODE; we use 128 in our experiments. This creates log2 (128) + 1 = 8 possible shortcut lengths
according to d ∈ (1/128, 1/64 ... 1/2, 1). During each training step, we sample xt , t, and a random
d < 1, then take two sequential steps with the shortcut model. The concatenation of these two steps
is then used as the target to train the model at 2d.
Note that the second step is queried at x′t+d under the denoising ODE and not the empirical data
pairing, i.e. it is constructed by adding the predicted first shortcut to xt , and not by interpolating


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Shortcut Model Training                             Algorithm 2 Sampling
  while not converged do                                          x ∼ N (0, I)
    x0 ∼ N (0, I), x1 ∼ D, (d, t) ∼ p(d, t)                       d ← 1/M
    xt ← (1 − t) x0 + t x1                 Noise data point       t ←0
    for first k batch elements do                                 for n ∈ [0, . . . , M − 1] do
       starget ← x1 − x0                   Flow-matching target     x ← x + sθ (x, t, d) d
       d       ←0                                                   t ←t+d
    for other batch elements do                                   return x
       st      ← sθ (xt , t, d)            First small step
       xt+d ← xt + st d                    Follow ODE
       st+d ← sθ (xt+d , t + d, d)         Second small step
       starget ← stopgrad(st + st+d )/2 Self-consistency target
    θ ← ∇θ ||sθ (xt , t, 2d) − starget ||2


towards x1 from the dataset. When d is at the smallest value (e.g. 1/128), we instead query the
model at d = 0.
Joint optimization. Equation 5 consists of an empirical flow-matching objective and a self-
consistency objective, which are jointly optimized during training. The variance of the empirical
term is much higher, as it regresses onto random noise pairings with inherent uncertainty, whereas
the self-consistency term uses deterministic bootstrap targets. We found it helpful to construct a
batch with significantly more empirical targets than self-consistency targets.
The above behavior also gives us room for computational efficiency. Training requires less self-
consistency targets than empirical targets, and self-consistency targets are also more expensive to
generate (requiring two additional forward passes). We can therefore construct a training batch by
combining a ratio of 1 − k empirical targets with k self-consistency targets. We find k = (1/4) to
be reasonable. In this way, we can reduce the training cost of a shortcut model to be roughly only
∼ 16% more than that of an equivalent diffusion model2 .
Guidance. Classifier-free guidance (CFG; Ho & Salimans, 2022) has proven to be an essential tool
for diffusion models to reach high generation fidelity. CFG provides a linear approximation of a
tradeoff between the class-conditional and -unconditional denoising ODE. We find that CFG helps
at small step sizes but is error-prone at larger steps when linear approximation is not appropriate. We
therefore use CFG when evaluating the shortcut model at d = 0 but forgo it elsewhere. A limitation
of CFG in shortcut models is that the CFG scale must be specified before training.
Exponential moving average weights. Many recent diffusion models use an exponential moving
average (EMA) over weight parameters to improve sample quality. EMA induces a smoothing effect
on the generations, which is especially helpful in the in diffusion modelling since the objective has
inherent variance. We find that similarly in shortcut models, variance from loss at the d = 0 level
can result in large oscillations in the output at d = 1. Utilizing EMA parameters for generating
self-consistency targets alleviates this issue.
Weight decay. We find that weight decay is crucial for enabling stability, especially early on in
training. When the shortcut model is near initialization, the self-consistency targets it generates are
largely noise. The model can latch on to these incoherent targets, resulting in artifacting and bad
feature learning. We find that proper weight decay causes these issues to disappear, and enables us
to bypass the need for discretization schedules or careful warmups.
Discrete time sampling. In practice, we can reduce the burden of the shortcut network by only
training on relevant timesteps. During training, we first sample d, then sample t only at the discrete
points for which the shortcut model will be queried, i.e. multiples of d. We train the self-consistency
objective only at these timesteps.



    2
      Approximating a backward pass as twice the compute of a forward pass. Each shortcut update uses 1
(forward) + 2 (backward) + (1/4)*2 (self-consistency targets) compute units, vs. 3 units in a diffusion update.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     R ELATED W ORK

Distillation of diffusion models. A number of prior works have explored the distillation of pre-
trained diffusion models into a one-step or few-step model (Luo, 2023). Knowledge distillation
(Luhman & Luhman, 2021) and rectified flows (Liu et al., 2022) generate a synthetic dataset by
fully simulating the denoising ODE. As full simulation is expensive, a number of methods have
been proposed that utilize bootstrapping to warm-start the ODE simulation (Gu et al., 2023; Xie
et al., 2024). Alternatives to L2 distance have been proposed for distillation targets, such as ad-
versarial (Sauer et al., 2023) or distribution-matching (Yin et al., 2024b;a) objectives. Our work
most closely relates to techniques using binary time-distillation (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Meng et al.,
2023; Berthelot et al., 2023), which divides distillation into log2 (T ) stages of increasing step-size,
shortening the required bootstrap paths. Unlike these prior works, we focus on learning a one-step
generative model end-to-end, without a separate pretraining and distillation phase. Our method is
computationally cheaper than full simulation methods (e.g. rectified flows, knowledge distillation)
and avoids the multiple teacher-student phases of progressive distillation methods.

Consistency modelling. Consistency models (Song et al., 2023) are a family of one-step gener-
ative models that learn to map from any partially-noised data point to the final data point. While
such models can be used as a student for distillation (Luo et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2024), consis-
tency training has also been proposed to train consistency models end-to-end from scratch (Song
et al., 2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2023). Our work tackles the same problem setting, but approaches
it differently – consistency training enforces consistency among empirical xt and xt+d samples,
which accumulates irreducible bias at each discretization step due to ambiguity. We instead sample
x′t+d from the learned ODE, avoiding this issue. Shortcut models require only log2 (T ) bootstraps,
whereas consistency models require T . Shortcut models naturally support many-step generation as
a non-bootstrapped base case, whereas consistency models require bootstrapping in all cases. In ad-
dition, shortcut models are practically simpler, as many of the consistency model tricks – e.g. using
a strict discretization schedule, using perceptual loss rather than L2 loss – can be bypassed entirely.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We present a series of experiments evaluating quality, scalability, and robustness of shortcut models.
In terms of quality, shortcut models show few- and one-shot generation capability competetive with
prior two-stage methods, and outperform alternative end-to-end methods. At the same time, shortcut
models maintain the performance of base diffusion models on many-step generation. We show that
under increasing model scale, generation capability continues to improve. Shortcut models learn an
interpolatable latent noise space, and are robust to applications such as robotic control.

5.1   H OW DO SHORTCUT MODELS COMPARE TO PRIOR ONE - STEP GENERATION METHODS ?

In this section, we carefully compare our approach to a number of prior methods, by training each
objective from scratch with the same model architecture and codebase. We utilize the DiT-B diffu-
sion transformer architecture Peebles & Xie (2023). We consider CelebAHQ-256 for unconditional
generation, and Imagenet-256 for class-conditional generation. For all runs, we utilize the AdamW
optimizer (Loshchilov, 2017) with a constant learning rate of 1 ∗ 10−4 , and weight decay of 0.1. All
runs use the latent space of the sd-vae-ft-mse autoencoder (Rombach et al., 2022).
Comparison to prior work. We compare against two categories of diffusion-based prior meth-
ods: two-stage methods, which pretrain a diffusion model then distill it separately, and end-to-end
methods, which train a one-step model from scratch over a single training run.
• Diffusion (DiT-B) represents a standard diffusion model, faithfully following the setup in (Pee-
  bles & Xie, 2023).
• Flow Matching replaces the diffusion objective with an optimal-transport objective, following
  Liu et al. (2022). Together with diffusion, these two methods provide a baseline for the perfor-
  mance of an iterative many-step denoising model. The rest of the methods all adopt the flow-
  matching objective as a base, using a standard flow-matching model as a teacher if applicable.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Reflow provides a comparison to a standard two-stage distillation approach which fully evalu-
  ates a teacher model to generate synthetic (x0 , x1 ) pairs. We follow methodology from Liu et al.
  (2022), and generate 50k synthetic examples for CelebAHQ, and 1M synthetic examples for Ima-
  genet. Each example requires 128 forward passes to generate. Reflow is comparable to knowledge
  distillation (Luhman & Luhman, 2021), except the student model is trained among all t ∈ (0, 1)
  rather at just t = 0.
• Progressive Distillation provides comparison to a two-stage binary time-distillation approach,
  which aligns with our proposed method. Following Salimans & Ho (2022), starting from a pre-
  trained teacher model, a series of student models are distilled, each with 2x larger step-size than
  the previous. To match our methodology, classifier-free guidance is used during the first distilla-
  tion phase.
• Consistency Distillation compares to a consistency-model based two-stage distillation strategy.
  Pairs of (xt , xt+d ) are generated via a teacher diffusion model, and a separate student consistency
  model is trained to enforce consistent x1 prediction among these pairs.
• Consistency Training provides a comparison to a prior end-to-end method which trains a one-
  step model from scratch, most closely matching our setting. A consistency model is trained over
  empirical (xt , xt+d ) samples from the dataset. Following Song et al. (2023), the time discretiza-
  tion bins are scheduled to increase over the training run.
• Live Reflow is an additional end-to-end method we propose, in which a model is trained on both
  flow-matching and Reflow-distilled targets simultaneously. The model is conditioned on each tar-
  get type separately. Distillation targets are self-generated every training step using full denoising,
  so this method is considerably expensive computationally. We include it for comparison purposes.
Together, these works span the space of prior two-stage distillation and end-to-end training methods.
To ensure rigorous comparison, we run all prior work comparisons on the same codebase, using an
equal or greater amount of total computation than our method.
Evaluation. We evaluate models on samples generated with 128, 4, and 1 diffusion step(s), using
the standard Frechet Inception Distance (FID) metric. We report the FID-50k metric, as is standard
in prior work. Following standard practice, FID is calculated with respect to statistics over the entire
dataset, no compression is applied to the generated images, and images are resized to 299x299 with
bilinear upscaling and clipped to (−1, 1). We use the EMA model parameters during evaluation.
Table 1 highlights the abilities of shortcut models to retain accurate generation under few- and
one-step sampling. With the exception of two-stage progressive distillation, shortcut models out-
perform all prior methods, without the need for multiple training stages. Note that progressive
distillation models lose the ability for many-step sampling, whereas shortcut models retain this abil-
ity. Unsurprisingly, diffusion and flow-matching models display poor performance on 4- and 1-step
generation. Interestingly, in our experiments shortcut models display a slightly better FID than a
comparable flow-matching model. A blind hypothesis is that the self-consistency loss acts as a form
of implicit regularization of the model, although we leave this investigation to future work. Further
visual examples are provided in Appendix A.

5.2   W HAT IS THE BEHAVIOR OF SHORTCUT MODELS UNDER VARYING INFERENCE
      BUDGETS ?

We now analyze the behavior of shortcut models when images are generated with varying step
counts. While naı̈ve flow-matching models approximate the denoising ODE with a tangent velocity,
shortcut models are trained to approximately integrate the denoising ODE, providing more accurate
behavior at low step counts. Figure 4 shows that, while greater numbers of steps are always helpful,
the degradation at low step counts is much more pronounced in naı̈ve flow-matching models than
in shortcut models. In our experiments, we find that many-step performance is not sacrificed, and
shortcut models maintain the performance of baseline flow models even at high step counts.
Few-step artifacts in flow models resemble blurriness and mode collapse (Figure 1, left). Short-
cut models generally do not suffer from such issues, and globally match the equivalent many-step
images generated from the same initial noise. Artifacts in shortcut models resemble errors in high-
precision details. One-step shortcut models can therefore be used as a proxy: if a downstream user
wishes to refine a one-step generated image, they may simply regenerate the image from the same
initial noise, but with more generation steps.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             CelebAHQ-256 (unconditioned) Imagenet-256 (class conditioned)
                             128-Step 4-Step    1-Step    128-Step 4-Step        1-Step
 Two phase training
 Progressive Distillation    (302.9)     (251.3)         14.8       (201.9)    (142.5)       35.6
 Consistency Distillation     59.5        39.6           38.2        132.8      98.01        136.5
 Reflow                       16.1        18.4           23.2         16.9      32.8         44.8
 End-to-end (single training run)
 Diffusion                    23.0       (123.4)        (132.2)      39.7      (464.5)      (467.2)
 Flow Matching                 7.3        (63.3)        (280.5)      17.3      (108.2)      (324.8)
 Consistency Training         53.7         19.0           33.2       42.8        43.0         69.7
 Live Reflow (ours)            6.3         27.2           43.3       46.3        95.8         58.1
 Shortcut Models (ours)        6.9         13.8           20.5       15.5        28.3         40.3

Table 1: Comparison of training objectives under equivalent architecture (DiT-B) and com-
pute. FID-50k scores (lower is better) are shown over 128, 4, and 1-step denoising. Shortcut models
provide high-quality samples under any inference budget, within a single training run. Compared
to diffusion and flow-matching, shortcut models drastically reduce needed sampling steps. Com-
pared to distillation approaches, short models simplify the training pipeline and provides flexibility
to choose inference budget after training. Parentheses represent evaluation under conditions that the
objective is not intended to support.


                                                   Figure 4: Behavior of flow-matching and short-
                                                   cut models over decreasing numbers of denois-
                                                   ing steps. While naı̈ve flow-matching models incur
                                                   degradation and mode collapse, shortcut models are
                                                   able to maintain a similar sample distribution at few-
                                                   and one-step generation. This capability comes at
                                                   no expense to generation quality under large infer-
                                                   ence budget. See Figure 1 for qualatative examples.


Figure 5: One-step generation quality continues to improve as model parameter count in-
creases. While generative models tend to display continual improvement with model scale,
bootstrap-based methods such as Q-learning have been shown to lose this property (Kumar et al.,
2020). We show that shortcut models, while a bootstrap-based method, retains the ability to scale
accuracy with model size.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Interpolations between two sampled noise points. All displayed images are model
generated. Each horizontal set represents images generated by one-step denoising of a variance-
preserving interpolation between two Gaussian noise samples.


5.3   H OW DOES SHORTCUT MODEL PERFORMANCE INCREASE WITH MODEL SCALE ?

A powerful trend in deep learning is that large over-parameterized models increase in capabilities
when scaled up. This trend has been less clear in bootstrap-based methods such as learning Q-
functions for reinforcement learning (Kumar et al., 2020; Sokar et al., 2023; Obando-Ceron et al.,
2024). Common issues resemble a form of rank-collapse: by re-training on self-generated outputs,
model expressivity may become limited. As shortcut models are inherently bootstrap-based, we ex-
amine whether shortcut models can extract a benefit from model scale. As highlighted in Figure 5,
even in the one-step setting, our Transformer-based shortcut model architecture can achieve increas-
ingly accurate generation as model size is increased. These results hint that even though shortcut
models rely on bootstrapping, they nevertheless avoid drastic collapse and continue to scale with
model parameter count. A shortcut model trained with DiT-XL size is able to achieve a one-step
FID of 10.6 and a 128-step FID of 3.8 on Imagenet-256, as shown in Table 2 in the Appendix.

5.4   C AN SHORTCUT MODELS GIVE US AN INTERPOLATABLE LATENT SPACE ?

Shortcut models represent a deterministic mapping from noise to data. To examine the structure of
this mapping, we can interpolate between initial noise samples and view the corresponding genera-
tions. Figure 6 displays examples of interpolations generated in this fashion. A pair of noise points
(x00 , x10 ) are sampled, then interpolated in a variance-preserving manner:
                                                       p
                                         xn0 = nx00 + 1 − n2 x10                                  (6)

Despite no explicit regularization on the noise-to-data mapping, the resulting interpolated genera-
tions display a qualitatively smooth transition. Intermediate images appear to be semantically plau-
sible. Note that in the visualized generations, all images are generated. While we do not explore
interpolation between existing images, it may be possible to add noise to an existing image and
interpolate those intermediate points, as is done by Ho et al. (2020).

5.5   D O SHORTCUT MODELS WORK IN NON - IMAGE DOMAINS ?

The generative modeling objectives described in this work are all domain-agnostic, yet common
benchmarks traditionally involve image generation. We now evaluate the generality of the shortcut
models formulation by training shortcut model policies on robotic control tasks.
Specifically, we build off the methodology presented by Chi et al. (2023). This diffusion policy
framework trains an observation-conditioned model to predict robot actions in an iterative manner.
The original work uses 100 denoising steps, and we aim to reduce inference to one step by training
a shortcut model instead. We utilize the same network structure and hyperparameters as the original
work, except for changing AdamW weight decay from 0.001 to 0.1, and including a conditioning
term for d. We additionally use a flow-matching target rather than an epsilon-prediction target.
Figure 7 highlights the robotic control tasks, Push-T and Transport, which were selected from Chi
et al. (2023) as tasks where baseline methods struggle. We compare to iterative denoising meth-
ods IBC (Florence et al., 2022) and diffusion policy (Chi et al., 2023), as well as one-step methods
LSTM-GMM (Mandlekar et al., 2021) and BET (Shafiullah et al., 2022). Results display the ca-
pability of shortcut model policies to achieve strong performance on robotic control, while limiting
inference cost to a single function call. In contrast, one-step diffusion policies catastrophically fail.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                     # Steps Push-T       Transport
                                           IBC                         100    0.90          0.00
                                           Diffusion Policy            100    0.95          1.00
                                           LSTM-GMM                     1     0.67          0.76
                                           BET                          1     0.79          0.38
                                           Diffusion Policy             1     0.12          0.00
                                           Shortcut Policy (ours)       1     0.87          0.80

Figure 7: Shortcut models can represent multimodal policies in a similar manner as diffusion
policies, while reducing the number of denoising steps to 1. Shown on the left are trajectories
from the Push-T (top) and Transport (bottom) tasks. In each case, a generative model is trained on
human demonstrations, and the model is queried to produce actions given a set of past observations.


6    D ISCUSSION
This work introduces shortcut models, a new type of diffusion-based generative model that supports
few-step and one-step generation. They key idea behind shortcut models is to learn a step-size
conditioned model that is grounded to the data at a small step-size, and trained via self-bootstrapping
at larger step-sizes.
Shortcut models provide a simple recipe that requires no scheduling and can be trained end-to-end
in a single run. Unlike prior distillation methods, shortcut models do not require separate pretraining
and distillation phases. In comparison to consistency training, shortcut models do not need a training
schedule, use only standard L2 regression, and require less bootstrapping steps.
Empirical evaluations on CelebA-HQ and Imagenet-256 show that shortcut models outperform prior
single-phase methods, and are competetive to two-stage distillation methods. Despite a reliance on
bootstrapping, shortcut models are stable to train and scale with model parameter size. We showcase
how shortcut models can be used in non-image domains, such as robotic control.
Best practices. For a practitioner wishing to utilize shortcut models, we recommend to keep the
following in mind. Standard diffusion model practice should be followed – e.g., normalizing the
dataset to unit variance. If the self-consistency loss displays erratic behavior, one can reduce the ratio
of self-consistency targets in the training batch. A non-zero weight decay is highly recommended.
Evaluating with EMA parameters provides a consistent improvement, but is not strictly neccessary.
Implementation. We provide a clean open-source implementation of shortcut models, along with
model checkpoints, available at: https://github.com/kvfrans/shortcut-models
Limitations. While shortcut models provide a simple framework for training one-step generative
models, a key inherent limitation is that the mapping between noise and data is entirely dependent
on an expectation over the dataset. In other generative model flavors (e.g., GANs (Goodfellow et al.,
2020), VAEs (Kingma, 2013)) it is possible to adjust this mapping, which has the potential to simply
the learning problem. Secondly, in our shortcut model implementation there remains a gap between
many-step generation quality and one-step generation quality.
Future work. Shortcut models open up a range of future research directions. In Table 1, shortcut
models display slightly better many-step generation than a base flow model—is there a way for one-
step generation to improve many-step generation (rather than typically the opposite)? Extensions
to the shortcut model formulation may be possible that iteratively adjust the noise-to-data mapping
(e.g., with a Reflow-like procedure (Liu et al., 2022)), or which reduce the gap between many-
step and one-step generation. This work provides a stepping stone towards developing the ideal
generative modelling objective—a simple recipe which satisfies the trifecta of fast sampling, mode
coverage, and high-quality generations.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by an National Science Foundation Fellowship for KF, under grant
No. DGE 2146752. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. PA holds
concurrent appointments as a Professor at UC Berkeley and as an Amazon Scholar. This paper
describes work performed at UC Berkeley and is not associated with Amazon. We thank Google
TPU Research Cloud (TRC) for granting us access to TPUs for research.

R EFERENCES
Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf
  Ronneberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, et al. Accurate structure
  prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature, pp. 1–3, 2024.
Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat,
 Junhwa Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for
 video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.
David Berthelot, Arnaud Autef, Jierui Lin, Dian Ang Yap, Shuangfei Zhai, Siyuan Hu, Daniel
  Zheng, Walter Talbott, and Eric Gu. Tract: Denoising diffusion models with transitive closure
  time-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04248, 2023.
Andrew Brock. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural image synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shu-
  ran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian
  Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 158–168. PMLR, 2022.
Zhengyang Geng, Ashwini Pokle, William Luo, Justin Lin, and J Zico Kolter. Consistency models
  made easy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14548, 2024.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Jiatao Gu, Shuangfei Zhai, Yizhe Zhang, Lingjie Liu, and Joshua M Susskind. Boot: Data-free dis-
   tillation of denoising diffusion models with bootstrapping. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured
   Probabilistic Inference {\&} Generative Modeling, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.             Classifier-free diffusion guidance.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–
  8646, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Diederik Kingma and Ruiqi Gao. Understanding diffusion objectives as the elbo with simple data
  augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Diederik P Kingma. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile
  diffusion model for audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
Aviral Kumar, Rishabh Agarwal, Dibya Ghosh, and Sergey Levine. Implicit under-parameterization
  inhibits data-efficient deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14498, 2020.
Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching
  for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and
  transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003, 2022.
I Loshchilov. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Eric Luhman and Troy Luhman. Knowledge distillation in iterative generative models for improved
  sampling speed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02388, 2021.
Simian Luo, Yiqin Tan, Longbo Huang, Jian Li, and Hang Zhao. Latent consistency models: Synthe-
  sizing high-resolution images with few-step inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04378, 2023.
Weijian Luo. A comprehensive survey on knowledge distillation of diffusion models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2304.04262, 2023.
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
  Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. What matters in learning from offline
  human demonstrations for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
Chenlin Meng, Robin Rombach, Ruiqi Gao, Diederik Kingma, Stefano Ermon, Jonathan Ho, and
  Tim Salimans. On distillation of guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14297–14306, 2023.
Johan Obando-Ceron, Ghada Sokar, Timon Willi, Clare Lyle, Jesse Farebrother, Jakob Foerster,
  Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Doina Precup, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Mixtures of experts unlock
  parameter scaling for deep rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08609, 2024.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4195–4205, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022.
Axel Sauer, Katja Schwarz, and Andreas Geiger. Stylegan-xl: Scaling stylegan to large diverse
  datasets. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 conference proceedings, pp. 1–10, 2022.
Axel Sauer, Dominik Lorenz, Andreas Blattmann, and Robin Rombach. Adversarial diffusion dis-
  tillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17042, 2023.
Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 35:22955–22968, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ghada Sokar, Rishabh Agarwal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Utku Evci. The dormant neuron phe-
  nomenon in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  32145–32168. PMLR, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Yang Song and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved techniques for training consistency models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.14189, 2023.
Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Consistency models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.01469, 2023.
Sirui Xie, Zhisheng Xiao, Diederik P. Kingma, Tingbo Hou, Ying Nian Wu, Kevin Patrick
  Murphy, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Ruiqi Gao. Em distillation for one-step diffusion
  models. ArXiv, abs/2405.16852, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:270062581.
Tianwei Yin, Michaël Gharbi, Taesung Park, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, Fredo Durand, and
  William T Freeman. Improved distribution matching distillation for fast image synthesis. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.14867, 2024a.
Tianwei Yin, Michaël Gharbi, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, Fredo Durand, William T Freeman,
  and Taesung Park. One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6613–6623, 2024b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A PPENDIX


Figure 8: Examples generated from the unconditional CelebA-HQ dataset at 256x256 resolution.
Each triplet represents an image generated from the same noise, at (128, 4, 1) denoising steps from
top to bottom. Results are generated from a DiT-B size model trained for 400k iterations.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Examples generated from the class-conditional Imagenet dataset at 256x256 resolution.
Each triplet represents an image generated from the same noise, at (128, 4, 1) denoising steps from
top to bottom. Results are generated from a DiT-XL size model trained for 800k iterations. CFG of
1.5 is used during the training process (not during generation).


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        FID    Sampling Steps    Param Count    Epochs Trained
 Adversarial approaches
 BigGAN-deep (Brock, 2018)              6.96           1               –                –
 StyleGAN-XL (Sauer et al., 2022)        2.3           1               –                –
 Denoising approaches
 DiT-XL (Peebles & Xie, 2023)           2.27         500            675M              640
 ADM-G (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)        4.59         250              –               426
 LDM-4-G (Rombach et al., 2022)          3.6         500            400M              106
 Shortcut Model (XL)                     3.8         128            676M              250
 Shortcut Model (XL)                     7.8          4             676M              250
 Shortcut Model (XL)                    10.6          1             676M              250

Table 2: Comparison to state-of-the-art generative models on Imagenet-256. Due compute con-
straints, we cannot train models with the same compute as the best previously reported generative
models. However, results demonstrate that shortcut models are able to competitively scale up
quality with model size. The Shortcut Model (XL) using the DiT-XL architecture reaches substan-
tially lower FID that the DiT-B architecture in Table 1, and is competetive with previous state-of-
the-art models. Note that the compared models use different architectures and compute budgets.
Moreover, parameter count is not completely proportional to training compute due to weight shar-
ing, e.g. in convolutional and attention layers. Horizontal dashes indicate unreported quantities.


B     T RAINING D ETAILS

    Batch Size                                       64 (CelebA-HQ), 256 (Imagenet)
    Training Steps                                   400,000 (CelebA-HQ) 800,000 (Imagenet)
    Latent Encoder                                   sd-vae-mse-ft
    Latent Downsampling                              8 (256x256x3 to 32x32x4)
    Ratio of Empirical to Bootstrap Targets          0.75
    Number of Total Denoising Steps (M)              128
    Classifier Free Guidance                         0 (CelebA-HQ), 1.5 (Imagenet)
    Class Dropout Probability                        0.1
    EMA Parameters Used For Bootstrap Targets?       Yes
    EMA Parameters Used For Evaluation?              Yes
    EMA Ratio                                        0.999
    Optimizer                                        AdamW
    Learning Rate                                    0.0001
    Weight Decay                                     0.1
    Hidden Size                                      768
    Patch Size                                       2
    Number of Layers                                 12
    Attention Heads                                  12
    MLP Hidden Size Ratio                            4

Table 3: Hyperparameters used during training. Model architecture follows that described in Peebles
& Xie (2023), specifically DiT-B unless mentioned otherwise.


B.1   C OMPUTATION

All experiments are run on TPUv3 nodes, and methods are implemented in JAX. While runtimes
vary per method, each training run typically takes 1-2 days to complete.


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   M ETHOD D ETAILS

Followed are a description of details behind the comparison methods. All methods are implemented
in the same codebase, using the same architecture. Training budgets are chosen so that comparisons
utilize roughly equal compute (or more compute if neccessary for the method to produce reasonable
results).
Flow-Matching. We use the standard linear interpolation for generating velocity targets. We train
the base model for 800k iterations, and denoise images using deterministic Euler sampling. A
checkpoint at 400k iterations is used as a teacher model for two-stage distillation methods.
Reflow. We use a base flow-matching model to create the synthetic targets used in reflow. For
CelebA-HQ, 50K targets are generated. 1M targets are generated for Imagenet. The distillation
process is then run for 400k additional iterations on the synthetic dataset. CFG is used to generate
synthetic data when applicable, and no CFG is used on the resulting distilled model.
Progressive Distillation. We run progressive distillation for the standard distillation time (400k
iterations), split into equal sections for each phase of distillation. As there are 8 distinct phases,
this results in 50k training steps per phase. At each phase, a teacher model is used to sample two
sequential bootstrap steps, which a student model is trained to mimic. At the end of a training phase,
the student becomes the new teacher. CFG is used only for the first phase (distilling 128-step model
into a 64-step model).
Consistency Distillation. We train a consistency model in velocity space, to match the base frame-
work of flow-matching. Thus at each iteration, consistency in velocity prediction is enforced be-
tween two points (xt , xt+d ). The two points are computed by taking a small d = (1/128) step
from xt in the direction of the teacher flow model. Target velocities are computed from xt+d by
querying the consistency model, using this prediction to estimate x1 , then computing target velocity
as (x1 − xt )/(1 − t).
Consistency Training. A consistency model is trained in the same format as described above. In-
stead of sampling (xt , xt+d ) from a teacher model, the pairs are sampled by interpolating noise and
empirical data samples at different strength. Following the methodology in Song et al. (2023), a dis-
cretization schedule is used. We use a binary-time schedule similar to that in progressive distillation.
Specifically, the first phase has a single discretization interval, then two, then four, etc.
Live Reflow. In this method, we convert Reflow to a procedure that can be run in a single training
run. Similar to a shortcut model, we train a d-conditioned model. A percentage of the batch will
train the model at d = 0 towards the flow-matching loss. We use 0.75 as this ratio, the same as the
shortcut model. The other part of the batch consists of self-generated bootstrap targets generated
by fully denoising a set of random noise. As this is a considerably expensive prodecure, we limit
the number of denoising steps for target generation to 8. Even so, live reflow takes over 4x the
computation of any other method.


                                                  17
