Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FAST D IRECT: Q UERY-E FFICIENT O NLINE B LACK -
BOX G UIDANCE FOR D IFFUSION - MODEL TARGET
G ENERATION
    Kim Yong Tan 1 Yueming Lyu 2,3∗ Ivor Tsang1,2,3 Yew-Soon Ong1,2,3
 1
   College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
 2
   Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
 3
   Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

 {KIMYONG001,ASYSOng}@ntu.edu.sg
 {Lyu Yueming,Ivor Tsang}@cfar.a-star.edu.sg


                                                A BSTRACT

              Guided diffusion-model generation is a promising direction for customizing the
              generation process of a pre-trained diffusion model to address specific down-
              stream tasks. Existing guided diffusion models either rely on training the guid-
              ance model with pre-collected datasets or require the objective functions to be
              differentiable. However, for most real-world tasks, offline datasets are often un-
              available, and their objective functions are often not differentiable, such as image
              generation with human preferences, molecular generation for drug discovery, and
              material design. Thus, we need an online algorithm capable of collecting data
              during runtime and supporting a black-box objective function. Moreover, the
              query efficiency of the algorithm is also critical because the objective evaluation
              of the query is often expensive in real-world scenarios. In this work, we propose
              a novel and simple algorithm, Fast Direct, for query-efficient online black-box
              target generation. Our Fast Direct builds a pseudo-target on the data manifold to
              update the noise sequence of the diffusion model with a universal direction, which
              is promising to perform query-efficient guided generation. Extensive experiments
              on twelve high-resolution (1024 × 1024) image target generation tasks and six
              3D-molecule target generation tasks show 6× up to 10× query efficiency improve-
              ment and 11× up to 44× query efficiency improvement, respectively. Our im-
              plementation is publicly available at: https://github.com/kimyong95/
              guide-stable-diffusion/tree/fast-direct


1        I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models have become the state-of-the-art generative model for image synthesis (Ho et al.,
2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and video synthesis (Ho et al., 2022),
etc. Its remarkable success is due to its powerful capability in modeling complex multi-mode high-
dimensional data distributions.
One promising direction for utilizing the generative power of diffusion models is through target
generation, which allows users to customize the generation process to meet specific downstream
objectives, effectively extending the models’ capabilities beyond synthesis problems to engineering
optimization and science discovery problems, such as image generation with human preferences,
drug discovery (Corso et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2023) and material design (Vlassis & Sun, 2023;
Giannone et al., 2023).
The pre-trained diffusion models often struggle to generate desired samples for these applications,
especially when the target data lies outside the training data distribution. Therefore, the target gen-
eration often involves model fine-tuning or guidance techniques. Krishnamoorthy et al. (2023) pro-
poses to train the diffusion model with re-weighted training loss, while Clark et al. (2023); Black
et al. (2023); Fan et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2024) advocates for fine-tuning the parameters of the pre-
     ∗
         Corresponding author
                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


trained model. As opposed to training-time approaches, Bansal et al. (2023) introduces an inference-
time approach, which replaces the classifier in classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) with a
differentiable objective function to achieve the downstream target. However, the requirement of the
differentiable objective limits its practical usage for real applications with black-box feedback.
Most real-world applications of target generation involve evaluating black-box objectives in an
online manner. For example, image generation with human preferences requires human users to
evaluate the generated images; drug design requires real-world experiments to evaluate the generated
molecules. These applications typically require several iterative query-feedback cycles with a black-
box objective to achieve satisfactory target generation. As objective evaluations are often expensive,
it becomes crucial to develop query-efficient algorithms to minimize the cost of these evaluations.
Although the online black-box target generation tasks are important, the existing works are not suit-
able to address this task. Bansal et al. (2023); Krishnamoorthy et al. (2023); Lu et al. (2023) require
training an offline guidance model with pre-collected data, while Bansal et al. (2023); Clark et al.
(2023); Prabhudesai et al. (2023); He et al. (2023) require the objective function to be differentiable.
Most recently, Black et al. (2023); Fan et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2024) can be employed for on-
line black-box target generation, but they require online updates of the huge number of parameters,
which is both time-consuming and not query-efficient.
In Section 3.1, we first propose a novel guided noise sequence optimization (GNSO) technique
to guide the diffusion model sampling process towards a given target. GNSO updates the noise
sequence in a universal direction on the data manifold. Our GNSO is efficient: it enables fast
adaptation (with around only 50 steps) from any initial generation towards the given input target.
Moreover, GNSO is robust: empirically, even if the input target image is noisy, it can still generate
a clear image semantically similar to the target image. The GNSO itself cannot directly handle black-
box target generation tasks, but it provides a backbone for further designing black-box algorithms.
In Section 3.2, based on our GNSO technique, we further propose a novel algorithm, Fast Direct, to
tackle the online black-box target generation tasks in a query-efficient manner. Fast Direct builds
a pseudo-target on the data manifold as the input for our GNSO, to guide the diffusion model at
inference time. Notably, our Fast Direct is easy to implement and supports any stochastic diffusion
scheduler. Moreover, our Fast Direct provides a very flexible framework for extension. Any designs
of update methods for the pseudo-target can serve as a plug-in for our Fast Direct.
In Section 4, we evaluate our Fast Direct algorithm on the real-world applications: high-resolution
(1024 × 1024) image target generation tasks and 3D-molecule target generation tasks. For image
tasks, we employ the black-box API of the modern Large Language Model (LLM), Gemini 1.5,
as the black-box objective, which is much more practical compared with the synthetic toy score
function used in the literature. Extensive experiments on twelve image target generation tasks and
six 3D-molecule target generation tasks show significant query efficiency improvement: 6-times
up to 10-times query efficiency improvement on image tasks and 11-times up to 44-times query
efficiency improvement on 3D-molecule tasks, compared with baselines. Additionally, we evalu-
ate Fast Direct on compressibility, incompressibility, and atheistic quality tasks, demonstrating its
generalization ability on the unseen prompts. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
    • We propose a novel guided noise sequence optimization (GNSO) technique to guide the diffu-
      sion model sampling process toward a given target in an efficient and robust manner.
    • Based on GNSO, we further propose a novel algorithm, Fast Direct, to address online black-box
      target generation tasks in a query-efficient manner.
    • Fast Direct achieves significant query efficiency improvement in real-world applications: high-
      resolution image target generation tasks and 3D-molecule target generation tasks. Additionally,
      we demonstrate its generalization capability for unseen prompts.


2     R ELATED W ORKS

2.1    G UIDED G ENERATION

Diffusion guided generation (also called inference-time guidance) refers to the technique to guide
the sampling trajectory of the pre-trained diffusion to generate target data (Croitoru et al., 2023;


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chen et al., 2024). The key advantage of this approach is that it does not require updating the model
parameters, which is computationally expensive, especially for large models.
Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) proposed classifier guidance. However, it requires a guidance model
trained on noisy images with different noise scales, which is generally not readily available and
often requires training from scratch for each domain. Chung et al. (2022); Bansal et al. (2023); He
et al. (2023) extend the classifier guidance by using a differentiable objective function defined only
for clean data. Instead of using noisy images, the predicted clean images at each sampling step are
used as the input for the guidance objective function. In this way, the guidance process can operate
on the clean image space. While the predicted clean image is naturally imperfect, empirically it still
provides informative feedback to guide image generation (Bansal et al., 2023).
However, this approximation can harm image quality. Bansal et al. (2023) proposed universal guid-
ance that comprises backward guidance followed by a self-recurrence step to preserve image quality.
On the other hand, He et al. (2023) leverages the differentiability of a well-trained auto-encoder to
project the image to the data manifold and thus preserve image quality during the guidance process.
Instead of guiding the sampling trajectory, Karunratanakul et al. (2024); Eyring et al. (2024) treat
the diffusion process as a black-box and only optimize the initial (prior) noise.
While the aforementioned approaches assume a differentiable objective function, Lu et al. (2023)
tackles black-box objective f by learning a differentiable proxy neural network h to match their
gradients, i.e., ∇f ≈ ∇h. Li et al. (2024) eliminates the need for a differentiable proxy model
by employing importance sampling weighted by the objective values during the sampling process.
Most recently, DNO (Tang et al., 2024) proposes optimizing the diffusion noise sequence by using
ZO-SGD (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017) to tackle the black-box objective function. However, it runs
at the instance level; namely, each run only produces one image.

2.2   D IFFUSION - MODEL F INE - TUNING

Diffusion-model fine-tuning refers to the technique that updating the pre-trained diffusion-model
parameters to improve its performance on a specific use case. In this section, we review the fine-
tuning methods that support online learning of the black-box objective function.
Black et al. (2023); Fan et al. (2024) formulate the diffusion fine-tuning problem as a reinforce-
ment learning (RL) problem within Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), and propose an iterative
algorithm to fine-tune the diffusion model by using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017; Uehara et al., 2024) loss function. Fan et al. (2024) integrates the PPO with a KL
regularization to prevent the fine-tuned model from deviating too much from the pre-trained model.
On the other hand, Yang et al. (2024) does not require an absolute objective value; instead, it uses the
relative reward on a pair of samples by integrating DPO (Direct Preference Optimization) (Rafailov
et al., 2024), a technique for fine-tuning large language models, into the diffusion model.
Fine-tuning the diffusion model requires a large amount of GPU memory. Existing work mitigates
memory consumption by using the LoRA technique (Low-Rank Adaptation) (Hu et al., 2021) and
only fine-tunes parameters of the attention blocks in UNet. We categorize the related works based
on whether they support the online and black-box objective tasks in Appendix F Table 2.


3     M ETHODS

In this section, we first present a novel inference-time guidance generation method by guided noise
sequence optimization. Based on this method, we further present our query-efficient online black-
box guidance algorithm, Fast Direct, to address online black-box guidance tasks.

3.1   N OISE S EQUENCE O PTIMIZATION WITH TARGET G UIDANCE

Take i.i.d. Gaussian samples {ϵ0 , · · · , ϵK } ∼ N (0, I), for k ∈ {1, · · · , K}, the inference process
of the diffusion model can be formulated as follows:
                                         xk = Sθ (xk−1 , ϵk ),                                       (1)


                                                   3
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Algorithm 1: Guided Noise Sequence Optimization
  Input: Stepsize α, target data x∗ , number of diffusion sampling steps K, pre-trained diffusion
          sampler Sθ , number of iterations T .
  Output: Generated target xK .
1 Take i.i.d. noise {ϵ0 , · · · , ϵK } ∼ N (0, I)
                                    norm
2 Compute the norm of noise ϵk           = ∥ϵk ∥ for k ∈ {0, · · · , K}.
3 for t ← 1 to T do
4     x 0 ← ϵ0
5     for k ← 1 to K do
6         xk ← Sθ (xk−1 , ϵk )
7     for k ← 0 to K do
8         ϵ̂k ← ϵk + α(x∗ − xK )
9         ϵk ← ∥ϵ̂ϵ̂kk ∥ ϵnorm
                          k


  Line 4 - Line 6: Call diffusion-model sampler to generate data xK .
  Line 7 - Line 9: Update the noise ϵk by moving along direction x∗ − xK .


  Figure 1: Demonstration of guided generation for a given target by Algorithm 1. Column 2 (Update
  Direction) indicates the update term of Algorithm 1, Line 8. Rows 1 to 3 analyze how different
  update directions can affect the generated images. Rows 4 and 5 show that by using the update
  direction of x∗ − xK , the diffusion model can generate visually satisfying images even when the
  target image is noisy. The noisy target image (x∗ ) of the row 4 is obtained by clean image added
  with noise N (0, I), and row 5 is added with noise N (0, 9 × I).


  where Sθ (·, ·) denotes the diffusion model sampler that depends on the concrete SDE solver used,
  x0 = ϵ0 is a Gaussian sample, and xK denotes the generated data.
  Question 1: Given an input target x∗ , can we guide a pre-trained diffusion model at inference time
  to generate the target data efficiently and robustly?
  To answer this question, we need to develop an algorithm to address two challenges simultaneously:
  (1) Guidance Efficiency: the algorithm can generate the target data x∗ by using only a few guidance
  update steps. (2) Robust to noisy target: given a noisy target (e.g., a noise-perturbed image), the
  algorithm can generate meaningful target data (e.g., a clear image).
  We propose a novel guided noise sequence optimization method to address the above two challenges,
  which is presented in Algorithm 1. Our method optimizes the noise sequence by updating the noise
  along the direction on the data manifold. Specifically, Algorithm 1 consists of two procedures: a
  data generation procedure and a noise update procedure. In the data generation procedure, Line 4 -
  Line 6 in Algorithm 1 employ current noise sequence {ϵ0 , · · · , ϵK } to generate a data xK . In the
  noise update procedure, Lines 7 - 9 in Algorithm 1, we update each noise ϵk by moving along a
  universal direction x∗ − xK . Then, Algorithm 1 continues to employ the updated noise to generate
  a new data xK . By looping the data generation procedure and noise update procedure, Algorithm 1
  can generate a clear and meaningful target.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The direction x∗ − xK point from the current generation data xK to the target x∗ . Intuitively,
moving in this direction will shift the diffusion sampling trajectory toward the target. We highlight
the advantage of updating noise with the universal direction x∗ − xK compared with direction
x∗ − xk as the following remark.
Remark: In our Algorithm 1, we guided the noise update by moving along a universal direction
x∗ − xK . This direction lies in the data manifold, which alleviates the quality degeneration of the
generated data. We employ the direction x∗ − xK instead of the direction x∗ − xk because the
internal xk during inference sampling process may be far away from the data manifold (e.g., the xk
can be a very noisy and distorted image), which may degenerate the quality.
We empirically evaluate Algorithm 1 with different update directions: d⃗ = x∗ − xK and d⃗ =
x∗ − xk . Additionally, we consider the approximation xK ≈ x̂k 1 . Lastly, we set the noisy target
to test the robustness. We use the stable-diffusion model as the pre-trained model. The stepsize α is
set to α = 2 × 10−3 . We present the generated images every 10 iterations for each case in Figure 1.
From Figure 1, we can observe that Algorithm 1 (with update direction x∗ − xK ) can successfully
guide the diffusion process towards the target image, while x∗ − xk leads to a degenerated image.
The approximation x∗ − x̂K can achieve comparable target image but not as accurate as x∗ − xK .
Interestingly, even the input target x∗ is perturbed by noise and lies out of the data manifold, Algo-
rithm 1 will generate a pseudo-data on data manifold that is similar to the noisy target x∗ but with
much higher quality compared with the input noisy target. This property is important for designing
black-box guidance methods because the update direction is an approximation or estimation of the
true gradient of the black-box objective.
Moreover, we present the updating direction x∗ − xK ′ for K ′ ∈ {K, K/2, K/4, K/8} in Ap-
pendix C. We observe that the generated image quality decreases as the xK ′ becomes noisier.

3.2   QUERY- EFFICIENT ONLINE BLACK - BOX GUIDANCE

In section 3.1, we address the diffusion guidance sampling with a given optimal target input. How-
ever, in reality, we often only have access to the black-box objective function f (x), where the
optimal target data x∗ = arg min f (x) is unknown. In this section, we further investigate the dif-
fusion guidance sampling with only black-box objective feedback. For this task, it is natural to ask
the following question.
Question 2: Can we guide a pre-trained diffusion model at inference time to generate target data
with only black-box objective feedback in a query-efficient online manner?
To answer this question, we need to address two challenges: (1) the Black-box challenge and (2) the
Online guidance challenge. The black-box challenge means that we cannot access the gradient of
the objective. The online guidance challenge means we don’t have a prior dataset to train a surrogate
(classifier) for guidance; we can only access the black-box objective through query feedback online.
Usually, the query evaluation is expensive. Thus, query efficiency is critical.
We start addressing the above two challenges based on our target guidance generation Algorithm 1.
Although Algorithm 1 itself cannot handle black-box guidance tasks because it needs input a target
x∗ , it provides a basis for us to design query-efficient online black-box guidance methods. To be
specific, Algorithm 1 enables us to generate a target even updating with a noisy direction x∗ − xK .
This property is important for black-box guidance tasks because we can use a noisy estimation of
the gradient of the black-box objective to guide the generation.
The key idea is to set a pseudo target x̂∗ to guide the generation process based on our Algorithm 1.
We present our Fast Direct method as in Algorithm 2. In Algorithm 2, we call Algorithm 1 inside
the for-loop w.r.t. the number of batch queries t. The only difference compared with Alg. 1 is that
we set a pseudo target x̂∗ in Line 10 of Algorithm 2 instead of a given fixed target x∗ .
The choice of models for updating the pseudo target x̂∗ in Algorithm 2 is flexible, which supports
various black-box target generation method designs based on our Fast Direct algorithm framework.
In this work, we set the pseudo target x̂∗ through nonparametric methods without additional training.

   1
     The x̂k is the ”predicted clean image” at step k, see the Eq.12 of DDIM (Song et al., 2020). Note that it is
undefined for the initial step, so we simply set x̂0 := x̂1 .

                                                       5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 2: Fast Direct
    Input: Max number of batch queries N , batch size B, step-size α, number of diffusion
            sampling steps K, pre-trained diffusion sampler Sθ .
    Output: Set of optimized samples {x1K , · · · , xB  K }, pseudo target model that learns from
              dataset D.
 1 Initialize D ← {}
 2 for i ← 1 to N do
 3      do parallel for B instances
 4          Take i.i.d. noise {ϵ0 , · · · , ϵK } ∼ N (0, I).
 5          Compute the norm of noise ϵnorm   k   = ∥ϵk ∥ for k ∈ {0, · · · , K}.
 6          for t ← 1 to i do
 7              x 0 ← ϵ0
 8              for k ← 1 to K do
  9                 xk ← Sθ (xk−1 , ϵk )
10              Set a pseudo target x̂∗ by the pseudo target model with input xK .
11              for k ← 0 to K do
12                  ϵ̂k ← ϵk + α(x̂∗ − xK )
13                  ϵk ← ∥ϵ̂ϵ̂kk ∥ ϵnorm
                                    k

14          Query black-box objective score y ← f (xK ).
15          Increment dataset D ← D ∪ {(xK , y)}.
16       Update pseudo target model with dataset D.

     Specifically, we employ two methods for setting the pseudo target x̂∗ , namely, Gaussian process
     (GP) update and historical optimal update.
     Set pseudo target x̂∗ by GP update: For the GP update case, we set the pseudo target x̂∗ as the one
     gradient step update using the gradient of the posterior mean prediction of the GP surrogate model
     as follows:
                                         x̂∗ = xK − ∇fˆ(xK ; X n )                                    (2)
     where xK denotes the generated data in Algorithm 2 and fˆ(xK ; X n ) denotes the posterior predic-
     tion of the GP surrogate model (Seeger, 2004) evaluated at xK , which has closed-form as below:
                                                                             −1
                           fˆ(xK ; X n ) = k(xK , X n )⊤ K(X n , X n ) + λI     y                   (3)
     where X n = [x1 , · · · , xn ] and y = [y 1 , · · · , y n ] denotes the collected data and its corresponding
     score value in the historical set D in Algorithm 2, respectively. When the historical set D is empty,
     we simply set the gradient ∇fˆ(xK ; ∅) = 0.
     In this work, we employ shift-invariant kernels that can be rewritten in the form as k(z1 , z2 ) =
     g(∥z1 − z2 ∥2 ), e.g., Gaussian kernel and Matérn kernel. We show that the gradient of the GP
     surrogate when employing these shift-invariant kernels lies on the low-dimensional data manifold.
     We present this property in Proposition 1. Detailed proof of Proposition 1 can be found in Ap-
     pendix E. This property enables us to generate meaningful data on the data manifold instead of
     degenerated data, which is important for high-dimensional diffusion-model target generation prob-
     lems, e.g., high-resolution (1024 × 1024) target image generation tasks.
     Proposition 1. Given prior data X n = [x1 , · · · , xn ] and its corresponding score y = [y 1 , · · · , y n ],
     let fˆ(x; X n ) denotes the posterior mean of the GP model. For shift-invariant kernels k(z1 , z2 ) =
     g(∥z1 − z2 ∥2 ), ∇fˆ(x; X n ) lies on a subspace spanned by [x, x1 , · · · , xn ], where xi denotes the
     ith data sample in X n .
     Remark: When setting the pseudo target x̂∗ as Eq.(2), we know the pseudo target x̂∗ lies on
     the low-dimensional subspace spanned by data according to Proposition 1. Usually, the gradient
     descent update in Eq.(2) will lead to a new pseudo target x̂∗ with a lower score. In addition, based
     on the empirical observation from Algorithm 1, we know that even the pseudo target x̂∗ is noisy,
     Algorithm 1 can still generate similar data that is meaningful and lies on the data manifold. These
     two properties enable Algorithm 2 to generate data with lower and lower scores along the data
     manifold.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Set pseudo target x̂∗ by historical optimal update: For the historical optimal update case, we set
pseudo target x̂∗ as the empirical optimal point from the historical dataset D in Algorithm 2 as:
                                         x̂∗ = arg min f (x).                                       (4)
                                                 x∈D

Set pseudo target x̂∗ as Eq.(4) is an empirical approximation of the optimal target x∗ =
arg minx∈X f (x). In Algorithm 2, at each iteration w.r.t. the batch query i, we employ the gener-
ated data that achieves the current best score as the pseudo target x̂∗ to guide the generation process.
Intuitively, given this pseudo target x̂∗ , Algorithm 2 will generate a batch of data that is similar to
x̂∗ on the low-dimensional data manifold, which is promising to further improve the score. By iter-
atively repeating this procedure, the generated data progressively achieves lower objective scores.

4       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our algorithm in two domains, images and molecules, and compare it
against four baseline methods: DDPO (Black et al., 2023), DPOK (Fan et al., 2024), D3PO (Yang
et al., 2024), and DNO (Tang et al., 2024). Moreover, we further evaluate our algorithm in com-
pressibility, incompressibility, and aesthetic quality tasks in Appendix A.

4.1      I MAGE B LACK - BOX TARGET G ENERATION TASK

Problem: Prompt Alignment. We consider the image-prompt alignment problem. While the
current state-of-the-art image generative models excel at generating highly realistic images, they
sometimes struggle to faithfully generate images that are accurately aligned with the input prompts,
especially those complex prompts involving rare object combinations, object counting, or specific
object positioning.
Pre-trained Model: SDXL-Lightning. We use the SDXL (Podell et al., 2023) diffusion model as
the backbone text-to-image model. It can generate a 1024×1024 high-resolution realistic image.
In our experiment, we use the distilled version, SDXL-Lightning (Lin et al., 2024), for its high
sampling efficiency, which can generate images with comparable quality with just K = 8 steps. We
use the official implementation 2
Objective Function: Gemini 1.5. We leverage Gemini 1.5 (Reid et al., 2024), an advanced multi-
modal LLM service, as our black-box objective function to evaluate the alignment between input
prompts and generated images. To avoid confusion, the term query refers to the input to Gemini,
while prompt refers to the text used for image generation.
The query to Gemini 1.5 consists of the generated images with the question like: ”Does the prompt
$prompt accurately describe the image? Rate from 1 to 5”. We state the complete query in
Appendix G.
Because it is a closed-source paid service, we limit the number of batch queries in our ex-
periments, referred to as the batch query budget. We use the Gemini 1.5 Flash model (code:
gemini-1.5-flash-001) for its cost-efficiency, and set the temperature to 0 for experiment
consistency and reproducibility. For conciseness, we call it simply Gemini in the following section.
Experiment Procedure. We identify 12 prompts that the pre-trained model SDXL-Lighning strug-
gles to generate, and refer to these as the 12 tasks in our experiment, where the goal is to generate
images that are accurately aligned with the input prompts. We compare our Fast Direct algorithm
against each baseline method, and each experiment is constrained with a 50 batch query budget.
We perform inference-time guidance using Fast Direct (Algorithm 2) to maximize the Gemini rating.
We use the GP model in Eq. 2 for the pseudo-target, and set √the kernel as a Gaussian kernel, and we
follow (Hvarfner et al., 2024) to set the lengthscale as λ = d, where d = 4×128×128 is the latent
dimensionality of SDXL. We use N = 50 iterations to utilize the 50 batch query budget, and set the
batch size as B = 32 and step size as α = 80. We use the EularDescreteScheduler (Karras
et al., 2022) sampler as suggested by the SDXL-Lightning implementation (Lin et al., 2024), and the
DDIMScheduler (Song et al., 2020) (DDIM) sampler for a fair comparison with the baselines.
    2
        https://huggingface.co/ByteDance/SDXL-Lightning


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For all baseline methods, we perform 50 iterations, each iteration utilizes one batch query for updat-
ing. We set the batch size to 32, and leave the rest of the hyperparameters as default. We state more
details for baselines in the Appendix D. Note that for DNO, in which each experiment trial can only
produce one image, we run 16 independent experiment trials and report the average results3 .
Experiment Results. We present the results for the ”deer-elephant” 4 task in this section and defer
the results for the other 11 tasks to Appendix J due to space constraints. We compare the images
generated by our method with those generated by the baseline methods at each 10 batch query
intervals in Fig. 2. We can observe that our algorithm successfully satisfies the visual objectives
for both samplers within the 50 batch query budget, while the baseline methods fall short within
the same budget. Similar phenomena are observed for the other 11 tasks in Appendix J. We grant
baseline methods with extra batch query budget, and we observed that DDPO and DPOK almost
achieve the visual objectives, whereas D3PO and DNO remain unsuccessful in this particular task.
We collect the 32 randomly generated images using our algorithm (by utilizing a 50 batch query bud-
get) and present them in Fig. 3. We can observe that most images well satisfy the visual objective.
Similar phenomena are observed on the other 11 tasks as shown in Appendix J.


Figure 2: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”deer-eleplant” 4 ,
extra batch query budget (until 500) is given to the baseline methods for demonstration.

For the quantitative results, we report the average objective values over each batch query across
the 12 tasks in Fig. 4. For DNO, which only produces one image each experiment, we average the
results from 16 independent experiments. We observe that the Fast Direct achieves nearly a full score
within the 50 batch query budget in all tasks, which is significantly higher than the baseline methods.
Moreover, we observe that Fast Direct achieve a similar score for both samplers, suggesting it is
invariant to the sampler. We further perform an ablation study in Appendix B, and show that Fast
Direct is insensitive to the hyper-parameters: step size α and batch size B.
We further employ tasks 1 to 3 and assign an extra batch query budget of 200 to the baseline methods.
We report the accumulated objective values, which represent the best objective values achieved up
to each number of batch queries, in Appendix Fig. 11. We observe that our algorithm, utilizing only
50 batch query budget, consistently outperforms all baseline methods even when they are assigned
with expanded batch query budget of 200.
To quantify this advantage, in Table 1, we identify the minimum number of batch query budget
(denoted as N ∗ ) our algorithm requires to surpass each baseline method with their 200 batch query
   3
       Note that DNO spent 16 × 50 = 800 batch queries for each task.
   4
       The complete prompt is: A yellow reindeer and a blue elephant.

                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”deer-eleplant” 4 guided by Fast Direct
(w/ EDM) by utilizing 50 batch query budget.


Figure 4: The average Gemini rating (from 1 to 5, higher is better) of the generated images over
each number of batch queries on the 12 different tasks (the prompts abbreviation shown in bracket,
see the complete prompts in Appendix 3).
budget. We further calculate ours batch-query-efficiency gain compared to baselines as 200N ∗ and
report (in the bracket) in Table 1. We can observe that our algorithm is at least 667% and up to
1000% more batch-query-efficient than the baseline methods.

4.2   M OLECULE B LACK - BOX TARGET G ENERATION TASK

Problem: Drug Discovery. We consider the drug discovery problem. One of the key problems is to
find drug molecules that have a strong binding affinity with the target protein receptor. The binding
affinity quantifies the strength of the interaction between two biomolecules, so a stronger binding
affinity indicates a higher drug efficacy.
A traditional approach to this problem requires human-designed molecules, which are highly time-
consuming. Recent advancements in AI pose a great potential to speed up this process by generating
molecules using advanced generative models such as diffusion models. Although the current pre-
trained molecule models, such as TargetDiff, are capable of generating relatively realistic molecules,
they cannot generate molecules with the user’s desired high binding affinity.
Pre-trained Model: TargetDiff. We use TargetDiff (Guan et al., 2023) as the backbone molecules
generative model. It is pre-trained on the CrossDocked2020 dataset (Francoeur et al., 2020), and
can generate realistic 3D molecular structures conditioned on the given protein receptor. For sam-


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The minimum number of batch query budget (denoted as N ∗ ) for Fast Direct (ours) to
outperform each baseline (when each baseline is granted with 200 batch query budget) on images
and molecules tasks. The values in brackets show the batch-query-efficiency gain ( 200
                                                                                   N ∗ ) of Fast
Direct (ours) over the baselines.
                                          Minimum number of batch queries (N ∗ ) for
                                           Fast Direct to outperform each baselines:
                                            DDPO            DPOK           D3PO
                       Image Tasks
                       Task 1             15 (13.34×)    15 (13.34×)    10 (20.00×)
                       Task 2             8 (25.00×)      8 (25.00×)     4 (50.00×)
                       Task 3             37 (5.41×)      46 (4.34×)    16 (12.50×)
                       Average            20 (10.00×)    23 (8.70 ×)     30 (6.67×)
                       Molecules Tasks
                       Task 1              6 (33.33×)     5 (40.00×)     25 (8.00×)
                       Task 2              9 (22.22×)     4 (50.00×)    11 (18.18×)
                       Average            7.5 (26.67×)   4.5 (44.44×)   18 (11.11×)
pling efficiency, we use the DDIMScheduler sampler with K = 200 sampling steps as we find
that it can generate comparable results. During the generation process, we fix the atom type ac-
cording to the dataset reference and only allow the atom position to be varied. We use the official
implementation 5 in our experiment.
Objective Function: Molecules Binding Affinity. Measurement of the binding affinity requires
a real-world experiment, which is highly expensive (David et al., 2020). In our experiment, we
leverage the Vina score (kcal/mol) calculated by the AutoDock Vina simulation software (Eberhardt
et al., 2021) to estimate the binding affinity. A lower (more negative) Vina score indicates a stronger
estimated binding affinity. Therefore, our objective is to minimize the Vina score.
Experiment Procedure. We conduct experiments on 6 tasks, where the goal of each task is to
optimize the Vina score on the protein receptors of ID from 1 to 6, respectively. Similar to image
tasks, each algorithm is constrained to 50 batch query budget.
We perform inference-time guidance using our Algorithm 2 to minimize the Vina score. We use the
historical optimal in Eq. 4 for the pseudo-target. We use N = 50 iterations to utilize the 50 batch
query budget, and set the batch size as B = 32, and the step size as α = 10−2 . We then conduct
experiments on the baseline methods for 50 fine-tuning iterations. For DDPO and DPOK, the batch
size is set as the same 32; while D3PO requires binary rewards, so we double the batch size as 64 6 .
We keep the hyperparameters as default for all baseline methods.
Experiment Results. We report the average Vina score (recall, lower is better) for each batch of
queries across 6 tasks in Fig. 10. We observe that our algorithm consistently achieves much lower
Vina score compared to the baseline methods across all tasks. Similar to the images task, we grant
extra batch query budget of 200 to the baselines for tasks 1 and 2, and report the accumulated
objective values in Appendix Fig 12, and list the batch-query-efficiency gain in Table 1. We observe
that our algorithm is at least 1111% and up to 4444% more batch-query-efficient compared to the
baseline methods.

5       C ONCLUSION

In this work, we proposed Fast Direct for diffusion model target generation, which effectively
addresses the challenges of limited batch query budgets and black-box objective functions, demon-
strating its potential for various applications, including image generation and drug discovery. Fast
Direct is highly practical, as it is easy to implement, supports any type of SDE solver, and has only
one hyper-parameter to tune (step size α). Our algorithm is based on the surprising empirical ob-
servation that the universal update direction (i.e., x∗ − xK in Algorithm 1) can efficiently guide
the diffusion trajectory toward the target, even when the target x∗ is extremely noisy. This phe-
nomenon suggests an intriguing robustness in the diffusion inference process. Future research could
investigate its underlying theoretical principles.
    5
    https://github.com/guanjq/targetdiff
    6
    However, unlike image tasks where Gemini can evaluate rewards for two images in a single query, the Vina
simulation lacks this capability, requiring 64 individual queries for a batch of size 64.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm Media
Development Authority under its Trust Tech Funding Initiative, the Center for Frontier Artificial
Intelligence Research Center, Institute of High Performance Computing, A*Star, and the College of
Computing and Data Science at Nanyang Technological University. Any opinions, findings and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect
the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm Media Development Author-
ity. Yueming Lyu is supported by Career Development Fund (CDF) of the Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR) (No: C243512014 and No: C233312007).

R EFERENCES
Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 843–852, 2023.

Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion
  models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.

Minshuo Chen, Song Mei, Jianqing Fan, and Mengdi Wang. An overview of diffusion models: Ap-
 plications, guided generation, statistical rates and optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07771,
 2024.

Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion
  posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14687, 2022.

Kevin Clark, Paul Vicol, Kevin Swersky, and David J Fleet. Directly fine-tuning diffusion models
  on differentiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17400, 2023.

Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Dif-
  fusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01776, 2022.

Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models
  in vision: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(9):
  10850–10869, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3261988.

Laurianne David, Amol Thakkar, Rocı́o Mercado, and Ola Engkvist. Molecular representations in
  ai-driven drug discovery: a review and practical guide. Journal of Cheminformatics, 12(1):56,
  2020.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Jerome Eberhardt, Diogo Santos-Martins, Andreas F Tillack, and Stefano Forli. Autodock vina
   1.2. 0: New docking methods, expanded force field, and python bindings. Journal of chemical
   information and modeling, 61(8):3891–3898, 2021.

Luca Eyring, Shyamgopal Karthik, Karsten Roth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Zeynep Akata. Reno:
  Enhancing one-step text-to-image models through reward-based noise optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.04312, 2024.

Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Reinforcement learning for fine-
  tuning text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024.

Paul G Francoeur, Tomohide Masuda, Jocelyn Sunseri, Andrew Jia, Richard B Iovanisci, Ian Snyder,
  and David R Koes. Three-dimensional convolutional neural networks and a cross-docked data set
  for structure-based drug design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 60(9):4200–
  4215, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Giorgio Giannone, Akash Srivastava, Ole Winther, and Faez Ahmed. Aligning optimization trajec-
  tories with diffusion models for constrained design generation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:51830–51861, 2023.
Jiaqi Guan, Wesley Wei Qian, Xingang Peng, Yufeng Su, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. 3d equiv-
   ariant diffusion for target-aware molecule generation and affinity prediction. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.03543, 2023.
Yutong He, Naoki Murata, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Yuhta Takida, Toshimitsu Uesaka, Dongjun Kim, Wei-
  Hsiang Liao, Yuki Mitsufuji, J Zico Kolter, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Manifold preserving
  guided diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16424, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–
  8646, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Carl Hvarfner, Erik Orm Hellsten, and Luigi Nardi. Vanilla bayesian optimization performs great in
  high dimension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02229, 2024.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-
  based generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:26565–26577,
  2022.
Korrawe Karunratanakul, Konpat Preechakul, Emre Aksan, Thabo Beeler, Supasorn Suwajanakorn,
  and Siyu Tang. Optimizing diffusion noise can serve as universal motion priors. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1334–1345, 2024.
Siddarth Krishnamoorthy, Satvik Mehul Mashkaria, and Aditya Grover. Diffusion models for black-
  box optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07180, 2023.
Xiner Li, Yulai Zhao, Chenyu Wang, Gabriele Scalia, Gokcen Eraslan, Surag Nair, Tommaso Bian-
  calani, Aviv Regev, Sergey Levine, and Masatoshi Uehara. Derivative-free guidance in continuous
  and discrete diffusion models with soft value-based decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08252,
  2024.
Shanchuan Lin, Anran Wang, and Xiao Yang. Sdxl-lightning: Progressive adversarial diffusion
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13929, 2024.
Cheng Lu, Huayu Chen, Jianfei Chen, Hang Su, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Contrastive energy
  prediction for exact energy-guided diffusion sampling in offline reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22825–22855. PMLR, 2023.
Yueming Lyu, Kim Yong Tan, Yew Soon Ong, and Ivor W Tsang. Covariance-adaptive sequential
  black-box optimization for diffusion targeted generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00812, 2024.
Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions.
  Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 17(2):527–566, 2017.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Mihir Prabhudesai, Anirudh Goyal, Deepak Pathak, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Aligning text-to-
 image diffusion models with reward backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03739, 2023.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-
 baptiste Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gem-
 ini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
John Schulman, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft q-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017.
Matthias Seeger. Gaussian processes for machine learning. International journal of neural systems,
 14(02):69–106, 2004.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Hongxu Yin, Morteza Mardani, Ming-Yu Liu, Jan Kautz, Yongxin
   Chen, and Arash Vahdat. Loss-guided diffusion models for plug-and-play controllable generation.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 32483–32498. PMLR, 2023.
Zhiwei Tang, Jiangweizhi Peng, Jiasheng Tang, Mingyi Hong, Fan Wang, and Tsung-Hui Chang.
  Tuning-free alignment of diffusion models with direct noise optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.18881, 2024.
Masatoshi Uehara, Yulai Zhao, Tommaso Biancalani, and Sergey Levine. Understanding rein-
 forcement learning-based fine-tuning of diffusion models: A tutorial and review. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2407.13734, 2024.
Nikolaos N Vlassis and WaiChing Sun. Denoising diffusion algorithm for inverse design of mi-
  crostructures with fine-tuned nonlinear material properties. Computer Methods in Applied Me-
  chanics and Engineering, 413:116126, 2023.
Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purushwalkam,
  Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model alignment using
  direct preference optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8228–8238, 2024.
Kai Yang, Jian Tao, Jiafei Lyu, Chunjiang Ge, Jiaxin Chen, Weihan Shen, Xiaolong Zhu, and Xiu Li.
  Using human feedback to fine-tune diffusion models without any reward model. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8941–8951, 2024.
Hui Yuan, Kaixuan Huang, Chengzhuo Ni, Minshuo Chen, and Mengdi Wang. Reward-directed
  conditional diffusion: Provable distribution estimation and reward improvement. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    M ORE E XPERIMENTS : C OMPRESSIBILITY, I NCOMPRESSIBILITY, AND
     A ESTHETIC Q UALITY
Problem. We follow DDPO (Black et al., 2023) to evaluate our algorithm on the three black-box
optimization tasks for images: compressibility, incompressibility, and aesthetic quality.
Objective Function. For compressibility, we aimed to minimize the compressed JPEG size (MB)
of the generated images. For incompressibility, it’s simply the inverse. For aesthetic quality, the
aesthetic score is evaluated by the pre-trained LAION aesthetics predictor (?), which is trained on
human ratings of the images’ aesthetic quality, and we aimed to maximize the aesthetic score.
Experiment Procedure. For each task, we uniformly sample from the 45 common animals (as
proposed by DDPO (Black et al., 2023)) as input prompts and optimize the objective using Fast
Direct in Algorithm 2. The prompt for each instance within a batch is sampled randomly and
independently. We set N = 50 batch query budget for compressibility and incompressibility,
and N = 100 for aesthetic quality. We use the same pre-trained model, hyper-parameters, and
GP settings as in Section 4.1. The 45 common animal prompts used in the experiment are as follows:

      cat     dog      horse    monkey      rabbit     zebra     spider       bird        sheep
     deer     cow       goat      lion       tiger      bear    raccoon       fox          wolf
    lizard   beetle      ant    butterfly     fish     shark     whale      dolphin      squirrel
    mouse      rat     snake     turtle      frog     chicken     duck       goose         bee
      pig    turkey      fly     llama      camel       bat      gorilla   hedgehog     kangaroo

For DNO, each experimental trial generates only a single image, and the objective score is highly
dependent on the specific prompt. To ensure a more accurate evaluation, we run 45 independent
experiment trials using each prompt and report the average results. Consequently, DNO requires
45× more batch queries per task compared to other methods.
Experiment Result. We present the objective scores for each task in the left column of Fig. 5 and
provide the generated images for the three tasks in the supplementary materials. For compressibility
and incompressibility, we observe that Fast Direct achieves significantly better scores than the base-
lines. For aesthetic quality, Fast Direct with the EDM sampler achieves significantly better scores
than with DDIM, likely due to EDM being a more advanced sampler, capable of generating higher-
quality images. DNO achieves comparable scores; however, note that each experiment optimizes
and generates only a single image.
Generalization Ability. We follow DDPO to evaluate generalization ability. For Fast Direct, we
freeze the learned GP model to generate 16 unseen images using distinct unseen animal prompts.
Specifically, in this phase, Lines 17 and 18 are removed from Algorithm 2, and our algorithm does
not access the objective function. For DDPO, DPOK, and D3PO, the fine-tuned models are frozen
to generate images with the 16 unseen animal prompts. DNO is not applicable to the generalization
experiment, as it performs per-image optimization and lacks generalization ability. For the unseen
prompts, since DDPO didn’t publish the unseen prompts, we created our own as follows:

         elephant      eagle     pigeon     hippo     hamster     otter    panda    reindeer
            owl       penguin   flamingo     seal      koala     giraffe   parrot   cheetah

In Fig.6, we present the images generated using the unseen prompt ”hippo” by each algorithm across
the three tasks. The remaining 15 prompts for the three tasks are provided in the supplementary
material. A similar phenomenon is observed for all 15 other unseen prompts across the three tasks.
For quantitative evaluation, we report the objective values for the unseen prompts in the right column
of Fig.5. We can observe that Fast Direct with the GP model has generalization ability to unseen
prompts.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Left column: The average objective score of the generated images over each number of
batch queries on the 3 black-box optimization tasks, the images are generated using the 45 common
animals that were used in DDPO (Tang et al., 2024) as the input prompts. Right column: The
objective score of the images generated by unseen prompts, which demonstrates the generalization
capability. Note that DNO is not applicable to this task.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Compressibility


                                         (b) Incompressibility


                                         (c) Aesthetic Quality

Figure 6: The generated images using the unseen prompt ”hippo” in the aesthetic quality task, extra
batch query budgets (until 500) are given to the baseline methods for demonstration.

                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   (a) Pre-trained                               (b) Compressibility


                (c) Incompressibility                            (d) Aesthetic Quality

Figure 7: The generated images using the 16 unseen prompts. Top left is the image generated by the
pre-trained model, the rest are the Fast Direct generated images in the corresponding tasks.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B        A BLATION S TUDY
We perform an ablation study on the target image generation Task-1. For step size analysis, we fix
the batch size as 32, then perform experiment with different step size α = {20, 40, 80, 160, 320};
for batch size analysis, we fix the step size as 80, then perform experiment with different batch size
B = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. Additionally, we report the run time for different batch sizes. We report the
result in Fig. 8.
We can observe that the performance steadily increases for any step size and any batch size, which
suggests that our algorithm is not sensitive to the hyperparameter settings. The run time scales
linearly with the batch size. In our target image generation experiments in Section 4.1, as the batch
size is set as 32, each experiment takes approximately 6.4 hours to process 32 images in parallel.


Figure 8: Left: Gemini rating for different step size settings. Middle: Gemini rating for different
batch size settings. Right: Run time (hours) for different batch size settings.


C        A NALYSIS OF U NIVERSAL D IRECTION
In Fig. 9, we demonstrate Algorithm 1 with update direction d⃗ = x∗ − xK ′ for K ′ ∈
{K, K/2, K/4, K/8}. It shows that the generated image quality decreases as the K ′ decreases.
This is because as K ′ decreases, the xK ′ becomes noisier and may move further away from the data
manifold.


Figure 9: The update direction d⃗ = x∗ − xK ′ for K ′ ∈ {K, K/2, K/4, K/8}, the generated images
quality decrease as the xK ′ being more more noisy.


D        BASELINES D ETAILS
For DDPO, DPOK, and D3PO, we fine-tune the model to maximize the Gemini rating. We fine-tune
the model with 50 epochs; each epoch utilizes one batch query for model updating. For DDPO
and DPOK, we set the batch size to 32; for D3PO, it requires a relative reward, so we doubled
the batch size to 64.7 As these RL-based methods require closed-form expression of the logarithm
probabilities, we follow their official implementation to use the DDIMScheduler (Song et al.,
2020) sampler.
    7
        For D3PO, to evaluate 64 images only requires 32 queries calls, see Appendix G.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For DNO, we optimize the noise sequence w.r.t the Gemini rating. Recall that the Gemini is a black-
box, so we use the non-differentiable mode, with the number of samples for gradient approximation
set as 32, and optimize for 50 iterations; each iteration utilizes one batch query for updating. How-
ever, each experiment of DNO only produces one image, where the score is highly dependent on the
initial prior. Thus, for a more accurate evaluation, we run 16 independent experiments to generate
16 images and report the average results. Note that this requires 16 × 50 = 800 batch queries for
each task, which is 16 times compared with our Fast Direct and other baselines.

E    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                                         −1
Proof. Let α = K(X n , X n ) + λI           y = [α1 , · · · , αn ]⊤ , for GP with a shift-invariant kernel
that can be rewritten as k(z1 , z2 ) = g(∥z1 − z2 ∥2 ), the gradient of the GP prediction is
                        ∇fˆ(x; X n ) = ∇k(x, X n )⊤ α                                                  (5)
                                           n
                                           X
                                       =         αi ∇k(x, xi )                                        (6)
                                           i=1
                                            n
                                           X      αi
                                       =               i∥
                                                          g ′ (∥x − xi ∥2 )(x − xi )                  (7)
                                           i=1
                                               ∥x −  x
                                           n
                                           X
                                       =         ci (x)(x − xi )                                      (8)
                                           i=1
                                                                          αi      ′
where xi denotes the ith sample in X = [x1 , · · · , xn ], and ci (x) = ∥x−x
                                           n                                              i
                                                                             i ∥ g (∥x − x ∥2 ), and

g ′ (·) denotes the derivative of g(·).
From Eq.(8), we can see that the gradient ∇fˆ(x; X n ) is a weighted sum of x − xi for i ∈
{1, · · · , n}. Thus, we know ∇fˆ(x; X n ) lies on a subspace spanned by [x, x1 , · · · , xn ]



F    OVERVIEW OF R ELATED W ORKS
We present the summary of related works according to their category and supported problem sce-
narios in Table 2.
                               Table 2: Overview of existing approaches.
              Algorithm Category   Algorithm                                    Online   Black-box
                                   DRaFT (Clark et al., 2023)                     ✓          ✗
              Training /
                                   DDOM (Krishnamoorthy et al., 2023),
              Fine-tune
                                   RCGDM (Yuan et al., 2024),                     ✗         ✓
                                   DPO (Wallace et al., 2024)
                                   DDPO (Black et al., 2023),
                                   DPOK (Fan et al., 2024),                       ✓         ✓
                                   D3PO (Yang et al., 2024)
                                   LGD (Song et al., 2023),
                                   MPGD (He et al., 2023),
                                                                                  ✓         ✗
              Inference-time       DNO (2024a) (Karunratanakul et al., 2024),
              Guidance             ReNO (Eyring et al., 2024)
                                   CEP (Lu et al., 2023)                          ✗         ✓
                                   DNO (Tang et al., 2024),
                                   CASBO (Lyu et al., 2024),                      ✓         ✓
                                   Fast Direct (ours)



G    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We use the following query question for the Gemini:
         Does the prompt $prompt accurately describe the image?
         Rate from 1 (inaccurate) to 5 (accurate).
         Answer in the format: Score=(score), Reason=(reason).


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the $prompt is substituted by the input prompt used for image generation. We extract the
integer score as the objective value.
The D3PO takes relative reward, so we specially crafted for its selective query question:

         Given this two images, which image is better aligned with
         the prompt $prompt?
         Answer in the format: Choice=(1/2), Reason=(reason).

where we extract the choice (1/2) as the selections.
The Gemini 1.5 Flash can faithfully respond with the correct format to ensure our experiment is
consistent.

H    M OLECULES G ENERATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
We report the average Vina score in the molecules generation task in Fig. 10.


Figure 10: The Vina score (lower is better) of the generated molecules for each number of batch
queries on the six protein receptors.


I   M ORE E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
We report the accumulated objective values over the number of batch queries for the images task in
Fig. 11, and for the molecules task in Fig. 12.

J   M ORE G ENERATED I MAGES BY FAST D IRECT FOR I MAGE -P ROMPT
    A LIGNMENT TASK
Table 3 shows the list the complete prompts used for each task in our image generation experiment.
From Fig. 13 to Fig. 23, we present the generated images of each algorithm over each number of
batch queries for prompts 2 to 12. From Fig. 24 to Fig. 34, we showcase the 32 randomly generated
by the pre-trained model, followed by the resultant images guided by the Fast Direct for prompts 2
to 12.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: The accumulated Gemini rating (from 1 to 5, higher is better) over the number of batch
queries. The accumulated plot displays the maximum Gemini rating achieved for each number of
batch queries.


Figure 12: The accumulated Vina score (lower is better) over the number of batch queries. The
accumulated plot displays the minimum Vina score achieved up to each number of batch queries.


                            Table 3: Target Image Generation Tasks

 Task ID    Abbreviated Prompt     Complete Prompt
 1          deer-elephant          A yellow reindeer and a blue elephant.
 2          traffic-light          A traffic light with yellow at top, green at middle, and red at bot-
                                   tom.
 3          apple                  Seven red apples arranged in a circle.
 4          cyber-dog              A natural fluffy dog talking to a cybertic dog.
 5          puppy-nose             Side view of a puppy lying on floor, one butterfly stopping on its
                                   nose.
 6          robot-plant            A cute cybernetic robot plants a tree in the forest.
 7          ocean                  A helicopter floating under the ocean.
 8          sand-glass             A transparent glass filled with a mixture of water and sand, with
                                   one feather floating inside.
 9          penguin                A photo realistic photo showing a penguin standing on a very small
                                   floating ice, with a tree is on fire in the background.
 10         basket                 Exactly one orange in a basket of apples.
 11         ice-cube               A glass of water with exactly one ice cube.
 12         cat-butterfly          A cat with butterfly wings.



                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”traffic-light”,
extra batch query budgets (until 500) are given to the baseline methods for demonstration.


Figure 14: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”apple”, extra
batch query budgets (until 500) are given to the baseline methods for demonstration.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”cyber-dog” for
each algorithm.


Figure 16: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”puppy-nose”
for each algorithm.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 17: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”robot-plant” for
each algorithm.


Figure 18: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”ocean” for each
algorithm.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 19: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”sand-glass” for
each algorithm.


Figure 20: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”penguin” for
each algorithm.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 21: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”basket” for each
algorithm.


Figure 22: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”ice-cube” for
each algorithm.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 23: The generated images over each number of batch queries on the prompt ”cat-butterfly”
for each algorithm.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                           (b) Fast Direct

Figure 24: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”traffic-light” guided by Fast Direct
by utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 25: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”apple” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 26: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”cyber-dog” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 27: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”puppy-nose” guided by Fast Direct
by utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 28: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”robot-plant” guided by Fast Direct
by utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 29: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”ocean” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                           (b) Fast Direct

Figure 30: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”sand-glass” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 31: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”penguin” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 32: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”basket” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                          (b) Fast Direct

Figure 33: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”ice-cube” guided by Fast Direct by
utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          (a) Pre-trained


                                           (b) Fast Direct

Figure 34: The 32 randomly generated images for the prompt ”cat-butterfly” guided by Fast Direct
by utilizing 50 batch query budget.


                                               38
