Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A N O NLINE L EARNING T HEORY OF
T RADING -VOLUME M AXIMIZATION
 Tommaso Cesari                               Roberto Colomboni
 EECS                                         DEIB / Dept. of Computer Science
 University of Ottawa                         Politecnico di Milano / University of Milan
 Ottawa, Canada                               Milano, Italy
 tcesari@uottawa.ca                           robertocolomboni@polimi.it



                                             A BSTRACT

         We explore brokerage between traders in an online learning framework. At any
         round t, two traders meet to exchange an asset, provided the exchange is mutually
         beneficial. The broker proposes a trading price, and each trader tries to sell their
         asset or buy the asset from the other party, depending on whether the price is higher
         or lower than their private valuations. A trade happens if one trader is willing to
         sell and the other is willing to buy at the proposed price. Previous work provided
         guidance to a broker aiming at enhancing traders’ total earnings by maximizing the
         gain from trade, defined as the sum of the traders’ net utilities after each interaction.
         This classical notion of reward can be highly unfair to traders with small profit
         margins, and far from the real-life utility of the broker. For these reasons, we
         investigate how the broker should behave to maximize the trading volume, i.e., the
         total number of trades. We model the traders’ valuations as an i.i.d. process with an
         unknown distribution. If the traders’ valuations are revealed after each interaction
         (full-feedback), and the traders’ valuations cumulative distribution function (cdf)
         is continuous, we provide an algorithm achieving logarithmic regret and show its
         optimality up to constants. If only their willingness to sell or buy at the proposed
         price is revealed after each interaction (2-bit feedback), we provide an algorithm
         achieving poly-logarithmic regret when the traders’ valuations cdf is Lipschitz and
         show its near-optimality. We complement our results by analyzing the implications
         of dropping the regularity assumptions on the unknown traders’ valuations       √ cdf.
         If we drop the continuous cdf assumption, the regret rate degrades to Θ( T ) in
         the full-feedback case, where T is the time horizon. If we drop the Lipschitz cdf
         assumption, learning becomes impossible in the 2-bit feedback case.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In modern financial markets, Over-the-Counter (OTC) trading platforms have emerged as dynamic
and decentralized hubs, offering diverse alternatives to traditional exchanges. In recent years, these
markets have experienced remarkable growth, solidifying their central role in the global financial
ecosystem: OTC asset trading in the US surpassed 50 trillion USD in value in 2020 (Weill, 2020),
with an upward trend documented since 2016 (www.bis.org, 2022).
Brokers play a crucial role in OTC markets. Beyond acting as intermediaries between traders, they
utilize their understanding of the market to identify the optimal prices for assets. Additionally, traders
in these markets often respond to price changes: higher prices usually lead to selling, while lower
prices typically result in buying (Sherstyuk et al., 2020). This adaptability appears across various
asset classes, including stocks, derivatives, art, collectibles, precious metals and minerals, energy
commodities (like gas and oil), and digital currencies (cryptocurrencies) (Bolić et al., 2024).
Our study draws inspiration from recent research analyzing the bilateral trade problem from an online
learning perspective (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2021; Azar et al., 2022; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2023; 2024a;
Bolić et al., 2024; Bernasconi et al., 2024; Bachoc et al., 2024a;b). In particular, we build on insights
from Bolić et al. (2024), which addresses the brokerage problem in OTC markets where traders may
decide to buy or sell their assets depending on prevailing market conditions.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.1    M OTIVATIONS FOR C HOOSING T RADING VOLUME AS R EWARD

Previous works have entirely focused on scenarios where brokers aim at maximizing the so-called
cumulative gain from trade—the sum of the net utilities of the traders over the entire sequence of
interactions with the broker. This classical approach has the two following pitfalls.

Traders’ Perspective. Gain-from-trade maximization can cause unfairness in settings where the
majority of traders make a living off of small margins (e.g., in micro trading or high-frequency
trading), and only a handful of high-payoff trades have the potential to occur. In these cases, gain-
from-trade maximization can lead to sacrificing the majority of the population in favor of a small
minority of traders that are lucky enough to be paired with people that are willing to be greatly
underpaid for the good on sale. In contrast, trading-volume maximization gives the same dignity to
all traders, granting everybody the same opportunity to trade, independently of their buying power.
For a striking concrete example of this pitfall, see Section 3.

Broker’s Perspective. From the broker’s perspective, too, it might not be as beneficial to potentially
miss out on traders’ exchanges by maximizing the gain from trade, given that, typically, brokers only
earn when trades occur. For example, in settings where traders have to pay a small fee for each trade,
it is clear that the broker’s ultimate goal is to maximize trading volume. Another example where
maximizing trading volume is superior to maximizing the gain from trade is the one discussed in the
Trader’s Perspective paragraph (and Section 3). In this case, a gain-from-trade maximizing broker
would risk alienating the vast majority of the population which, realistically, would end up leaving a
broker that does not give them trading opportunities, consequently hurting the broker’s bottom line.
For these reasons, in this work, we aim at providing strategies that boost the trading volume by
maximizing the number of trades in the broker-traders interaction sequence.

1.2    S ETTING

In what follows, for any two real numbers a, b, we denote their minimum by a ∧ b and their maximum
by a ∨ b. We now describe the brokerage online learning protocol.
For any time t = 1, 2, . . .

       ● Two traders arrive with their private valuations V2t−1 and V2t
       ● The broker proposes a trading price Pt
       ● If the price Pt is between the lowest valuation V2t−1 ∧ V2t and the highest valuation V2t−1 ∨
         V2t —meaning the trader with the lower valuation is willing to sell at Pt and the trader with
         the higher valuation is willing to buy at Pt —the transaction occurs with the higher-valuation
         trader purchasing the asset from the lower-valuation trader at the price Pt
       ● The broker receives some feedback

As commonly assumed in the existing bilateral trade literature, we assume valuations and prices
belong to [0, 1]. While previous literature aims at maximizing the cumulative gain from trade—
defined as the sum of traders’ net utilities1 in the whole interaction sequence—our objective is to
maximize the number of trades. Formally, for any p, v1 , v2 ∈ [0, 1], our utility posting a price p when
the valuations of the traders are v1 and v2 is
                                  g(p, v1 , v2 ) ∶= I {v1 ∧ v2 ≤ p ≤ v1 ∨ v2 } .
The goal of the broker is to minimize the regret, defined, for any time horizon T ∈ N, as
                                                      T
                                  RT ∶= sup E [ ∑ (Gt (p) − Gt (Pt ))] ,
                                          p∈[0,1]    t=1

where Gt (q) ∶= g(q, V2t−1 , V2t ) for all q ∈ [0, 1] and t ∈ N, and the expectation is taken over the
randomness present in (Vt )t∈N and the (possible) randomness used by the broker’s algorithm to
generate the prices (Pt )t∈N .
   1
    Formally, for any p, v1 , v2 ∈ [0, 1], the gain from trade of a price p when the valuations of the traders are v1
and v2 is GFT(p, v1 , v2 ) ∶= (v1 ∨ v2 − v1 ∧ v2 ) I {v1 ∧ v2 ≤ p ≤ v1 ∨ v2 }.


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               M -Lipschitz                          Continuous          General
                                                                                        √
   Full                      Ω(ln T ) Thm 2                         O(ln T ) Thm 1    Θ( T ) Thm 5+6
   2-Bit       O(ln(M T ) ln T ), Ω(ln(M T )) Thm 3+4                Ω(T ) Thm 7             Ω(T )
                                                                           √
Table 1: Overview of all the regret regimes: ln T (cyan), ln(M T ) (green), T (yellow), and T (red), depending
on the feedback (full or 2-bit) and the assumption on the cdf (M -Lipschitz, continuous, or no assumptions).


As in Bolić et al. (2024), we assume that traders’ valuations V, V1 , V2 , . . . are generated i.i.d. from an
unknown distribution ν—a practical assumption for large and stable markets.2
Finally, we consider the following two different types of feedback commonly studied in the online
learning bilateral trade literature:

          • Full-feedback. At each round t, after having posted the price Pt , the broker has access to the
            traders’ valuations V2t−1 and V2t .
          • 2-bit feedback. At each round t, after having posted the price Pt , the broker has access to
            the indicator functions I{V2t−1 ≤ Pt } and I{V2t ≤ Pt }.

The full-feedback model draws its motivation from direct revelation mechanisms, where the traders
disclose their valuations V2t−1 and V2t before each round, but the mechanism has access to this
information only after having posted the current bid Pt (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2021; 2024a).
The 2-bit feedback model corresponds to posted price mechanisms, where the broker has access only
to the traders’ willingness to buy or sell at the proposed posted price, and the valuations V2t−1 and
V2t are never revealed.

1.3      OVERVIEW OF O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

In the full-feedback case, if the distribution ν of the traders’ valuations has a continuous cdf, we
design an algorithm (Algorithm 1) suffering O(ln T ) regret in the time horizon T (Theorem 1), and
we provide a matching lower bound (Theorem 2). We complement these         √ results by showing that
dropping the continuous cdf assumption leads to √ a worse regret rate of Ω( T ) (Theorem 5), and we
design an algorithm (Algorithm 3) achieving O( T ) regret (Theorem 6).
In the 2-bit feedback case, if the cdf of the traders’ valuations is M -Lipschitz, we design an algorithm
(Algorithm 2) achieving regret O(ln(M T ) ln T ) (Theorem 3) where T is the time horizon, and
provide a near-matching lower bound Ω(ln (M T )) (Theorem 4). We complement these results by
showing that the problem becomes unlearnable if we drop the Lipschitzness assumption (Theorem 7).
For a full summary of our results, see Table 1.

1.4      T ECHNIQUES AND C HALLENGES

Online learning with a continuous action domain and full-feedback is usually tackled by discretizing
the action domain and then playing an optimal expert algorithm on the discretization, or by directly
running exponential weights algorithms in the continuum (Maillard & Munos, 2010; Krichene et al.,
2015; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2024b). These approaches
                                                √      require that the (expected) reward function is
                                             ̃ T ). In contrast, our expected reward function is not
Lipschitz and lead to a regret rate of order O(
Lipschitz in general. To overcome this challenge, we leverage the specific structure of the problem
by proving Lemma 1, which enables us to design an algorithm that achieves an exponentially better
regret rate of O(ln T ) even when the underlying cdf—and hence the associated reward function—
is only continuous. Moreover, we establish a matching Ω(ln T ) lower bound that, surprisingly,
applies even when the reward function is Lipschitz, demonstrating that additional Lipschitz regularity
beyond continuity does not contribute to faster rates in this setting. This lower bound construction
is particularly challenging because the shape of the function p ↦ E[Gt (p)] can only be controlled
indirectly through the traders’ valuation distribution: to avoid exceedingly complex calculations,
   2
       For further discussion on this assumption, see Appendix B.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


extra care is required in selecting appropriate instances. Even then, we needed a subtle and somewhat
intricate Bayesian argument to obtain the lower bound.
In the 2-bit feedback model, we remark that the available feedback is enough to reconstruct bandit
feedback. Consequently, when the underlying cdf—and hence the expected reward function—is
M -Lipschitz, a viable approach is to discretize the action space [0, 1] with K uniformly spaced
points and run an optimal bandit algorithm
                                      √      on the discretization. This approach immediately yields
a regret rate of order O(M T /K + KT ). This bound leads to a regret of order O(M 1/3 T 2/3 )
by tuning K ∶= Θ(M 2/3 T 1/3 ) when M is known to the learner, or of order O(M T 2/3 ) by tuning
K ∶= Θ(T 2/3 ) when the learner does not possess this knowledge. In contrast, we exploit the extra
information provided by the 2-bit feedback and the intuition provided by Lemma 1 to devise a binary
search algorithm achieving the exponentially better rate of O(ln(M T ) ln T ), with the additional
feature of being oblivious to M . Our corresponding lower bound shows that this rate is optimal (up
to a ln T factor), demonstrating through an information-theoretic argument that some sort of binary
search is essentially a necessary step for optimal learning.


1.5   R ELATED W ORK

Bilateral trade was originally studied in a one-shot setting where a broker has to devise a mechanism
to make a buyer and a seller trade, and classical properties like incentive compatibility, individual
rationality, budget balance, and efficiency were investigated. Since the pioneering work of Myerson
and Satterthwaite and their celebrated impossibility result (Myerson & Satterthwaite, 1983), the
study of bilateral trade has grown significantly, particularly from a game-theoretic and approximation
perspective (McAfee, 2008; Colini-Baldeschi et al., 2016; 2017; Blumrosen & Mizrahi, 2016; Brustle
et al., 2017; Colini-Baldeschi et al., 2020; Babaioff et al., 2020; Dütting et al., 2021; Deng et al.,
2022; Kang et al., 2022; Fei, 2022; Archbold et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). For a comprehensive
overview, refer to Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024a).
In recent years, the focus has expanded to include online learning settings for bilateral trade. Given
their close relevance to our paper, we concentrate our discussion on these works.
In Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021); Azar et al. (2022); Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024a; 2023); Bernasconi et al.
(2024); Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024b), the authors examined bilateral trade problems where the reward
function is the gain from trade and each trader has a fixed role as either a seller or a buyer.
In Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021), the authors investigated a scenario where seller and buyer valuations
                                                                                                  √
                                                                                               ̃
                               √ In the full-feedback case, they achieved a regret bound of O( T ),
form two distinct i.i.d. sequences.
which was later refined
                  √       to O( T ) in Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024a). They also demonstrated a worst-
case regret of Ω( T ) even when sellers’ and buyers’ valuations are independent of each other and
their cdfs are Lipschitz. For the 2-bit feedback scenario under i.i.d. valuations, Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2021) proved that any algorithm must suffer linear regret, even under either the M -Lipschitz joint cdf
assumption or the traders’ valuation independence assumption. However, when both conditions are
simultaneously satisfied, they proposed an algorithm achieving a regret rate of O(M̃       T ), later
                                                                                        1/3 2/3

refined to O(M T ) in Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024a). Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021) also established
                 1/3 2/3

a worst-case regret lower bound of Ω(T 2/3 ) in this case, which, however, does not display any
dependence on M .
Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021; 2024a) also showed that the adversarial bilateral trade problem is un-
learnable even with full-feedback. To achieve learnability beyond the i.i.d. case, Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2023; 2024b) explored weakly budget-balanced mechanisms, allowing the broker to post differ-
ent selling and buying prices as long as the buyer pays more than what the seller receives. They
demonstrated that learning can be achieved using weakly budget-balanced mechanisms in the 2-bit
                                     ̃
feedback setting at a regret rate of O(M T 3/4 ) when the joint seller/buyer cdf may vary over time
but is M -Lipschitz. Furthermore, for the same setting, they provided a Ω(T 3/4 ) matching lower
bound in the time horizon, even when the process is required to be i.i.d., but their lower bound does
not feature any dependence on M . Azar et al. (2022) investigated
                                                          √          whether learning is possible in
                                                        ̃ T ) bounds for 2-regret in full-feedback,
the adversarial case by considering α-regret, achieving Θ(
       ̃ 3/4 ) upper bound in 2-bit feedback. Following another direction, Bernasconi et al. (2024)
and a O(T


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                  √
explored globally budget-balanced mechanisms in the adversarial case, showing a Θ( T ) regret rate
                       ̃ 3/4 ) rate in the 2-bit feedback case.
in full-feedback and a O(T
The closest to our work is Bolić et al. (2024), where the authors studied the same i.i.d. version of our
trading problem with flexible seller and buyer roles, but with the target reward function being the
gain from trade. Under the M -Lipschitz cdf assumption, they obtained tight Θ(M ln T ) regret in
the full-feedback case. Surprisingly, in the same full-feedback case, but using our different reward
function, we achieve a Θ(ln T ) regret rate even when the cdf is only continuous: in our case, the
additional Lipschitz regularity does not offer any speedup once the continuity assumption is fulfilled.
Furthermore,
   √           under the M -Lipschitz cdf assumption, Bolić et al. (2024) proved a sharp rate of
Θ( M T ) in the 2-bit feedback case. Interestingly, using our different reward function, we achieve
an exponentially faster upper bound of O(ln(M T ) ln T ), which is tight up to a ln T factor. If the
Lipschitz cdf assumption
                       √ is removed, the learning rate for both our problem and the one in Bolić et al.
(2024) degrades to Θ( T ) in the full-feedback case, and the problem becomes unlearnable in the
2-bit feedback case.

2    T HE M EDIAN L EMMA

In this section, we present the Median Lemma (Lemma 1), a simple but crucial result for what follows,
and the key upon which our main algorithms are based. At a high level, Lemma 1 states that a broker
who aims at maximizing the number of trades should post prices that are as close as possible to the
median of the (unknown) traders’ valuation distribution ν, and the instantaneous regret which the
broker incurs by playing any price is (proportional to) the square of the distance between the median
and the price, if distances are measured with respect to the pseudo-metric induced by the traders’
valuation cdf.
Lemma 1 (The median lemma). If the cdf F of ν is continuous, then, for any t ∈ N and any p ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                                      2
                                                          1                  1
           E[Gt (p)] = 2F (p)(1 − F (p))        and         − E[Gt (p)] = 2 ( − F (p)) .
                                                          2                  2
In particular, the function p ↦ E[Gt (p)] is maximized at any point m ∈ [0, 1] such that F (m) = 12 .

Before presenting the proof of Lemma 1, we just remark that points m ∈ [0, 1] satisfying F (m) = 1/2
do exist by the intermediate value theorem, because F (0) = 0, F (1) = 1, and F is continuous.

Proof. For each t ∈ N and each p ∈ [0, 1], we have that

        E[Gt (p)] = P[{V2t−1 ≤ p < V2t } ∪ {V2t ≤ p ≤ V2t−1 }]
                   = P[V2t−1 ≤ p]P[p < V2t ] + P[V2t ≤ p]P[p ≤ V2t−1 ] = 2F (p)(1 − F (p)) ,
where the second equality follows from additivity and independence, while in the last equality we
leveraged the continuity of F to obtain P[p ≤ V2t−1 ] = P[p < V2t−1 ] = 1 − F (p). To conclude, it is
                                                                                             2
enough to note that, for each p ∈ [0, 1] it holds that 1/4 − F (p)(1 − F (p)) = (1/2 − F (p)) .

3    T RADING VOLUME V S G AIN FROM T RADE

In this section, we leverage Lemma 1 to show with a formal example that, unlike trading-volume
maximizing brokers, gain-from-trade maximization brokers can be heavily biased towards small
segments of the population and, as a result, end up hurting their own bottom lines.
Assume that the distribution of the traders’ valuations V, V1 , V2 , . . . have common density f defined,
for all x ∈ [0, 1], by f (x) ∶= ( 1ε − 1)I{ 21 − ε ≤ x ≤ 12 } + I{1 − ε ≤ x ≤ 1}, for some ε ∈ (0, 21 ).
At a high level, this population of traders is clustered into two segments: a low-valuation cluster L
that believes that the good on sale has a value slightly smaller than 12 and a high-valuation cluster H
that believes the value is slightly smaller than 1. If ε ≈ 0, the overwhelming majority of the population
belongs to the low-valuation cluster L. In this case, we will prove that a gain-from-trade maximizing


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


broker would sacrifice the majority of the population to favor trades that include a trader coming
from the (extremely small) high-valuation cluster H.
Indeed, by Bolić et al. (2024), a gain-from-trade maximizing broker would post the expectation
E[V ] = 12 . In contrast, by Lemma 1, a trade-volume maximizing broker would post the median
m ∶= 12 − 2ε ⋅ 1−2ε
                1−ε
                    of V , which is a value roughly in the middle of the low-valuation cluster L.
By posting the expectation, the probability of having a trade is, for all t ∈ N, P[V2t−1 ∧ V2t ≤ 12 ≤
V2t−1 ∨ V2t ] = 2(1 − ε)ε, which is close to zero when ε ≈ 0.
In contrast, by posting the median, the probability of having a trade is, for all t ∈ N, P[V2t−1 ∧ V2t ≤
m ≤ V2t−1 ∨ V2t ] = 12 , which is always bounded away from zero, irrespectively of ε.
This shows two ways in which (unlike a trade-volume maximizing broker) a gain-from-trade max-
imizing broker is biased towards favoring the high valuation cluster H. First, they are willing to
accept that only a negligible fraction of the population will trade. Second, being E[V ] = 12 , they
only (with probability 1) allow trades where one of the two traders comes from the high-valuation
cluster H, resulting in only the high-valuation trader making a large profit, while the low valuation
trader is left with a profit of order ε ≈ 0, even in the low-probability event where they are given the
opportunity to trade. It is easy to imagine that, in real life, such a bias would cause the low-valuation
traders in L to leave the broker, in turn greatly reducing the broker’s own profit.
For further discussion on the trading-volume metric, see Appendix A.


4    F ULL -F EEDBACK

We now investigate how the broker should behave to maximize the number of trades in the full-
feedback case where after each interaction the traders’ valuations are disclosed. We begin by studying
the full-feedback case under the continuous cdf assumption. In this case, taking inspiration from
Lemma 1, a natural strategy is to play the empirical median, which leads to Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: Follow the Empirical Median (FEM)
Post P1 ∶= 1/2 and receive feedback V1 , V2 ;
for time t = 2, 3, . . . do
                                           (t−1)         (t)                (1)         (2(t−1))
    Post the empirical median Pt ∶= 21 (V2(t−1) + V2(t−1) ), where V2(t−1) , . . . , V2(t−1) are the
      order statistics of the observed sample V1 , . . . , V2(t−1) , and receive feedback V2t−1 , V2t ;


The next theorem leverages Lemma 1 to show that Algorithm 1 suffers regret O(ln T ) when the
traders’ valuation cdf is continuous.
Theorem 1. If ν has a continuous cdf F , the regret of FEM satisfies, for all time horizons T ∈ N,
                                            1 π
                                     RT ≤    + (1 + ln(T − 1)) .
                                            2 2

Proof. Without loss of generality, we can (and do!) assume that T ≥ 2. Then, we have
                             T               T                    T               2
                 1                                        1            1
          RT ≤     + max E [ ∑ Gt (p)] − E [ ∑ Gt (Pt )] = + 2 ⋅ ∑ E [( − F (Pt )) ]
                 2 p∈[0,1] t=2              t=2           2      t=2   2

Now, let m ∈ [0, 1] be such that F (m) = 1/2, and let V be a random variable whose distribution is ν,
independent of V1 , V2 , . . . . Then, for any t ∈ N such that t ≥ 2 we have
                   2
        1                                       2                            2
    E [( − F (Pt )) ] = E [(P[m ≤ V ≤ Pt ∣ Pt ]) ] + E [(P[Pt ≤ V ≤ m ∣ Pt ]) ] =∶ (I) + (II) .
        2


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, for the term (I), leveraging the fact that V and Pt are independent of each other, together with
the Minkowski’s integral inequality (see, e.g., (Stein, 1970, Appendix A.1)), we have:
√       √                                         √
                                         2                              2
  (I) = E [(E[I{m ≤ V ≤ Pt } ∣ Pt ]) ] ≤ E [ E [(I{m ≤ V ≤ Pt }) ∣ V ]]
           √                                    √                                    √
      = E [ P[m ≤ V ≤ Pt ∣ V ]] = ∫                 P[x ≤ Pt ] dPV (x) = ∫               P[x ≤ Pt ] dν(x) = (⋆)
                                        [m,1]                                [m,1]

For each x ∈ [0, 1] and for any s ∈ N, let Bs (x) ∶= I{x ≤ Vs }, and notice that B1 (x), B2 (x), . . . is
                                                                                    (1)          (2(t−1))
an i.i.d. sequence of Bernoulli random variables of parameter 1 − F (x). Let V2(t−1) , . . . , V2(t−1)
be the order statistics of the observed sample V1 , . . . , V2(t−1) . For any x ∈ [m, 1], observing that
                                                 (t)             2(t−1)
F (x) − 12 ≥ 0 and P[x ≤ Pt ] ≤ P [x ≤ V2(t−1) ] ≤ P [∑s=1                Bs (x) ≥ t − 1], we can leverage
Hoeffding’s inequality to obtain
                ⎡2(t−1)             ⎤     ⎡2(t−1)                                                    ⎤
                ⎢                   ⎥     ⎢       Bs (x)                     t−1                     ⎥
P[x ≤ Pt ] ≤ P ⎢⎢ ∑ Bs (x) ≥ t − 1⎥⎥ = P ⎢⎢ ∑            − (1 − F (x)) ≥             − (1 − F (x))⎥⎥
                ⎢ s=1               ⎥     ⎢ s=1 2(t − 1)                    2(t − 1)                 ⎥
                ⎣                   ⎦     ⎣                                                          ⎦
          ⎡2(t−1)                                   ⎤
          ⎢        Bs (x)                         1 ⎥
     = P ⎢⎢ ∑             − (1 − F (x)) ≥ F (x) − ⎥⎥ ≤ e−4(t−1)(F (x)− 2 ) = e−4(t−1)(ν[[0,x]]− 2 ) ,
                                                                       1  2                     1  2


          ⎢ s=1 2(t − 1)                          2⎥
          ⎣                                         ⎦
from which, by the change of variable formula (Revuz & Yor, 2013, Proposition 4.10, Chapter 1), it
follows also that
                ¿
                Á                                2             1                        2
  (⋆) ≤ ∫       Àexp (−4(t − 1) (ν[[0, x]] − 1 ) ) dν(x) =
                Á                                                                 1
                                                            ∫ exp (−2(t − 1) ( − u) ) du
          [m,1]                               2              1/2                  2
                      ∞
                                         √
              1                            π      1
      ≤√           ∫    exp (−r2 ) dr = √ ⋅ √         ,
           2(t − 1) 0                    2 2     t−1

and hence (I) ≤ 8(t−1)
                  π
                       . Analogously, we can prove that (II) ≤ 8(t−1)
                                                                 π
                                                                      . Hence,

        1 π T 1       1 π π T −1 t 1      1 π π   T −1 1     1 π
 RT ≤    + ⋅∑        = + + ⋅∑ ∫       ds ≤ + + ⋅∫        ds = + (1+ln(T −1)) .
        2 2 t=2 t − 1 2 2 2 t=2 t−1 t     2 2 2 1      s     2 2

We now establish the optimality of FEM by demonstrating a matching Ω(ln T ) regret lower bound.
We remark that this result holds even when competing against underlying distributions that have a
2-Lipschitz cdf, thus proving the optimality of FEM even under the Lipschitz cdf assumption.
Theorem 2. There exist two numerical constants c1 and c2 such that, for any time horizon T ≥ c2 ,
the worst-case regret of any full-feedback algorithm satisfies
                                          sup RTν ≥ c1 ln T ,
                                          ν∈D2

where RTν is the regret at time T of the algorithm when the i.i.d. sequence of traders’ valuations
follows the distribution ν, and D2 is the set of all distributions ν that admit a 2-Lipschitz cdf.

Due to space constraints, we defer the (long and technical) proof of this result to Appendix C and
only present a short, high-level sketch here.

Proof sketch. In the proof, we build a family of 2-Lipschitz cdfs Fε parameterized by ε ∈ [0, 1], so
that if two instances are parameterized by ε and ε′ respectively, then their medians are Θ(∣ε − ε′ ∣)-
away from each other (Figure 1). The high-level idea is to leverage a Bayesian argument to show that
if the underlying instance FE is such that E is drawn uniformly at random√in [0, 1], then, at round
t, the broker cannot reliably determine prices that are much closer than 1/ t to the corresponding
median mE when distances are measured with respect to the metric induced by the cdf FE . This,
together with our key Lemma 1, leads to the conclusion.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    Θ(∣ε − ε′ ∣ )
                                                                                                              2
     2(1 − ε)
    2(1 − ε′ )
            1
          2ε′
           2ε
                 0   1/8                    7/8   1        0   1/8         Θ(∣ε − ε′ ∣)   7/8   1

Figure 1: Qualitative plots of the densities fε , fε′ (left) and corresponding expected rewards (right)
used in the proof of Theorem 2 for two values ε, ε′ > 0. Note that the difference in reward by posting
a price that is optimal for one instance ε′ when the actual instance is ε is Θ(∣ε − ε′ ∣ ).
                                                                                        2


5     2-B IT F EEDBACK
We start the study of the 2-bit feedback case under the assumption that the traders’ valuation
distribution admits a Lipschitz cdf F . The algorithm we propose (Algorithm 2) is based on the
following observation: by posting any price p, the broker has access to two noisy realizations of F (p).
Recalling that Lemma 1 suggests tracking the median of F (i.e., a point m at which F (m) = 1/2),
and since F is a non-decreasing function, we can proceed using a natural binary search strategy to
move toward the median. This can be done in epochs: in each one, we repeatedly test a (dyadic) price
until the first time we can confidently decide that the median is to the left or right of the current price.

Algorithm 2: Median Binary Search (MBS)
Input: Confidence parameter δ ∈ (0, 1), time horizon n ∈ N;
Initialization: Q1 ∶= 21 , τ ∶= 1, t ∶= 1;
while time t ≤ n do
    Let s ∶= 0, Yτ,s ∶= 0, tτ −1 ∶= t − 1;
    while time t ≤ n do
        Post Pt ∶= Qτ and receive feedback I{V2t−1 ≤ Pt }, I{V2t ≤ Pt };
        Update s ∶= s + 2, Yτ,s ∶= Yτ,s−2 + I{V2t−1 ≤ Pt } + I{V2t ≤ Pt }, t ∶= t + 1;
                     √
        if 1s Yτ,s + ln(2/δ)    < 12 then let Qτ +1 ∶= Qτ +1 + 2τ1+1 , sτ ∶= s, τ ∶= τ + 1, and break;
                         √
                         2s

        else if 1s Yτ,s − ln(2/δ)
                               2s
                                     > 21 then let Qτ +1 ∶= Qτ +1 − 2τ1+1 , sτ ∶= s, τ ∶= τ + 1, and break;


We now show that a suitably tuned Algorithm 2 has regret guarantees of O(ln(M T ) ln(T )). In
particular, we stress that the tuning of Algorithm 2 does not need prior knowledge of M . Due to
space constraints, we defer the full proof of the next result to Appendix D.
Theorem 3. If ν has an M -Lipschitz cdf F for some M ≥ 1, then, for all time horizons T ∈ N, the
regret of MBS tuned with parameters δ ∶= 2/T 3 and n ∶= T satisfies
                                         RT ≤ 2 + 6 log2 (M T ) ln(T ) .

Proof sketch. The proof is based on the following observations. First, during an epoch where a price
p is tested, given that one has to distinguish if the parameter F (p) of a sequence of Bernoulli random
variables is bigger or smaller than 1/2, a concentration argument shows that the duration of this epoch
                                        2
is at most O(ln(1/δ)/(1/2 − F (p)) ), where δ is the confidence parameter. Second, by Lemma 1,
                                     2
the broker regrets 2(1/2 − F (p)) by playing a price p, and hence the total regret of an epoch where
the broker tests p is at most O(ln(1/δ)). We then use the fact that the F is M -Lipschitz to prove that,
after at most O(log2 (M T )) epochs, the cumulative regret that the algorithm suffers from that point
onward is constant, and conclude by showing that the tuning of δ leads to the stated guarantees.

We now show that Algorithm 2 is optimal, up to a multiplicative ln T term. Due to space constraints,
we defer the full proof of this result to Appendix E.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 4. There exist two numerical constants c1 and c2 such that for any M ≥ 16 and any time
horizon T ≥ c2 log2 (M ), the worst-case regret of any 2-bit feedback algorithm satisfies
                                          sup RTν ≥ c1 ln(M T ) ,
                                         ν∈DM

where RTν is the regret at time T of the algorithm when the i.i.d. sequence of traders’ valuations
follows the distribution ν, and DM is the set of all distributions ν that admits an M -Lipschitz cdf.

Proof sketch. The proof builds a family of distributions, each supported in a different region of length
Θ(1/M ), whose cdfs are M -Lipschitz. To avoid suffering linear regret if the traders’ valuations are
generated according to one of these distributions, the broker has to detect the corresponding support.
To accomplish this task, we show that the broker is essentially forced to solve a binary search problem
that needs log2 (M ) rounds in each of which the instantaneous regret is constant. Noticing that any
regret lower bound for full-feedback algorithms also applies to 2-bit feedback algorithms, the ln T
lower bound of Theorem 2 together with the binary search ln M lower bound yield a lower bound of
Ω(max(ln T, ln M )) = Ω(ln(M T )).

6    N ON -L IPSCHITZ OR D ISCONTINUOUS P DFS
We now investigate how the problem changes if we lift the assumption that ν has a Lipschitz or
continuous cdf. First, note that when the cdf of ν is not continuous, Lemma 1, and, consequently, the
guarantees of Theorem 1, no longer
                               √      hold. Indeed, in general, no full-feedback algorithm can achieve
regret guarantees better than T . As shown in the proof of the next theorem, the reason is that our
problem contains instances that √ resemble online learning with expert advice (with 2 experts), which
has a known lower bound of Ω( T ).
Theorem 5. There exist two numerical constants c1 and c2 such that, for any time horizon T ≥ c2 ,
the worst-case regret of any full feedback algorithm satisfies
                                                        √
                                           sup RTν ≥ c1 T ,
                                             ν∈D

where RTν is the regret at time T of the algorithm when the i.i.d. sequence of traders’ valuations
follows the distribution ν, and D is the set of all distributions ν.

Proof sketch. For each ε ∈ [−1/4, 1/4], define νε ∶= 1−ε  4 0
                                                              δ + 14 δ1/3 + 14 δ2/3 + 1+ε
                                                                                       4 1
                                                                                          δ , where, for any
a ∈ R, we denoted by δa the Dirac’s delta probability measure centered at a. Let (Vε,t )ε∈[−1/4,1/4],t∈N
be an independent family such that for each ε ∈ [−1/4, 1/4] the sequence Vε,1 , Vε,2 , . . . is i.i.d.
with common distribution νε . For each ε ∈ [−1/4, 1/4], each t ∈ N, and each p ∈ [0, 1], define
Gε,t (p) ∶= g(p, Vε,2t−1 , Vε,2t ). Straightforward computations show that, for each ε ∈ [−1/4, 1/4] and
each t ∈ N, the function p ↦ E[Gε,t (p)] is maximized at 1/3 or at 2/3, with any other point having an
expected reward that is less than 31/256-away from the minimum expected reward achieved at 1/3 or
2/3. Furthermore, for any ε ∈ [−1/4, 1/4] and any t ∈ N, the maximum is at 1/3 or 2/3 depending on
                                                                 2                                     2
whether ε < 0 or ε > 0, given that E[Gε,t (1/3)] = 11 16
                                                         − 8ε − ε8 and E[Gε,t (2/3)] = 11   16
                                                                                               + 8ε − ε8 , from
which it follows also that E[Gε,t (2/3)] − E[Gε,t (1/3)] = 4ε . Hence, in order not to suffer Ω(∣ε∣ T )
regret, an algorithm has to detect the sign of ε. However, a standard information-theoretic argument
shows that a sample of order Ω(1/ε2 ) is required in order to detect the sign of ε. During this period,
the best any algorithm can do is to play blindly in the set {1/3, 2/3}, incurring in a cumulative regret
of order Ω ( ε12 ⋅ ∣ε∣) = Ω (1/ ∣ε∣). Overall, any learner has to suffer Ω (min ( ∣ε∣ 1
                                                                                        , ∣ε∣ T )) worst-case
                                        √                                                         √
regret, which, by tuning ∣ε∣ = Θ(1/ T ), leads to a worst-case regret lower bound of Ω( T ).

We now focus on the upper bound. A closer look at the proof of Lemma 1 shows that if we drop the
cdf continuity assumption in the Median Lemma, the formula generalizes to
          E[Gt (p)] = 2F (p)(1 − F (p)) + F (p)F ○ (p) =∶ Ψ(p) ,             ∀p ∈ [0, 1], ∀t ∈ N,
with no assumptions on ν, and where F is the cdf of ν and we defined F ○ (p) ∶= ν[{p}]. This suggests
the strategy of building an empirical proxy Ψ̂t of Ψ with the feedback available at time t, and posting


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prices that maximize Ψ̂t . By replacing the theoretical quantities by their empirical counterparts, for
any t ∈ N and any p ∈ [0, 1], we define an empirical proxy for Ψ(p) as follows:
                          1 2t          1 2t            1 2t          1 2t
         Ψ̂t+1 (p) ∶= 2      ∑ I{Vs ≤ p} ∑ I{p < Vs } +    ∑ I{Vs ≤ p} ∑ I{Vs = p} .
                          2t s=1        2t s=1          2t s=1        2t s=1
This definition leads to Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3: Follow the Empirical Ψ (FEΨ)
Post P1 = 12 and receive feedback V1 , V2 ;
for time t = 2, 3, . . . do
    Post Pt ∈ argmaxp∈[0,1] Ψ̂t (p) and receive feedback V2t−1 , V2t ;


We now state regret guarantees for Algorithm 3. The proof of the following result (which hinges on
showing that Ψ̂t is uniformly close to Ψ with high probability) is deferred to Appendix F.
Theorem 6. For all time horizons T ∈ N, the regret of FEΨ satisfies
                                              √ √
                                   RT ≤ 1 + 8 π ⋅ T − 1 .

We conclude by showing that, without the Lipschitz cdf assumption, the 2-bit feedback problem is
unlearnable. This can be deduced as a simple corollary of the proof of Theorem 4. Specifically, we
can obtain a linear worst-case lower bound for any 2-bit feedback algorithm, even if we assume that
the underlying distribution has a continuous cdf.
Theorem 7. There exist two numerical constants c1 and c2 such that, for any time horizon T ≥ c2 ,
the worst-case regret of any 2-bit feedback algorithm satisfies
                                            sup RTν ≥ c1 T ,
                                           ν∈Dc

where RTν is the regret at time T of the algorithm when the i.i.d. sequence of traders’ valuations
follows the distribution ν, and Dc is the set of all distributions ν that admits a continuous cdf.

Proof. As a consequence of the last part of the proof of Theorem 4 (see Appendix E) we have that,
for any time horizon T ≥ 4, if we set M ∶= 2T , then the conditions M ≥ 16 and T ≥ log2 (M )
in that proof holds, and hence, any 2-bit feedback algorithm has worst-case regret that is at least
   1
4 ln 2
       ln M = 4 ln
                 1
                   2
                     T.

7    C ONCLUSIONS AND O PEN P ROBLEMS
Motivated by maximizing trading volume in OTC markets, we proposed a novel objective that
departs from the classical gain-from-trade reward studied in the bilateral trade literature. For this new
problem, we investigated optimal brokerage strategies from an online learning perspective. Under
the assumption that traders are free to sell or buy depending on the trading price and that traders’
valuations form an i.i.d. sequence, we provided a complete picture with matching (up to, at most,
logarithmic factors) upper and lower bounds in all the proposed settings, fleshing out the role of
regularity assumptions in achieving these fast regret rates.
In addition to closing the logarithmic ln T gap in the regret rate of the 2-bit feedback setting, a few
other future research directions are to find non-stationary variants of this problem where learning is
still achievable, investigate trading volume maximization when traders have definite seller and buyer
roles, and explore the contextual version of the problem when the broker has access to relevant side
information before posting each price. One could also consider the 1-bit feedback setting, where the
learner receives no individual feedback from traders but only observes if trades occurred or not. This
is a desirable property of the mechanism as it ensures complete privacy regarding the preferences
of the traders. Lastly, a natural question arising from our unlearnability result in the 2-bit feedback
setting is if learning is possible when the objective is weakened to α-regret. We leave the investigation
of these intriguing problems to future research.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
TC gratefully acknowledges the support of the University of Ottawa through grant GR002837
(Start-Up Funds) and that of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) through grants RGPIN-2023-03688 (Discovery Grants Program) and DGECR2023-00208
(Discovery Grants Program, DGECR - Discovery Launch Supplement). RC is partially supported by
the MUR PRIN grant 2022EKNE5K (Learning in Markets and Society), the FAIR (Future Artificial
Intelligence Research) project, funded by the NextGenerationEU program within the PNRR-PE-
AI scheme, the EU Horizon CL4-2022-HUMAN-02 research and innovation action under grant
agreement 101120237, project ELIAS (European Lighthouse of AI for Sustainability).

R EFERENCES
Thomas Archbold, Bart de Keijzer, and Carmine Ventre. Non-obvious manipulability for single-
  parameter agents and bilateral trade. In Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 2107–2115, USA, 2023. International Foundation
  for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Yossi Azar, Amos Fiat, and Federico Fusco. An alpha-regret analysis of adversarial bilateral trade.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:1685–1697, 2022.
Moshe Babaioff, Kira Goldner, and Yannai A. Gonczarowski. Bulow-klemperer-style results for
 welfare maximization in two-sided markets. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual ACM-SIAM
 Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20, pp. 2452–2471, USA, 2020. Society for Industrial
 and Applied Mathematics.
François Bachoc, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. Fair online
  bilateral trade. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2024a.
François Bachoc, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. A contextual online learning theory of
  brokerage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01566, 2024b.
François Bachoc, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. A tight regret analysis of non-parametric
  repeated contextual brokerage. In Proceedings of The 28th International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 03–05 May 2025.
Martino Bernasconi, Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, and Federico Fusco. No-regret learning in
 bilateral trade via global budget balance. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
 Theory of Computing, 2024.
Liad Blumrosen and Yehonatan Mizrahi. Approximating gains-from-trade in bilateral trading. In
  Web and Internet Economics, WINE’16, volume 10123 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
  400–413, Germany, 2016. Springer.
Natasa Bolić, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. An online learning theory of brokerage. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  AAMAS ’24, pp. 216–224, Richland, SC, 2024. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
  and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9798400704864.
Johannes Brustle, Yang Cai, Fa Wu, and Mingfei Zhao. Approximating gains from trade in two-sided
  markets via simple mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics
  and Computation, EC ’17, pp. 589–590, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing
  Machinery. ISBN 9781450345279.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso R Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  A regret analysis of bilateral trade. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics
  and Computation, pp. 289–309, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso R Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  Repeated bilateral trade against a smoothed adversary. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 1095–1130, USA, 2023. PMLR, PMLR.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  Bilateral trade: A regret minimization perspective. Mathematics of Operations Research, 49(1):
  171–203, 2024a.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  Regret analysis of bilateral trade with a smoothed adversary. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 25(234):1–36, 2024b.
Tommaso R Cesari and Roberto Colomboni. A nearest neighbor characterization of Lebesgue points
  in metric measure spaces. Mathematical Statistics and Learning, 3(1):71–112, 2021.
Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi, Bart de Keijzer, Stefano Leonardi, and Stefano Turchetta. Approximately
  efficient double auctions with strong budget balance. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
  Algorithms, SODA’16, pp. 1424–1443, USA, 2016. SIAM.
Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi, Paul W. Goldberg, Bart de Keijzer, Stefano Leonardi, and Stefano
  Turchetta. Fixed price approximability of the optimal gain from trade. In Web and Internet
  Economics, WINE’17, volume 10660 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 146–160, Germany,
  2017. Springer.
Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi, Paul W Goldberg, Bart de Keijzer, Stefano Leonardi, Tim Roughgar-
  den, and Stefano Turchetta. Approximately efficient two-sided combinatorial auctions. ACM
  Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 8(1):1–29, 2020.
Yuan Deng, Jieming Mao, Balasubramanian Sivan, and Kangning Wang. Approximately efficient
  bilateral trade. In STOC, pp. 718–721, Italy, 2022. ACM.
Paul Dütting, Federico Fusco, Philip Lazos, Stefano Leonardi, and Rebecca Reiffenhäuser. Efficient
  two-sided markets with limited information. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT
  Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2021, pp. 1452–1465, New York, NY, USA, 2021.
  Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380539.
Yumou Fei. Improved approximation to first-best gains-from-trade. In International Conference on
  Web and Internet Economics, pp. 204–218. Springer, 2022.
Zi Yang Kang, Francisco Pernice, and Jan Vondrák. Fixed-price approximations in bilateral trade.
  In Proceedings of the 2022 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp.
  2964–2985, Alexandria, VA, USA, 2022. SIAM, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Walid Krichene, Maximilian Balandat, Claire Tomlin, and Alexandre Bayen. The Hedge algorithm
 on a continuum. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 824–832. PMLR, 2015.
Odalric-Ambrym Maillard and Rémi Munos. Online learning in adversarial lipschitz environments.
  In ECML/PKDD (2), volume 6322 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 305–320. Springer,
  2010.
Pascal Massart. The tight constant in the dvoretzky-kiefer-wolfowitz inequality. The annals of
  Probability, pp. 1269–1283, 1990.
R Preston McAfee. The gains from trade under fixed price mechanisms. Applied economics research
  bulletin, 1(1):1–10, 2008.
Roger B Myerson and Mark A Satterthwaite. Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of
  economic theory, 29(2):265–281, 1983.
Daniel Revuz and Marc Yor. Continuous martingales and Brownian motion, volume 293. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Katerina Sherstyuk, Krit Phankitnirundorn, and Michael J Roberts. Randomized double auctions:
  gains from trade, trader roles, and price discovery. Experimental Economics, 24(4):1–40, 2020.
Elias M Stein. Singular integrals and differentiability properties of functions. Princeton university
  press, 1970.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pierre-Olivier Weill. The search theory of over-the-counter markets. Annual Review of Economics,
  12:747–773, 2020.
www.bis.org. OTC derivatives statistics at end-June 2022. Bank for International Settlements, 2022.
 URL https://www.bis.org/publ/otc_hy2211.pdf.
Yixuan Even Xu, Hanrui Zhang, and Vincent Conitzer. Non-excludable bilateral trade between groups.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 9952–9959, 2024.


A    F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON THE T RADING -VOLUME M ETRIC
To further elaborate on our choice of maximizing the trading volume, we first compute the individual
expected utilities of the traders in our motivating example in Section 3, in the two cases in which
the learner posts the price 1/2 maximizing the gain from the trade and the price m = 12 − 2ε 1−2ε
                                                                                                1−ε
maximizing the trading volume. A direct verification shows the following:

      1. The selling expected utility of traders at 1/2 is ε2 − ε3 = Θ(ε2 ).
      2. The buying expected utility of traders at 1/2 is ε − 2ε2 + ε3 = Θ(ε).
      3. Thus, the gain from trade at 1/2 is ε − 2ε2 = Θ(ε).

On the other hand:

      1. The selling expected utility of traders at m is 81 ε + 14 ε2 = Θ(ε).
      2. The buying expected utility of traders at m is 85 ε = Θ(ε).
      3. Thus, the gain from trade at m is 34 ε + 14 ε2 = Θ(ε).

Since the distribution of the traders’ valuations is continuous and supported on the union [ 21 − ε, 12 ] ∪
[1 − ε, 1] of a low and a high-valuation cluster (with the overwhelming majority of the population
concentrated in the low-valuation cluster), then, posting the price 1/2 that maximizes the gain from
trade has the following consequences:

       • Traders from the high-valuation cluster (who enter the market with probability Θ(ε)) will
         trade with probability Θ(1) and earn utility Θ(1).
       • Traders from the low-valuation cluster (who enter the market with probability Θ(1)) trade
         with probability Θ(ε) and earn utility Θ(ε).

This is arguably an unfair division of utilities because traders in the low-valuation cluster (which
constitutes the near-totality of the population) are effectively made unable to trade with each other and,
as a consequence, end up earning negligible Θ(ε2 ) expected utilities. In this case, the near-totality of
the gain from trade comes from the Θ(ε) expected utility accrued by the high-valuation traders.
In contrast, posting the price m that maximizes the trading volume has the following consequences.

       • Traders from the high-valuation cluster (who enter the market with probability Θ(ε)) will
         trade with probability Θ(1) and earn utility Θ(1).
       • Traders from the low-valuation cluster (who enter the market with probability Θ(1)) trade
         with probability Θ(1) and earn utility Θ(ε).

In this case, low-valuation traders can trade with each other (as well as with high-valuation traders),
and consequently, their expected utilities rise to Θ(ε). Both low and high-valuation traders accrue
Θ(ε) expected utilities, maintaining in particular the same order Θ(ε) of expected gain from trade.
However, there is no free lunch. The fairness obtained by moving away from directly maximizing the
gain from trade comes at the cost that, in general, the gain from trade won’t be exactly maximized.
Take the previous instance as an example. The trading-volume objective effectively manages to drive
a balance of the utilities of traders coming from high and low-valuation clusters of the population
but at the price of slightly lowering the gain from trade (note that although the order is the same, the


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


gain from trade at m is lower than the optimal one by a multiplicative constant). If ε is a constant
(however small) independent of the time horizon, this will result in a linear regret with respect to the
gain from trade.
This should not come as a surprise, though, as it is what one should expect from fair objectives:
generally speaking, they are not as efficient as unfair ones. This is a point worth raising in a broader
sense. Is it worth losing a fraction of the global value to obtain a fairer distribution of a slightly lower
total wealth? Perhaps. This is a profound philosophical question that reaches far beyond the scope of
our work and whose answer probably varies depending on the circumstances. Still, we believe it is
valuable to investigate both options and, at the very least, shine a light on the possible pros and cons
of the two, as well as to flesh out the different techniques that are needed to tackle each variant of the
problem.


B    F URTHER D ISCUSSION ON THE I.I.D. A SSUMPTION

Same-distribution assumption. Unlike bilateral trade settings where traders join the market as
either buyers or sellers (in which case, it is natural to assume that the populations of buyers and
sellers have distinct valuation distributions), in our setting, each trader has no predetermined intent to
buy or sell. Instead, they simply hold a valuation for the item on sale and are willing to either buy or
sell depending on the price proposed by the broker.
Settings with flexible seller/buyer roles have already appeared in the literature and are prevalent in
OTC markets. Think of the stock market, or markets of gems and minerals, but also (perhaps less
obviously) agricultural markets, as described in (Sherstyuk et al., 2020): “Consider, for example, mar-
kets for agricultural goods [...]. Participants in agricultural markets [...] may switch between seller
and buyer roles depending on individual outcomes, consumption needs, and trading opportunities.
[...] A considerable literature in development economics studies agricultural households navigating
such decisions (e.g., Singh et al. (1986), Key et al. (2000), Taylor and Adelman (2003), and Barrett
(2008)).”
In all these markets, there are no two distinct populations of buyers and sellers. There is simply one
population of traders.
This naturally leads to the assumption that the traders’ valuations come from a distribution modeling
fluctuation of the market value of the item on sale.
To elaborate further, the reader might wonder: “What if there are multiple segments of the population,
each with its own skewed idea of the market price of the item?” If at every round, two (possibly
different) population segments are drawn i.i.d. and then the valuations of the two traders are drawn
i.i.d. from the (possibly different) valuations distribution of each segment, would our techniques still
apply? The answer is yes. To see it, simply note that the setting we investigate is context-free, i.e.,
we do not assume that any information about the traders that come each round is available to the
learner before they propose the current trading price at each round. Without knowing a priori the
segment each trader belongs to, writing the expected utility explicitly shows that the problem becomes
equivalent to our formulation, where the single distribution is the mixture of all the distributions
coming from different segments.
Therefore, the same-distribution assumption in a context-free setting where traders are allowed to buy
or sell depending on current market conditions is essentially done without loss of generality.
In a contextual setting, instead, things change, and different techniques are needed depending on
the assumptions relating contextual information to market prices. Recent attempts at investigating
contextual models for the brokerage problem can be found in (Bachoc et al., 2024b; 2025).

Incentive-compatibility and the i.i.d. assumption. Consistent with the broader body of bilateral
trade literature studied from an online learning perspective, our mechanism is truthful for traders
who make “take-it-or-leave-it” decisions and subsequently leave the broker permanently. In such
scenarios, traders have no incentive to misreport their valuations, as doing so would yield no benefit
and could instead result in forfeiting the opportunity to secure a non-negative utility. This assumption
aligns naturally with the i.i.d. framework, which can be interpreted as representing traders drawn


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from a large and stable market. In such markets, re-entry effects are negligible, and the distribution
of traders’ valuations remains essentially unchanged over time.

C       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
For each ε ∈ [0, 1], consider the following density function (see Figure 1, left)
                                                         1         1        7                          7
            fε ∶ [0, 1] → [0, 2],          x ↦ 2εI {x ≤ } + I { < x < } + 2(1 − ε)I {x ≥ } ,
                                                         8         8        8                          8
Notice that, for each ε ∈ [0, 1] the cumulative function associated to the density fε is 2-Lipschitz
with explicit expression given by
                                              1      2ε − 1          1         7                                     7
Fε ∶ [0, 1] → [0, 1], x ↦ 2εxI {x ≤ }+(                      + x) I { < x < }+(2ε−1−2(ε−1)x)I {x ≥ } .
                                              8        8             8         8                                     8
Consider for each ε ∈ [0, 1], an i.i.d. sequence (Bε,t )t∈N of Bernoulli random variables of parameter
ε, an i.i.d. sequence (Dt )t∈N of Bernoulli random variables of parameter 14 , an i.i.d. sequence
(Ut )t∈N of uniform random variables on [0, 1], and a uniform random variable E on [0, 1], such
that ((Bε,t )t∈N,ε∈[0,1] , (Dt )t∈N , (Ut )t∈N , E) is an independent family. For each ε ∈ [0, 1] and t ∈ N,
define
                                           Ut               7 + Ut                  1 3
                     Vε,t ∶= Dt ⋅ (Bε,t       + (1 − Bε,t )        ) + (1 − Dt ) ⋅ ( + Ut ) .                        (1)
                                            8                  8                    8 4
Tedious but straightforward computations show that, for each ε ∈ [0, 1] the sequence (Vε,t )t∈N is
i.i.d. with common density given by fε , and this sequence is independent of E. For any ε ∈ [0, 1],
p ∈ [0, 1], and t ∈ N, let Gε,t (p) ∶= g(p, Vε,2t−1 , Vε,2t ) (for a qualitative representation of its
expectation, see Figure 1, right). We now show how to lower bound the worst-case regret of any
arbitrary deterministic algorithm for the full-feedback setting (αt )t∈N , i.e., a sequence of functions
                         t−1
αt ∶ ([0, 1] × [0, 1])        → [0, 1] where each element maps past feedback into a price (with the
convention that α1 is a number in [0, 1]). We remark that we do not lose any generality in considering
only deterministic algorithms given that we are in a stochastic i.i.d. setting, and the minimax regret
over deterministic algorithms coincides with that over randomized algorithms. For each t ∈ N, define
                        t−1
̃t ∶ ([0, 1] × [0, 1])
α                            → [ 18 , 87 ] equal to αt whenever αt takes values in [ 81 , 78 ], and equal to 1/2
otherwise. Notice that for each ε ∈ [0, 1] it holds that (Fε ○̃                    ̃t ) ≥ (Fε ○αt )⋅(1 − Fε ○ αt ),
                                                                    αt )⋅(1 − Fε ○ α
and hence, due to Lemma 1, for each t ∈ N, it holds that E [Gε,t (̃                 αt (Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) ))] ≥
E [Gε,t (αt (Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) ))]. Notice also that for each ε ∈ [0, 1], we have that mε ∶= 5−2ε     8
                                                                                                                  is the
unique element in [0, 1] such that Fε (mε ) = 1/2. For any time horizon T ≥ 144, we have that the
worst-case regret of the algorithm (αt )t∈N can be lower bounded as follows
                       T
 sup RTν ≥ sup ∑ E[Gε,t (mε ) − Gε,t (αt (Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) ))]
ν∈DM           ε∈[0,1] t=13
              T                                                              T                                         2
                                                                  ♠              1
    ≥ sup ∑ E[Gε,t (mε ) − Gε,t (̃
                                 αt (Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) ))] = sup ∑ E [2 ( − Fε (̃
                                                                                       αt (Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) ))) ]
     ε∈[0,1] t=13                                                   ε∈[0,1] t=13 2
    ○ T       1                                      2
                                                        ♣
                                                            T
                                                                   5 − 2E                                 2
    ≥ ∑ E [2 ( − FE (̃
                     αt (VE,1 , . . . , VE,2(t−1) ))) ] = 2 ∑ E [(         ̃t (VE,1 , . . . , VE,2(t−1) )) ]
                                                                          −α
      t=13    2                                            t=13       8
    ♥    T
                  5 − 2E      5 − 2E                                                                            2
    ≥ 2 ∑ E [(           − E[        ∣ BE,1 , . . . , BE,2(t−1) , D1 , . . . , D2(t−1) , U1 , . . . , U2(t−1) ]) ]
        t=13         8           8
    ♦
         T
                 5 − 2E         5 − 2E                                 2
                                                                             1 T                                      2
    = 2 ∑ E [(            − E[          ∣ BE,1 , . . . , BE,2(t−1) ]) ] = ∑ E [(E − E [E ∣ BE,1 , . . . , BE,2(t−1) ]) ]
        t=13        8              8                                         8 t=13
             ⎡                              2⎤                    ⎡                           2⎤
    ∗ 1
          T  ⎢⎛        ∑s=1 BE,s + 1 ⎞ ⎥
                         2(t−1)
                                                  1 T         1   ⎢⎛       ∑s=1 Bε,s + 1 ⎞ ⎥
                                                                             2(t−1)
             ⎢
    = ∑ E⎢ E −                               ⎥ = ∑ ∫ E⎢ ε −       ⎢                            ⎥ dε
      8 t=13 ⎢⎝                2t         ⎠ ⎥⎥ 8 t=13 0           ⎢⎝               2t        ⎠ ⎥
                                                                                               ⎥
             ⎣                               ⎦                    ⎣                            ⎦
                   ⎡                                                                    2⎤
      1   T    1   ⎢ ⎛       2(t−1)
                           ∑s=1     B
                                               2(t−1)
                                             ∑s=1        B
                                                                   2(t−1)
                                                                 ∑s=1      B        1 ⎥⎞ ⎥
    = ∑ ∫ E⎢
                                     ε,s                  ε,s                ε,s
                   ⎢⎝ε − 2(t − 1) + 2(t − 1) −                                   −
                                                                                    2t ⎠ ⎥
                                                                                           dε
      8 t=13 0     ⎢                                                    2t               ⎥
                   ⎣                                                                     ⎦
                   ⎡                                                          2⎤
      1 T      1   ⎢⎛        2(t−1)
                           ∑s=1 Bε,s             1        2(t−1)
                                                                           1⎞ ⎥
    = ∑ ∫ E⎢       ⎢⎝    −                +                 ∑           −       ⎥ dε
                                                                          2t ⎠ ⎥
                       ε                                         B ε,s
      8 t=13 0     ⎢         2(t − 1)        2t(t − 1) s=1                      ⎥
                   ⎣                                                            ⎦

                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   ⎡                          RRR                       RR                                    R⎤
                                                RRRε − ∑s=1 Bε,s RRRRR RRRRR                            1 RRRR⎥
                                        2
      1 T      1   ⎢⎛     ∑s=1 Bε,s ⎞
                            2(t−1)                          2(t−1)
                                                                                   1     2(t−1)
    ≥    ∑ ∫ E⎢         −                 −       RRR                                      ∑         −        R⎥ dε
                   ⎢⎝                                       2(t − 1) RRRR RRRR 2t(t − 1) s=1            2t RRRR⎥
                      ε                     2                                                   Bε,s
                   ⎢         2(t − 1) ⎠
                                                                                                              R⎥
      8 t=13 0                                      RR
                   ⎣                                                    RR                                     ⎦
                   ⎡                    2             R
                                                      R                  R
                                                                         R   ⎤
      1  T     1   ⎢⎛     ∑s=1 Bε,s ⎞
                            2(t−1)
                                            1 RRR          ∑s=1 Bε,s RRR⎥
                                                             2(t−1)
    ≥ ∑ ∫ E⎢       ⎢⎝ε − 2(t − 1) ⎠ − t RRRRε − 2(t − 1) RRRR⎥ dε
                                                                             ⎥
      8 t=13 0     ⎢                                  RR                 RR⎥
                   ⎣                                                         ⎦
                                    ¿                                                           ¿
               1 ⎛ Var(B          1Á  Var(Bε,1 ) ⎞                             1 ⎛ ε(1 − ε)    1Á                ⎞
    ⋆ 1 T                 ε,1 )     Á                            1 T                            À ε(1 − ε) ⎟ dε
    ≥ ∑∫ ⎜                      −   À                    ⎟ dε = ∑ ∫ ⎜                       − Á
      8 t=13 0 ⎝ 2(t − 1)         t    2(t − 1) ⎠                8 t=13 0 ⎝ 2(t − 1) t               2(t − 1) ⎠

        1 T ⎛       1          π       ⎞ 1 1    π  T −1
                                                        1 1 1    π   T 1
    =      ∑              − √           ≥ ( − √ ) ∑ ≥ ( − √ )∫           ds
        8 t=13 ⎝ 12(t − 1) 8t 2(t − 1) ⎠ 8 12 16 6 t=12 t 8 12 16 6 12 s

        1 1    π     T     1  1   π
    =    ( − √ ) ln ( ) ≥    ( − √ ) ln(T ) .
        8 12 16 6    12   16 12 16 6
where “♠” follows from Lemma 1; “○” follows from the fact that E and Vε,1 , . . . , Vε,2(t−1) are inde-
pendent of each other; “♣” follows from the fact that α          ̃t takes values in [ 18 , 78 ] and the explicit formula
of Fε in that interval for any ε ∈ [0, 1]; “♥” follows from the fact that α               ̃t (VE,1 , . . . , VE,2(t−1) ) is
Ft ∶= σ(BE,1 , . . . , BE,2(t−1) , D1 , . . . , D2(t−1) , U1 , . . . , U2(t−1) )-measurable and that, for any Y the
minimizer in L2 (Ft ) of the functional X ↦ E [(Y − X)2 ] is X = E[Y ∣ Ft ]; “♦” follows from the
fact that E and (D1 , . . . , D2(t−1) , U1 , . . . , U2t−1 ) are independent of each other; “∗” follows from the
fact E ∣ BE,1 , . . . , BE,2(t−1) has a beta distribution; and “⋆” follows from the fact that Bε,1 , Bε,2 , . . .
is an i.i.d. Bernoulli process of parameter ε, together with Jensen’s inequality.

D       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Without loss of generality, we can (and do!) assume that T ≥ 2, and so log2 (M T ) ≥ 1. First, let
τT be the final value of τ if the algorithm ends at time T without a break, or define it as τ − 1 if it
ends with a break. For each τ ∈ [τT ], we define the epoch τ as the collection of rounds from tτ −1 + 1
to tτ . Notice that, for each τ ∈ [τT ], we have that sτ is the number of bits collected during the
epoch τ . Let Q⋆1 ∶= 1/2, and define by induction Q⋆τ +1 as Q⋆τ + 2τ1+1 if F (Q⋆τ ) < 1/2, as Q⋆τ − 2τ1+1
if F (Q⋆τ ) > 1/2, or as Q⋆τ if F (Q⋆τ ) = 1/2. If there is τ ∈ N such that F (Q⋆τ ) = 1/2, let m ∶= Q⋆τ .
Otherwise, let m ∈ [0, 1] be such that F (m) = 1/2 (its existence has already been pointed out after
Lemma 1). Crucially, notice that for each τ ∈ N, we have that ∣m − Q⋆τ ∣ ≤ 2−τ .
Let (Vx,k )x∈[0,1],k∈N be an independent family of random variables with common distribution given
by ν, and for each x ∈ [0, 1] and t ∈ N, define Nt (x) ∶= 2 ⋅ ∑t−1
                                                                k=1 I{Pk = x}. Notice that without
loss of generality, we can assume that for each t ∈ N it holds that V2t−1 ∶= VPt ,Nt (Pt )+1 and
V2t ∶= VPt ,Nt (Pt )+2 . Define the “good” event
                                                                    √
                                T ⎧  ⎪                                         ⎫
                                                                       ln(2/δ) ⎪
                           T
                                     ⎪ 1 j           ⋆        ⋆                ⎪
                     E ∶= ⋂ ⋂ ⎨∣ ∑ I{VQ⋆i ,k ≤ Qi } − F (Qi )∣ <               ⎬,
                          i=1 j=1 ⎪  ⎪ j                                  2j   ⎪
                                                                               ⎪
                              j even
                                     ⎩   k=1                                   ⎭
and notice that by De Morgan’s laws, a union bound, and Hoeffding’s inequality, we can upper bound
the probability of the “bad” event E c by P[E c ] ≤ δT 2 . Notice that for each i, j ∈ [T ] with F (Q⋆i ) ≠ 12
and j even satisfying j ≥ 12 ln(2/δ)      2 , then, whenever we are in the good event E, we have that
                           ( 2 −F (Q⋆i ))
                                                √                      √
                  1 j                   ⋆          ln(2/δ)       ⋆        2 ln(2/δ) 1
                     ∑ I{VQi ,k ≤ Qi } +
                              ⋆                            < F (Qi ) +                ≤ ,
                  j k=1                               2j                      j         2
whenever F (Q⋆i ) < 1/2, while
                                                   √                             √
                     1 j              ⋆                ln(2/δ)                       2 ln(2/δ) 1
                       ∑ I{VQ⋆i ,k ≤ Qi } −                    > F (Q⋆i ) −                   ≥ .
                     j k=1                                2j                             j     2
whenever F (Q⋆i ) > 1/2. Instead, if i, j ∈ [T ] with F (Q⋆i ) = 12 and j is even, we have that
                                                    √
                         1 j                  ⋆        ln(2/δ)                 1
                           ∑ I{VQi ,k ≤ Qi } +
                                      ⋆                          ≥ F (Q⋆i ) =
                         j k=1                            2j                   2

                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and analogously                                       √
                            1 j                  ⋆       ln(2/δ)                1
                               ∑ I{VQi ,k ≤ Qi } −
                                         ⋆                         ≤ F (Q⋆i ) = .
                             j k=1                          2j                  2
In particular, if we are in the good event E, these inequalities imply on the one hand that Q1 =
Q⋆1 , . . . , QτT = Q⋆τT and, if τ ∈ [τT ] is such that F (Q⋆τ ) = 1/2, then τ = τT . On the other hand, if
τ ∈ [τT ] is such that F (Q⋆τ ) ≠ 1/2 and we are in the good event E, they imply that the number of bits
sτ collected during the epoch τ cannot be greater than 12 ln(2/δ)        2 , because the condition that ends
                                                             ( 2 −F (Qτ ))
                                                                      ⋆

                                                                                 2 ln(2/δ)
the epoch τ with a break is met by the time that we have collected                           2 bits in that epoch.
                                                                             ( 12 −F (Q⋆τ ))

Define τT# ∶= ⌈log2 (M T )⌉, define τT♭ as the smallest τ ∈ N such that F (Q⋆τ ) = 1/2 if it exists,
and +∞ otherwise, and define τT⋆ ∶= min(τT# , τT♭ , τT ). In what follows, when we are in the event
τT# > max(τT♭ , τT ), we use the convention that any summation of the form ∑ττT=τ ⋆ +1 is zero by
                                                                                             T
definition. For each t ∈ [T ], define Ht ∶= σ(V1 , . . . , V2t−2 ) as the σ-algebra generated by the history
observed before time t. We can control the regret in the following way
           T                            T
    RT = ∑ E[Gt (m) − Gt (Pt )] = ∑ E[E[Gt (m) − Gt (Pt ) ∣ Ht ]]
           t=1                         t=1
           T                                          T               2
       ♠                                       ♣           1
       = ∑ E[[E[Gt (m) − Gt (p)]]            ] = 2 ⋅ ∑ E [( − F (Pt )) ]
           t=1                          p=Pt         t=1   2
             T                   2
                    1                      T
      ≤ 2 ⋅ ∑ E [( − F (Pt )) IE ] + ⋅ P[E c ]
            t=1     2                      2
           ⎡τT⋆ −1                        ⎤     ⎡ τT                            ⎤
           ⎢            1             2   ⎥     ⎢              1             2  ⎥ T
      = E ⎢⎢ ∑ sτ ⋅ ( − F (Q⋆τ )) IE ⎥⎥ + E ⎢⎢ ∑ sτ ⋅ ( − F (Q⋆τ )) IE ⎥⎥ + ⋅ P[E c ]
           ⎢ τ =1       2                 ⎥     ⎢τ =τ ⋆        2                ⎥ 2
           ⎣                              ⎦     ⎣ T                             ⎦
           ⎡τT −1                                         ⎤      ⎡ τT                       ⎤
           ⎢                                              ⎥      ⎢                          ⎥
              ⋆
                                                    2
      ♥              2 ln(2/δ)         1                  ⎥ + E ⎢ ∑ sτ ⋅ M 2 ⋅ ∣m − Q⋆ ∣2 ⎥ + T ⋅ P[E c ]
      ≤ E ⎢⎢ ∑                     ⋅ (   − F (Q⋆
                                               τ ))    IE ⎥      ⎢                      τ ⎥
           ⎢ τ =1 ( − F (Q⋆τ ))
                   1            2
                                       2                  ⎥      ⎢τ =τ ⋆                    ⎥ 2
           ⎣       2                                      ⎦      ⎣ T                        ⎦
                                                             3
                                                 #         T
      ≤ (τT# − 1) ⋅ 2 ⋅ ln(2/δ) + T ⋅ M 2 ⋅ 2−2τT + δ ⋅        ≤ 2 + 6 log2 (M T ) ln(T ) ,
                                                            2
where in ♠ we used the Freezing Lemma (see, e.g.,(Cesari & Colomboni, 2021, Lemma 8)), in ♣ we
used Lemma 1, and in ♥ we used that fact that F (m) = 1/2 and F is M -Lipschitz.

E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
We already know that algorithms that have access to full-feedback have to suffer worst-case regret
of at least c1 ln T if T ≥ c2 , where c1 and c2 are the constants in the statement of Theorem 2. In
particular, the same statement holds a fortiori for any 2-bit feedback algorithm, given that any 2-bit
feedback algorithm can be trivially converted into an algorithm operating with full-feedback. It
follows that it is enough to prove that there exist two universal constants ̃   c1 and ̃c2 such that the worst-
case regret of any 2-bit feedback algorithm is at least ̃  c1 ln M whenever T ≥ ̃     c2 log2 (M ). In fact, in
this case, we can set c̄1 ∶= 12 min(c1 , ̃
                                         c1 ) and c̄2 ∶= max(c2 , ̃
                                                                  c2 ) to obtain that the worst-case regret of
any 2-bit feedback algorithm is at least 2c̄1 max(ln T, ln M ) ≥ c̄1 ln(M T ) whenever T ≥ c̄2 log2 M .
We now prove the existence of ̃c1 and ̃
                                      c2 . Let n ∈ N be the greatest integer such that 2n ≤ M and
consider the elements νk ∈ DM whose density is 2n ⋅ I( k−1       for some k ∈ [2n ], and notice that the
                                                       2n , 2n )
                                                             k

corresponding cdfs are M -Lipschitz.
Consider the following surrogate game. The adversary secretly chooses k ⋆ ∈ [2n ]. The player action
space is [2n ]. The surrogate game ends the first time t ∈ N when the player plays It = k ⋆ . Before
that, if the player plays It ≠ k ⋆ , the player suffers a loss 1/2 and receives I{It ≤ k ⋆ } as feedback.
Now, note that we can convert any algorithm α for the 2-bit feedback problem into an algorithm α        ̃
for the surrogate game in the following way. For each k ∈ [2n − 1], define Jk ∶= [(k − 1)2−n , k2−n )
and J2n ∶= [(2n − 1)2−n , 1]. Whenever the algorithm α plays Pt ∈ Jk , the algorithm α    ̃ plays It ∶= k


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and passes (I{It ≤ k ⋆ }, I{It ≤ k ⋆ }) to α, where k ⋆ is the underlying instance of the surrogate game.
Now, notice that we can map every instance k ⋆ ∈ [2n ] for the surrogate game into the instance
νk⋆ ∈ DM of the original problem and that the regret of the algorithm α on the instance νk⋆ is greater
than or equal to than the regret of the algorithm α  ̃ on the instance k ⋆ . It follows that a worst-case
regret lower bound for the surrogate game is also a worst-case regret lower bound for the original
problem.
Fix an algorithm α for the surrogate game. Given that the surrogate game is deterministic, without
any loss of generality we can assume that α is deterministic. We say that S ⊂ [2n ] is a discrete
segment if S is of the form {k ∈ [2n ] ∣ a ≤ k ≤ b} for some a, b ∈ [2n ] with a ≤ b. We can prove the
following property by induction on t = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1: there is a discrete segment Jt with at least
2n−t − 1 elements such that, for each k, k ′ ∈ St , the algorithm has not won the game by the time t
and receives the same feedback (and hence selects the same actions) if the underlying instance is k
or k ′ . For t = 0 the property is true by setting S0 ∶= [2n ]. Assume that the property is true for some
t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 2}. Assume that a, b ∈ [2n ] with a ≤ b are such that St = {k ∈ [2n ] ∣ a ≤ k ≤ b},
where St is a segment that enjoys the property. Now, if the algorithm plays It+1 ∉ St we can
set St+1 ∶= St , and we see that the required properties hold trivially. Instead, if It+1 ∈ St we set
St+1 ∶= {k ∈ [2n ] ∣ It + 1 ≤ k ≤ b} if It+1 < a+b      2
                                                            and we set St+1 ∶= {k ∈ [2n ] ∣ a ≤ k ≤ It − 1}
if It+1 ≥ a+b 2
                  . Notice that given that St has at least 2n−t − 1 points, we have that St+1 contains at
        2n−t −2
least 2 = 2n−(t+1) − 1 points and, for each k ∈ St+1 , the game does not end by the time t + 1.
Hence the induction step is proved. It follows that Sn−1 is non-empty and, if we pick k ⋆ ∈ Sn−1 ,
the game goes on at least up to time n − 1 whenever the time horizon T is at least n − 1. Hence, if
T ≥ log2 (M ) (which implies in particular that T ≥ n − 1), the worst-case regret of the algorithm α is
                              log (M )         log (M )
at least n−12
                 = n+1
                     2
                        − 1 ≥ 22       − 1 ≥ 24         = 4 ln(2)
                                                             1
                                                                  ln M , where in the last inequality we used
M ≥ 16. Hence, we can pick ̃       c1 ∶= 4 ln 2 and ̃
                                            1
                                                    c2 ∶= 1, concluding the proof.

F      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6
For any t ∈ N, tedious but straightforward computations show that
        ⎡                         ⎤           1 2t
        ⎢                         ⎥                                  ε            1
      P ⎢ sup ∣Ψ(p) − Ψ̂t (p)∣ ≥ ε⎥ ≤ P [sup ∣ ∑ I{Vs ≤ p} − F (p)∣ ≥ ] ≤ 2 exp (− ε2 t) ,
        ⎢p∈[0,1]                  ⎥           2t                     4            4
        ⎣                         ⎦      p∈R     s=1

where the last inequality follows from the DKW inequality (Massart, 1990). Let p⋆ ∈
argmaxp∈[0,1] Ψ(p) (which does exist due to the upper-semicontinuity of Ψ). Then, for any t ∈ N,
we have that
E [Ψ(p⋆ ) − Ψ(Pt+1 )] = E [Ψ(p⋆ ) − Ψ̂t (p⋆ )] + E[Ψ̂t (p⋆ ) − Ψ̂t (Pt+1 )] + E [Ψ̂t (Pt+1 ) − Ψ(Pt+1 )]
                                                   ´¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¸¹¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¶
                                                                                                ≤0
                                         ⎡                     ⎤         +∞ ⎡                          ⎤
                                         ⎢                     ⎥             ⎢                         ⎥
                                    ≤ 2E ⎢ sup ∣Ψ(p) − Ψ̂t (p)∣⎥ = 2 ∫     P ⎢ sup ∣Ψ(p) − Ψ̂t (p)∣ ≥ ε⎥ dε
                                         ⎢p∈[0,1]              ⎥             ⎢p∈[0,1]                  ⎥
                                         ⎣                     ⎦       0     ⎣                         ⎦
                                           +∞
                                                                   √
                                                      1 2         4 π
                                    ≤ 2∫      2 exp (− ε t) dε = √ .
                                         0            4              t
Hence
                               T                           √ T −1 1      √ √
                  RT ≤ 1 + E [ ∑ (Ψ(p⋆ ) − Ψ(Pt ))] ≤ 1 + 4 π ∑ √ ≤ 1 + 8 π ⋅ T − 1 .
                              t=2                             t=1  t


                                                                             18
