Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S WIFT H YDRA : S ELF -R EINFORCING G ENERATIVE
F RAMEWORK FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION WITH M UL -
TIPLE M AMBA M ODELS

 Nguyen Do1 , Truc Nguyen2 , Malik Hassanaly2 , Raed Alharbi3 , Jung Taek Seo4 , My T. Thai1∗
 1                                     2
   University of Florida, FL, USA        National Renewable Energy Laboratory, CO, USA
 3                                                4
   Saudi Electronic University, Saudi Arabia        Gachon University, South Korea
 nguyen.do@ufl.edu, Truc.Nguyen@nrel.gov, Malik.Hassanaly@nrel.gov,
 ri.alharbi@seu.edu.sa, seojt@gachon.ac.kr, mythai@cise.ufl.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

             Despite a plethora of anomaly detection models developed over the years, their
             ability to generalize to unseen anomalies remains an issue, particularly in critical
             systems. This paper aims to address this challenge by introducing Swift Hydra, a
             new framework for training an anomaly detection method based on generative AI
             and reinforcement learning (RL). Through featuring an RL policy that operates on
             the latent variables of a generative model, the framework synthesizes novel and
             diverse anomaly samples that are capable of bypassing a detection model. These
             generated synthetic samples are, in turn, used to augment the detection model,
             further improving its ability to handle challenging anomalies. Swift Hydra also
             incorporates Mamba models structured as a Mixture of Experts (MoE) to enable
             scalable adaptation of the number of Mamba experts based on data complexity,
             effectively capturing diverse feature distributions without increasing the model’s
             inference time. Empirical evaluations on ADBench benchmark demonstrate that
             Swift Hydra outperforms other state-of-the-art anomaly detection models while
             maintaining a relatively short inference time. From these results, our research
             highlights a new and auspicious paradigm of integrating RL and generative AI for
             advancing anomaly detection.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Anomaly detection remains one of the most pressing and challenging tasks in various applications
ranging from cybersecurity in critical systems to big data analysis (Liao et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2021b; Leibig et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017; Sahu et al., 2024). In simple terms, an anomaly detection
method often involves training a machine learning (ML) model that aims to identify unusual patterns
in data that deviate from expected behaviors. One real-world challenge in realizing such an approach
is the scarcity of available anomalies to train on and the lack of prior knowledge about unseen
anomalies. For that reason, supervised methods, including techniques such as one-class metric
learning (Görnitz et al., 2013; Pang et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2019; Ruff et al., 2020) and one-sided
anomaly-focused deviation loss (Pang et al., 2021; 2019c; Zhang et al., 2020), tend to overfit to
known anomaly patterns and struggle to generalize to unseen anomalies.
Unsupervised methods (Venkataramanan et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2022; Livernoche et al., 2024), on the other hand, have gained traction for training anomaly detec-
tion models with synthetic anomalies, thereby demonstrating an auspicious approach to tackle the
data scarcity and generalization issues. Common techniques (Schlegl et al., 2017; Nazari & Branco,
2021) using generative AI models such as Variational Auto Encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2016) to generate novel
synthetic anomalies on which a detection model can be trained. In order to significantly augment
the generalization ability of anomaly detection models, the generated samples should be realistic
and challenging enough to bypass detection. However, current methods based on these techniques
     ∗
         Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


lack a strategy to generate such samples. Moreover, they often struggle to synthesize diverse and
high-quality anomalies due to the high complexity of training the generative models (e.g., vanishing
gradients and model collapse issues) (Salimans et al., 2016; Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017). Other state-
of-the-art models (Zhang et al., 2021a; An & Cho, 2015; Xu et al., 2022) encode the training data
distribution and then determine the anomaly score of a newly observed data point using their recon-
struction loss. This is based on the assumption that, since normal instances significantly outnumber
anomalies, these models should show higher reconstruction losses for anomalies. Nonetheless, neu-
ral networks can memorize and reconstruct anomalies well. As a result, the reconstruction losses
for both normal and anomalous samples become indistinguishable, undermining the effectiveness of
anomaly detection (Child, 2021).
In this work, we take a new approach to foster a more strategic mechanism for generating synthetic
anomalies that can tackle the above-mentioned challenges. Specifically, we introduce a reinforce-
ment learning (RL) agent to guide the training of a Conditional VAE (C-VAE) (Sohn et al., 2015)
model capable of synthesizing anomalous samples that are both challenging and diverse, which can
be used to substantially augment anomaly detection models. The RL agent operates on the latent
space of the C-VAE model and its reward function is strategically designed to balance the entropy of
the generated samples and their ability to evade detection, presenting a key advantage of our train-
ing framework in generating more effective anomalies. Furthermore, with this reward function, we
theoretically show that the agent can explore deterministically in the latent space to yield feasible
actions, thereby tackling one of the most crucial efficiency problems in RL.
Additionally, the complexity of data generated presents a challenge for training an efficient anomaly
detection model. We establish a lower bound on the error rate for any single detection model, show-
ing that even an over-parameterized model cannot fully capture the intricate features of increasingly
complex generated data. Moreover, this over-parameterized model could lead to significantly pro-
longed inference times, which is not ideal for real-time applications. This necessitates a scalable
anomaly detection model capable of capturing the increasingly diverse feature distributions. To
achieve this, we train Mamba models (Gu & Dao, 2024) structured as a Mixture of Experts (MoE)
(Shazeer et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2024) where each expert specializes in dif-
ferent feature regions. Together with a proposed MoE training scheme, this allows for a scalable
inference with arbitrarily complex input data without increasing inference times, as only relevant
experts are activated for specific input. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

      • We introduce a new systematic framework, namely Swift Hydra, for training an anomaly
        detection model based on synthetic anomalies strategically generated by an RL-guided C-
        VAE model. The efficiency of the detection model is enhanced via a Mixture of Mamba
        Experts, thereby enabling high detection accuracy while maintaining short inference time.
      • We establish a theorem showing that the RL agent can perform gradient descent on the
        latent space to yield feasible actions in early training episodes. We also propose a new
        training scheme for MoE that tackles the “winner-take-all” issue (Fedus et al., 2022).
      • Comprehensive experiments are conducted on ADBench, a benchmark including 57
        datasets from various domains, to demonstrate the outperforming detection accuracy and
        the efficiency of inference of our model. The result suggests that RL and generative AI
        together inspire a new and promising paradigm for advancing anomaly detection.

2   P RELIMINARIES AND N OTATION
Anomaly Detection. Given observations from a system, represented by x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }
where x ∈ RP ×N , P is the feature space dimension and the objective is to determine whether each
observation xi ∈ RP , for i ∈ [N ], is an anomaly. The approach to anomaly detection can vary
depending on the availability of labeled data. In the unsupervised setting, the assumption is that
no labeled data is available, and the dataset comprises a mix of unidentified normal and anomalous
instances. In the supervised setting, a dataset D = {(xi , yi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , N } is used where
each xi is labeled as normal (yi = −1) or anomalous (yi = 1). This dataset is fully labeled
with a known proportion of anomalies and normal data, rendering the detection process similar to
binary classification with unbalanced classes, where there are typically fewer anomalous than normal
instances. The semi-supervised or one-class classification method acts as a hybrid approach, where
the training involves only normal data (D contains only yi = −1), and anomalies, if present, are


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


identified during inference. This method can also extend to partially labeled datasets, where some
anomalies are labeled during training.
Class-Conditional Data Generation. In our work, we employ a Conditional Variational Autoen-
coder (C-VAE) (Sohn et al., 2015), denoted by Fθ = Mϕ ◦ Gψ , conditioned on anomalous data
(y = 1). The parameters ψ and ϕ represent the encoder and decoder, respectively, while θ encapsu-
lates both sets of C-VAE parameters. The C-VAE operates as follows:

               Fθ = Mϕ ◦ Gψ ,          x̂i = Fθ (xi , yi ) = Mϕ (Gψ (xi , yi )) = Mϕ (zi , yi )               (1)

where x̂i ∈ RP represents the reconstructed observation. The generator is trained by optimizing the
Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO):

                                                                                       qψ (zi | xi , yi )
          LELBO
           C-VAE = Eqψ (zi |xi ,yi ) [log p ϕ (xi | z  ,
                                                      i iy )] − Eqψ (zi |xi ,yi )  log                        (2)
                                                                                         pϕ (zi | yi )
In the above equation, Eqψ (zi |xi ,yi ) [log pϕ (xi | zi , yi )] is called the reconstruction loss term, which
aims to measure  h how well thei model can reconstruct the input data from the latent representation.
                     q (zi |xi ,yi )
Eqψ (zi |xi ,yi ) log ψpϕ (z i |yi )
                                     is called the KL divergence term, which serves to regularize the latent
space by making the distribution of the latent variables close to a prior distribution, typically a
standard Gaussian. Note that our C-VAE model is a combination of linear functions and 1-Lipschitz
activation functions in which all layers are normalized. To generate a new anomalous sample x̃i ∈
RP , we sample from zi ∈ Rd ∼ N (µ, σ), where d is the latent space dimension, and µ and σ are
optimized parameters at the bottleneck. The decoder then transforms zi into x̃i = Mϕ (zi , yi = 1).

3     S WIFT H YDRA
This section introduces our Swift Hydra framework, as illustrated in Figure 1, which comprises
two main modules: a Self-Reinforcing Generative Module and an Inference Module. First, the
Self-Reinforcing Generative Module trains a generative model using RL to synthesize diverse and
challenging anomalies. These generated samples are later appended to the original dataset D. Sec-
ond, from this new dataset, the Inference Module trains an efficient detector using the Mixture of
Experts (MoE) technique, which includes a combination of multiple lightweight Mamba models
specializing in different data clusters and a gating network directing each data point to the top k
experts for collaborative prediction.

3.1   S ELF -R EINFORCING G ENERATIVE M ODULE

This module includes two main models: a C-VAE generator, Fθ , that synthesizes new anomalies,
and a large Mamba-based detector Wκ : RP → [0, 1] parameterized by κ that maps a sample xi
to a probabilistic score of it being an anomaly. Unlike conventional methods where the generator
Fθ relies solely on feedback from the detector Wκ to generate new samples which could lead to
a model collapse (Salimans et al., 2016; Hassanaly et al., 2022) or vanishing gradient (Arjovsky
& Bottou, 2017) problem, we instead leverage an RL agent to guide the training of Fθ . This RL
agent, represented by a policy πω , explores the latent distribution p(z) of Fθ and targets areas that
would encourage the generator Fθ to synthesize diverse and challenging anomalies that can bypass
the detector Wκ . These synthetic samples are then used to augment the current training dataset and
retrain Fθ , ultimately improving its ability to generate better anomalies in future episodes.
Dataset definitions. The dataset D is split into a training set, Dtrain , and a testing set, Dtest . In our
approach, the goal is to attain high accuracy on the Dtest even with a small training dataset Dtrain .
Let Dbalanced = {(x, y) ∈ Dtrain | j = min(|{y = −1}|, |{y = 1}|), |{y = −1}| = j, |{y =
1}| = j} be a dataset balanced between normal and anomalous data points, with equal cardinalities
determined by the smaller class. Note that, as episodes progress, the generator Fθ combined with the
RL-agent πω adds more anomalous samples to Dtrain , expanding the anomalous data in Dbalanced .
Since Dbalanced ensures equal numbers of anomalous and normal data, the increase in anomalous
data leads to a corresponding expansion of normal data as well. In the RL context, for each episode,
e, we denote Detrain and Debalanced as the evolving training and balanced datasets, respectively.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The Swift Hydra Framework consists of two main modules: the Self-Reinforcing Gener-
ative Module and the Inference Module. The first module includes a C-VAE, an RL agent, and a
large Mamba-based Detector. Initially, the C-VAE is trained on the original dataset (referred to as
the Combined Dataset in episode 0). In the early stages, the RL agent generates diverse anomalies
by refining latent vectors z, then shifts to producing anomalies that more effectively deceive the de-
tector. The top l anomalies are added back to the original dataset, creating a new combined dataset
to further improve the Generative Model. The second module employs a Mixture of Mamba Experts
(MoME), where lightweight models specialize in different parts of the dataset, providing the same
performance as the large detector but with significantly faster inference.


Training process. For each episode e (comprising h steps), the C-VAE generator Fθ is trained with
batches of Detrain dataset, while the detector Wκ is trained with Debalanced . Next, an anomalous data
                                                  train
point (x, y = 1) is sampled at random from De,anomalous       , and converted into a latent representation
z = Gψ (x, y = 1). The RL policy is tasked with generating a modification vector δ in the latent
space, i.e. πω : z → δ. This δ results in a new sample in the latent space as ẑ = z + δ. At the end
of the episode, a new dataset is obtained X̂ = {Mϕ (ẑ0 , y = 1), . . . , Mϕ (ẑh , y = 1)}. From the
newly generated set X̂ , the top l samples that lead to the highest rewards are selected and denoted as
X̂ <l . A formal definition of the reward is provided in the next section. At each episode, the selected
                                    train
samples are then merged with De−1         , forming the evolving dataset Detrain = De−1train
                                                                                             ∪ X̂ <l . Note
                      train
that we set D0 = D           to ensure that the model Fθ does not deviate from the acceptable range
of the original data (Shumailov et al., 2024). The dataset Detrain is used to retrain the generator
Fθ , enhancing its ability to generate high-quality data in future episodes. As e increases, Detrain
is incorporated into Dbalanced . Thus, Debalanced also grows across episodes. Due to page limit, we
refer readers to Appendix A.1 for the pseudocode and further details about the training process.

3.1.1   G ENERATING S AMPLES AS A M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS

The process of policy modeling can be structured as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Bellman,
             def
1957), M = (S, A, T, R). This includes (i) a finite sets of states S, (ii) a finite set of actions
A, (iii) a transition distribution T (s′ | s, a) where s, s′ ∈ S, a ∈ A and (iv) a reward function
R : S × A → R. We specify each component as follows:
States (s): A state is defined by latent space representations si = (zi , Detrain ) for zi = Gψ (xi ) and
       train
xi ∈ De,anomalous   , where zi is the latent vector produced by the encoder Gψ from the input data xi .
Actions (a): An action ai = (µi , σi ) is a vector of two components: µi ∈ Rd (predicted mean) and
σi ∈ Rd (predicted scale). The modification vector δi = σi · ϵ + µi , where ϵ ∼ N (0, I), and the
latent vector is updated as ẑi = zi + δi .
Rewards (R): The reward function is strategically designed to encourage the generation of a set of
samples that are diverse and reduce the detector’s confidence. The function is defined as follows:


   R(Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1), e) = γ e · H(Detrain ∪ Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1)) − log Wκ (Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1)),        (3)


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where H(Detrain ∪ Mϕ (ẑi , y = 1)) is the entropy of Detrain after incorporating Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1) and
is aimed at promoting the generation of diverse samples (additional details on the calculation of the
entropy of Detrain are provided in Appendix A.3). The function Wκ (Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1)) assesses the
detector’s likelihood of classifying the generated sample as anomalous, with the goal of reducing
this probability to decrease the detector’s confidence.
The hyperparameter γ ∈ [0, 1] dictates the desired rate of entropy reduction. This γ implies that the
                                                                             train
policy πω focuses on exploring rare samples to increase the diversity of De,anomalous     in the early
episodes. Once sufficient data has been explored, the reward function shifts to encourage the agent
to exploit this data, generating new samples that are more effective at bypassing the detector.
Transition Dynamics (T ): When an action ai = (µi , σi ) is taken, a new anomalous data point
x̂i = Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1) is added to X̂ . A new state si+1 = (zi+1 , Detrain ), where zi+1 = Gψ (xi+1 ), is
                                              train
then formed by selecting the next xi+1 ∈ De,anomalous   .

3.1.2    O NE - STEP TO F EASIBLE ACTIONS

The RL agent πω , which is tasked with generating a new sample x̂i from xi , can be trained using
conventional methods. However, during early training episodes, the agent would often struggle to
find suitable actions that maximize the reward function because πω has not yet learned effective
strategies. In fact, an action ai = (µi , σi ) may be invalid if the updated latent vector ẑi derived
from ai falls outside the supported range of the trained model Fθ . Even with advanced exploration
techniques such as those in (Eysenbach & Levine, 2022; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019;
Ecoffet et al., 2021), this issue remains challenging for πω to overcome due to the high-dimensional
and continuous nature of the action space.
A naive strategy to address this is to use the observed data distribution p(x) (i.e., adding Gaussian
noise to xi ) to generate new samples x̂i . The encoder then provides their latent representation
ẑi = Gψ (x̂i , y = 1), and the modification vector δ̂i = ẑi − zi is employed to guide exploration at
that step. After that, a feasible action ãi = (δ̂i , σi ) is derived from δ̂i to replace the invalid action
ai = (µi , σi ) of the RL agent in the current step. Once a feasible action is identified, the agent learns
it in a supervised manner, facilitating more effective exploration in future steps. However, randomly
modifying observations in the input space p(x) can be complex. Instead, we rely on the following
theorem to find feasible actions:
Theorem 1. (Reward Estimation Consistency). If the reward function R is differentiable, Fθ is
well-converged, and ẑi := zi − ϵ · ∇zi (−R(Mϕ (zi , yi = 1), e)) for some small ϵ, then R (x̂i , e) >
R (xi , e), where x̂i = Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1). (Proof in Appendix B.1)

In other words, if Fθ is well-converged and maintains both continuity (i.e., nearby points in the latent
space yield similar content when decoded) and completeness (i.e., points sampled from the latent
space produce meaningful content when decoded), the C-VAE described in Equation 2 can explore
new states s (i.e., anomalous observations) by utilizing the latent feature space p(z) (which is learned
from the original space p(x)). This allows us to search for feasible x̂i in the lower-dimensional and
less noisy latent space p(z) as an alternative to creating feasible actions. Specifically, Theorem 1
implies that we can deterministically search for ẑi in a manner that maximizes the reward function
specified in Equation 3 using gradient descent (Ruder, 2017). From that, a feasible action ãi =
(δ̂i , σi ) is derived where δ̂i = ẑi − zi . With this approach, the policy, value, and reward models are
trained simultaneously during these early episodes, allowing the RL agent to generalize effectively
and reduce invalid actions in future episodes. Thus, the need for using one-step to feasible actions is
eliminated in subsequent stages. Further details on this process can be found in Appendix A.2 with
a preliminary analysis given in Appendix C.5.

3.2     I NFERENCE M ODULE

At the conclusion of the first module, the detector Wκ has been augmented by the newly generated
dataset and can be used as the final anomaly detection model. Due to the increasingly diverse
training data generated by Fθ , we had to initially overparameterize the detector Wκ . For that reason,
deploying Wκ directly as the final detection model would not be scalable due to the high inference


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


cost. Furthermore, the theorem below establishes a lower bound on the detection error, showing that
any single detection model is subject to this lower bound regardless of the number of parameters.
Theorem 2. (Inefficiency of single detector in handling evolving balance data). Suppose a feature
space X ⊂ RP contains Un normal clusters and Ua anomalous clusters, where each cluster u-th ∈
[Un + Ua ] is modeled as a Gaussian distribution N (µu , σ 2 IP ). Let Vcluster be the cluster’s volume
and Λ be the total overlapping volume between normal and anomalous clusters, where the number
of anomalous data points is equal to the number of normal data points, the training loss Ltrain (Wκ )
is lower bounded by 41 · U ·V Λ − Λ in a case of linear Wκ . (Proof in Appendix B.2)
                           a   cluster   2


This theorem aligns with the findings in (Chen et al., 2022), emphasizing the inefficiency of using
a single classifier. To address this issue, in this second module, we use the MoE approach to train
an efficient detector on the dataset generated by the first module. Instead of relying on a single
large-scale detector, this technique leverages multiple “expert” models, with each one specializ-
ing in a subset of the input data. The balanced dataset Debalance is first decomposed into clusters
{C1 , C2 , . . . , CU }, where the number of clusters U is determined using the elbow method (Yuan &
Yang, 2019). We train a set of Mamba models {f1 , f2 , . . . , fM }, each acting as an expert for a spe-
cific data cluster following the Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts approach (Shazeer et al., 2017),
and where fm (x; W) is the output of the m-th expert network with input x and parameter W.
Gating network. In the mixture-of-experts approach, the experts are complemented by a gating
network that directs inputs to the most appropriate expert. Given an input x ∈ RP , the gating
network is defined as the following function:

                h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ) = x · ℵg + StandardNormal(.) · Softplus (x · ℵnoise )              (4)

where ℵg , ℵnoise ∈ RP ×M are weight matrices that determine the linear transformation and noise
contribution, respectively. From the output of h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ), a key step is to apply the top k expert
selection mechanism, denoted by TopK(h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ), k), where it selects the top k largest values
from the vector h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ), which represents the performance scores (e.g., accuracy) of different
expert networks. The elements in h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ) that are not within the top k are replaced by −∞,
effectively excluding them from further consideration. Finally, a softmax function is applied to these
top k values to normalize them, i.e., λ(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ) = Softmax(TopK(h(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ), k)). This
setup forms a Mixture of Mamba Expert, and the output of the MoE layer is then expressed as:
                                                X
                      F(x, ℵg , ℵnoise , W) =         λm (x, ℵg , ℵnoise )fm (x; W)                    (5)
                                               m∈Tx

where Tx ⊆ [M ] represents the indices of selected experts (|Tx | = k).
Tackling “winner-take-all”. During early training of MoE, experts have arbitrary performance
scores, hence the gating network could randomly allocate more samples to a particular expert. With
more training data, this expert outperforms others, thus receiving even more samples. This is referred
to as the ”winner-take-all” phenomenon (Oster & Liu, 2005; Fedus et al., 2022), which reduces the
MoE to a single lightweight expert, limiting its ability to generalize. While this expert may excel, it
fails to capture the diverse features across U clusters, undermining the model’s overall performance.
We tackle this “winner-take-all” issue by temporarily deactivating the gating network during this
early training stage and, instead, proposing a probabilistic approach to ensure diversity in cluster
assignments across experts, while also considering the complexity of each cluster. For each expert
fi , where i ∈ [M ], instead of assigning clusters based on fixed criteria, we dynamically adjust the
probability of an expert fi selecting a cluster ui ∈ [U ], with the probability inversely proportional
to how frequently the cluster has already been assigned to other experts. More importantly, we
introduce a scaling factor that adjusts this probability based on the size of the cluster. For larger
clusters, which are likely more complex, we reduce the penalty of being selected multiple times, as
these clusters require more experts to fully capture their complexity. Specifically, the probability of
expert fi selecting cluster u is given by:

                                                      exp c0 − sαu · nu
                       P(u | x, {nu }, {su }) = P                                                     (6)
                                                                     α
                                                  u′ ∈[U ] exp c0 − s ′ · nu
                                                                             ′
                                                                        u


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where su is the size of cluster u, nu is the number of times cluster u has already been assigned, α is
the base penalty factor, and c0 is a constant initialization score for cluster selection. Then, the expert
fi will select u ∼ Categorical (P (u | x, {nu } , {su }) , u ∈ [U ]) as its cluster.
Note that, due to the probabilistic nature of the selection algorithm, there could be clusters that are
not selected by any experts. Therefore, we overspecify the number of experts M . As demonstrated
in a theorem from (Nguyen et al., 2024), doing so does not increase prediction time. This is because
F(x, ℵg , ℵnoise , W) selects only the top k (typically 2 or 3) best experts for making predictions.
After training each expert with its selected cluster, we train the gating network to minimize the
overall classification loss (e.g., MSE or Cross Entropy Loss). With this setup, we also establish a
theorem to demonstrate the effectiveness of our training mechanism as follows:
Theorem 3. (MoME efficiently handles evolving balance data). Let Ltest (F) and Ltest (Wκ ) repre-
sent the expected error on the test set for the Mixture of Mamba Experts (MoME) model and a single
detector, respectively. For any value of Λ, employing MoME with {f1 , f2 , . . . , fM } guarantees that
the minimum expected error on the training set is Ltrain (F) = 0 and the expected error on the test
set satisfies Ltest (F) ≤ Ltest (Wκ ). (Proof in Appendix B.3)

The above theorem demonstrates that a Mixture of Mamba Experts model can effectively fit all the
data in the training set. Moreover, the expected error on the test set when using the Mixture of
Mamba Experts will always be less than or equal to that of a single detector. Once the experts are
well-trained, we activate the gating network and use it for routing samples.


4    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

Settings. We conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of our Swift Hydra framework
using the ADBench benchmark (Han et al., 2022), which includes a comprehensive collection of
57 widely used anomaly detection datasets spanning various tasks, from image analysis to natural
language processing, as detailed in Appendix C.6. We also evaluate a version of Swift Hydra without
MoME, i.e., a single large detector is used in the Inference Module. The implementation specifics,
such as the training algorithm, model architecture, hyperparameter, model size, and training costs
are provided in Appendix C.1. We will release the source code once the paper is published.
Metrics. In our evaluation, we focus on the performance of the Swift Hydra, particularly in terms of
AUC-ROC and TIF (total inference time to predict all data in ADBench). Additionally, we analyze
the distribution of generated data at each episode and compare it to the distribution of the test data.
Baselines. For the anomaly detection task, we compare Swift Hydra against several state-of-the-art
(SOTA) semi-supervised and unsupervised learning methods included in ADBench. These meth-
ods are Rejex (Perini & Davis, 2023), ADGym (Jiang et al., 2023) and DTE (Livernoche et al.,
2024). We also compare the distribution of our generated data against that of data generated by
oversampling techniques such as SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002), Borderline-SMOTE (Han et al.,
2005), ADASYN (He et al., 2008), SVM-SMOTE (Nguyen et al., 2011), CBO (Xu et al., 2021),
Oversampling GAN (Nazari & Branco, 2021) and VAE-Geometry (Chadebec et al., 2023). For each
method, we use the best-performing hyperparameters as provided in its original paper.

        Methods                  DTE             Rejex                ADGym         Swift Hydra (Single)   Swift Hydra (MoME)
                             AUCROC    TIF    AUCROC     TIF        AUCROC    TIF   AUCROC        TIF      AUCROC         TIF
 Train/Test Ratio (40/60%)    0.82     4.02    0.78      3.89        0.86    6.12     0.91       13.11       0.93         4.01
 Train/Test Ratio (30/70%)    0.80     4.13    0.77      4.09        0.82    7.03     0.90       14.38       0.91         4.79
 Train/Test Ratio (20/80%)    0.79     4.31    0.76      4.22        0.79    8.17     0.87       16.13       0.90         5.22
 Train/Test Ratio (10/90%)    0.78     4.42    0.74      4.39        0.77    9.14     0.86       18.52       0.87         5.84
                                                                                             TIF = Total Inference Time (Seconds)


Table 1: The performance of Swift Hydra and the baselines on the ADBench is evaluated based
on two criteria: AUC-ROC and total inference time (TIF). Here, the AUC-ROC is the average
calculated across all 57 datasets, while the TIF represents the total time the model takes to predict
all data points across all datasets. We vary the train/test ratios to illustrate how the size of the training
data impacts the performance. The best AUC-ROC values are highlighted.


                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Episode 2                 Episode 8                Episode 32               Episode 128


Figure 2: The distribution of the evolving training set Detrain and test set Dtest is visualized using
the Cardiotocography dataset, one of the 57 datasets from ADBench, generated by Swift Hydra in
each episode. The data points are dimensionally reduced using T-SNE (van der Maaten & Hinton,
2008). Note that the light blue points represent the generated datapoints from previous episodes,
providing insight into the trend of generating anomalous data across episodes.


AUC-ROC Evaluation. As shown in Table 1, the average AUC-ROC scores show that both ver-
sions of Swift Hydra - single large detector and MoME - consistently outperform other state-of-
the-art (SOTA) methods with respect to various training sizes (i.e., 40%, 30%, 20%, and 10% of
the whole dataset). Notably, with only 10% of the dataset, Swift Hydra outperforms DTE in the
semi-supervised setting and Rejex in the unsupervised setting. This demonstrates that our RL algo-
rithm can train a generative model to synthesize effective anomalies that can later be used to train
a high-performing detection model. We refer readers to Appendix C.2 for a comparative analy-
sis with more SOTA detection methods and oversampling techniques, and Appendix C.3 for a toy
example to illustrate the generalization ability of Swift Hydra. Appendix C.4 presents a series of
ablation studies evaluating the impact of the Self-Reinforcing Module, the effectiveness of the prob-
abilistic cluster assignments (as described in Equation 6), and the influence of the KL term and the
reconstruction term in Equation 2 on the AUC-ROC of Swift Hydra.
Inference Time Evaluation. In terms of total inference time across 57 datasets, Table 1 shows that
Rejex has the shortest time, which is expected as it relies on conventional lazy learning methods
such as Isolation Forest. DTE, which is based on a diffusion model, requires only a few steps to
reconstruct backward and determine whether a sample is anomalous, resulting in relatively short
inference times. Although ADGym optimally selects which ML models to use for each dataset, the
experiment shows that its overall prediction time is still relatively high compared to that of Swift
Hydra (MoME). Swift Hydra (Single) achieves high AUC-ROC scores; nevertheless, its prediction
time is significantly longer because a single large model is designed to capture the entire diverse
dataset generated by the Self-Reinforcing Generative Module. In contrast, Swift Hydra (MoME) not
only attains the best AUC-ROC scores but also has efficient prediction times that are comparable to
DTE with respect to the training sizes of 40% and 30%. Overall, Swift Hydra (MoME) offers the
best balance between AUC-ROC performance and inference time among the tested methods.
Generated Data Distribution. We visualize the distribution of data generated over time by our
Self-Reinforcing Generative Module in Figure 2. Initially, the model explores a broad spectrum of
widely dispersed anomalous data points. As the episodes progress, a discernible pattern emerges:
the generated anamalous points increasingly cluster towards the boundary that separates normal
from anomalous data. In fact, this transitional zone at the boundary highlights the anomalies that are
not easily distinguishable from normal data points. Hence, this dynamic progression shows that our
generative method significantly enriches the diversity of anomalous data points while simultaneously
pushing for the most challenging anomalies, thus strengthening the detector’s generalization ability.
Figure 3 shows a comparative analysis on the generated data distribution of our method and that of
other oversampling methods. As can be seen, methods like SMOTE, Borderline-SMOTE, SVM-
SMOTE, ADASYN, and CBO only generate data points within the boundary of the anomalous data
in the training set, while our approach allows data points to be generated beyond these boundaries.
This enables our method to potentially generate anomalous data points that can cover the distri-
bution of the test set. Although VAE-Geometry and Oversampling GAN also explore beyond the


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        SMOTE                 Borderline-SMOTE            SVM-SMOTE                    ADASYN


          CBO                  VAE-Geometry             Oversampling GAN              Swift Hydra


Figure 3: The distribution of the evolving training set Detrain and test set Dtest is visualized using
the Cardiotocography dataset, one of the 57 datasets from ADBench, generated by the oversampling
methods in our baselines. The data points are dimensionally reduced using T-SNE (van der Maaten
& Hinton, 2008).


Figure 4: The performance of the RL-Agent is represented by the reward (right y-axis), while the
performance of the Mamba-based Detector (single model) is measured by AUC-ROC (left y-axis).
Both metrics are plotted against the number of episodes (x-axis) across three challenging datasets
from ADBench. Note that both reward and AUC-ROC are averaged over multiple roll-outs.


boundary, they have limitations. Oversampling GAN suffers from model collapse (Salimans et al.,
2016; Hassanaly et al., 2022): during the early training steps, if it finds one data point that is very
good at fooling the detector, it will only focus on generating samples around that point in subse-
quent steps. VAE-Geometry performs better as it generates more diverse data points. However, it
is highly sensitive to hyperparameters to learn the data manifold correctly, hence, it is less effective
compared to our method. Both Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate that data generated by Swift Hydra
provides comprehensive coverage over the range of anomalous data in the test set, even though no
knowledge about the test data is provided during training.
Soundness of the Reward Function. Figure 4 shows that the reward trend (average of multiple
roll-outs) closely follows the increase in AUC-ROC. This demonstrates the soundness of our reward
function, as the RL agent optimizes the reward function, either by predicting actions itself or using
feasible actions as discussed in Section 3.1.2, leading to the maximization of AUC-ROC in the test
set. Interestingly, even though the RL agent receives no feedback on how it performs on the test set
(no knowledge about the test set is provided during training), it manages to increase the AUC-ROC
over time. This suggests that our reward function helps improve the detector’s generalization ability.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5   R ELATED W ORK

Anomaly Detection. Due to the high cost and difficulty of data annotation, most recent anomaly
detection (AD) research has focused on unsupervised methods with various data distribution as-
sumptions (Aggarwal, 2017; Liu et al., 2008; Zong et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; 2022; Xu et al.,
2022). Common approaches like GAN-based (Donahue et al., 2017; Schlegl et al., 2017), self-
supervised (Hojjati et al., 2022; Sehwag et al., 2021; Georgescu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021), and
one-class classification (Shen et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020) typically rely solely on normal data
for training, making it difficult to identify anomalies due to the absence of true anomaly patterns.
Reconstruction-based methods (An & Cho, 2015; Xu et al., 2022) use anomaly reconstruction loss
to detect outliers but are often unreliable as neural networks can memorize and generalize even with
a few samples of anomalies. More recent supervised or weakly-supervised methods (Pang et al.,
2018b; 2019a;d; Ruff et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021) treat anomalies as negative samples to improve
sensitivity, but they risk overfitting and heavily depend on the diversity and quality of the dataset.
Advanced methods like ADGym (Jiang et al., 2023) have improved anomaly detection through op-
timized data processing, augmentation, network design, and training, but they may fail if settings
do not align with the target domain. Learning to Reject (Perini & Davis, 2023) uses uncertainty
scores to reject rather than forcibly predict uncertain samples; however, it often rejects data near the
normal-anomaly boundary, reducing detection performance. DTE (Livernoche et al., 2024) lever-
ages diffusion models to estimate posterior densities, but the decoder can still memorize and recon-
struct anomalies, complicating reliable scoring. AnomalyClip (Zhou et al., 2024) captures general
anomalies in images using object-agnostic text prompts but is limited to image-based tasks.
Oversampling-based techniques. Traditional oversampling techniques tackle imbalanced data by
generating synthetic samples. SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002) interpolates between minority points to
increase diversity but does not focus on challenging samples. Variations like CBO (Xu et al., 2021),
Borderline-SMOTE (Han et al., 2005), and SVM-SMOTE (Nguyen et al., 2011) generate samples
near boundaries to improve representation but risk introducing noise and overfitting in complex
distributions. ADASYN (He et al., 2008) targets harder instances for sample generation, enhancing
performance but potentially causing redundancy if not carefully managed.
Recent techniques like Oversampling GAN (Nazari & Branco, 2021) and VAE-Geometry (Chadebec
et al., 2023) use deep learning to generate more generalized samples. Oversampling GAN may suf-
fer from issues like vanishing gradients or model collapse, limiting sample diversity. VAE-Geometry
employs a Variational Autoencoder that preserves the geometric structure of the data during augmen-
tation, producing synthetic samples that more accurately reflect the true distribution. However, its
accuracy depends on correctly learning the data manifold and is highly sensitive to hyperparameters;
failure to capture complex structures can result in inaccurate sample generation.
RL-Guided Generative AI. Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been used to guide Generative AI
(GenAI) in large language models (LLMs), as seen in ”Learning from Human Feedback” (Dubois
et al., 2023) and ReST (Gulcehre et al., 2023), enhancing generative capabilities through reward
models. The direct use of RL to guide the sample generation process of generative models in
anomaly detection remains underexplored, with this approach only recently gaining traction through
the ReST framework for LLMs.

6   C ONCLUSION

We propose Swift Hydra, a framework designed to reinforce a generative model’s ability to syn-
thesize anomalies in order to augment anomaly detection models. The framework features an RL
agent to guide the training of a C-VAE model that generates diverse and challenging anomalies. We
further propose a mechanism to help the RL agent choose an action more efficiently during train-
ing. Additionally, due to the diverse nature of the generated dataset, we introduce a Mixture of
Mamba Experts to train an efficient anomaly detector, where each expert specializes in capturing
specific data clusters. As a result, our model demonstrates strong generalization capabilities and
fast inference, as evidenced by experiments conducted on the ADBench benchmark against state-
of-the-art anomaly detection models. Our research highlights a promising paradigm of integrating
RL and generative AI for advancing anomaly detection. It can also be leveraged for generating and
synthesizing data in other application contexts where collecting real data is expensive and scarce.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under the SaCT program,
grant number CNS-1935923, and by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Plan-
ning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government (MOTIE) (RS-2023-00303559, Study on
developing cyber-physical attack response system and security management system to maximize
real-time distributed resource availability).
This work was authored in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, operated by Alliance
for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-
AC36-08GO28308. Funding provided by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER), and by the Laboratory Directed Research and
Development (LDRD) Program at NREL. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily
represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a
nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of
this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.

R EFERENCES
Charu C Aggarwal. An introduction to outlier analysis. In Outlier analysis, pp. 1–34. Springer,
  2017.
Jinwon An and Sungzoon Cho. Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection using recon-
   struction probability. 2015. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   36663713.
Martin Arjovsky and Leon Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial
 networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://
 openreview.net/forum?id=Hk4_qw5xe.
Richard Bellman. A markovian decision process. Journal of mathematics and mechanics, pp. 679–
  684, 1957.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym.
Clément Chadebec, Elina Thibeau-Sutre, Ninon Burgos, and Stéphanie Allassonnière. Data aug-
  mentation in high dimensional low sample size setting using a geometry-based variational au-
  toencoder. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(3):2879–2896,
  2023. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3185773.
Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer. Smote: synthetic
  minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 16:321–357, 2002.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Yue Wu, Quanquan Gu, and Yuanzhi Li.         Towards un-
  derstanding the mixture-of-experts layer in deep learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 23049–23062. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Rewon Child. Very deep {vae}s generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them
  on images. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=RLRXCV6DbEJ.
Nguyen Do, Dung Truong, Duy Nguyen, Minh Hoai, and Cuong Pham. Self-controlling photonic-
  on-chip networks with deep reinforcement learning. Scientific Reports, 11(1):23151, Nov 2021.
  ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02583-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41598-021-02583-7.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nguyen Do, Tanmoy Chowdhury, Chen Ling, Liang Zhao, and My T. Thai. Mim-reasoner: Learn-
  ing with theoretical guarantees for multiplex influence maximization, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.16898.
Jeff Donahue, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial feature learning, 2017. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.09782.
Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4hturzLcKX.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O. Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First re-
  turn, then explore. Nature, 590(7847):580–586, Feb 2021. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/
  s41586-020-03157-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03157-9.
Benjamin Eysenbach and Sergey Levine. Maximum entropy RL (provably) solves some robust
  RL problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=PtSAD3caaA2.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23(1), jan 2022. ISSN 1532-4435.
Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu, Antonio Barbalau, Radu Tudor Ionescu, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Marius
 Popescu, and Mubarak Shah. Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multi-task
 learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
 pp. 12742–12752, 2021.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
  MIT Press, 2016.
Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11959.
Nico Görnitz, Marius Kloft, Konrad Rieck, and Ulf Brefeld. Toward supervised anomaly detection.
  Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 46:235–262, 2013.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752.
Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Ksenia Konyushkova, Lotte Weerts, Abhishek
  Sharma, Aditya Siddhant, Alex Ahern, Miaosen Wang, Chenjie Gu, Wolfgang Macherey, Arnaud
  Doucet, Orhan Firat, and Nando de Freitas. Reinforced self-training (rest) for language modeling,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08998.
Hui Han, Wen-Yuan Wang, and Bing-Huan Mao. Borderline-smote: a new over-sampling method in
  imbalanced data sets learning. In International conference on intelligent computing, pp. 878–887.
  Springer, 2005.
Songqiao Han, Xiyang Hu, Hailiang Huang, Minqi Jiang, and Yue Zhao. ADBench: Anomaly
  detection benchmark. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 35:32142–
  32159, 2022.
Malik Hassanaly, Andrew Glaws, Karen Stengel, and Ryan N King. Adversarial sampling of un-
 known and high-dimensional conditional distributions. Journal of Computational Physics, 450:
 110853, 2022.
Haibo He, Yang Bai, Edwardo A. Garcia, and Shutao Li. Adasyn: Adaptive synthetic sampling
  approach for imbalanced learning. In 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural
  Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence), pp. 1322–1328, 2008. doi:
  10.1109/IJCNN.2008.4633969.
Hadi Hojjati, Thi Kieu Khanh Ho, and Narges Armanfard. Self-supervised anomaly detection: A
  survey and outlook. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05173, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenpeng Hu, Mengyu Wang, Qi Qin, Jinwen Ma, and Bing Liu. Hrn: A holistic approach
 to one class learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19111–19124. Cur-
 ran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
 paper/2020/file/dd1970fb03877a235d530476eb727dab-Paper.pdf.
Minqi Jiang, Chaochuan Hou, Ao Zheng, Songqiao Han, Hailiang Huang, Qingsong Wen, Xiyang
 Hu, and Yue Zhao. Adgym: Design choices for deep anomaly detection, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2309.15376.
Nguyen Khoi, Cuong Van, Hoang Tran, and Cao Dung Truong. Multi-objective exploration for
  proximal policy optimization. pp. 105–109, 03 2021. doi: 10.1109/ATiGB50996.2021.9423319.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Christian Leibig, Vaneeda Allken, Murat Seçkin Ayhan, Philipp Berens, and Siegfried Wahl. Lever-
  aging uncertainty information from deep neural networks for disease detection. Scientific reports,
  7(1):1–14, 2017.
Chun-Liang Li, Kihyuk Sohn, Jinsung Yoon, and Tomas Pfister. Cutpaste: Self-supervised learning
  for anomaly detection and localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9664–9674, 2021.
Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and Xiyang Hu. Copod: copula-based outlier
  detection. In 2020 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM), pp. 1118–1123. IEEE,
  2020.
Zheng Li, Yue Zhao, Xiyang Hu, Nicola Botta, Cezar Ionescu, and George Chen. Ecod: Unsuper-
  vised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution functions. IEEE Transactions on
  Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2022.
Hung-Jen Liao, Chun-Hung Richard Lin, Ying-Chih Lin, and Kuang-Yuan Tung. Intrusion detection
  system: A comprehensive review. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 36(1):16–24,
  2013.
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In 2008 eighth ieee international
  conference on data mining, pp. 413–422. IEEE, 2008.
Wen Liu, Weixin Luo, Zhengxin Li, Peilin Zhao, Shenghua Gao, et al. Margin learning embedded
 prediction for video anomaly detection with a few anomalies. In IJCAI, volume 3, pp. 023–3,
 2019.
Victor Livernoche, Vineet Jain, Yashar Hezaveh, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. On diffusion modeling
  for anomaly detection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lR3rk7ysXz.
Ehsan Nazari and Paula Branco. On oversampling via generative adversarial networks under dif-
  ferent data difficulty factors. In Nuno Moniz, Paula Branco, Luis Torgo, Nathalie Japkow-
  icz, Michał Woźniak, and Shuo Wang (eds.), Proceedings of the Third International Work-
  shop on Learning with Imbalanced Domains: Theory and Applications, volume 154 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 76–89. PMLR, 17 Sep 2021. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v154/nazari21a.html.
Hoang M. Ngo, Nguyen H K. Do, Minh N. Vu, Tamer Kahveci, and My T. Thai. Charme: A
  chain-based reinforcement learning approach for the minor embedding problem, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07124.
Hien M. Nguyen, Eric W. Cooper, and Katsuari Kamei. Borderline over-sampling for imbalanced
  data classification. Int. J. Knowl. Eng. Soft Data Paradigm., 3(1):4–21, April 2011. ISSN
  1755-3210. doi: 10.1504/IJKESDP.2011.039875. URL https://doi.org/10.1504/
  IJKESDP.2011.039875.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Huy Nguyen, Pedram Akbarian, Fanqi Yan, and Nhat Ho. Statistical perspective of top-k sparse
  softmax gating mixture of experts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jvtmdK69KQ.

Matthias Oster and Shih-Chii Liu. Spiking inputs to a winner-take-all network. In Y. Weiss,
 B. Schölkopf, and J. Platt (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 18.
 MIT Press, 2005. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2005/file/881c6efa917cff1c97a74e03e15f43e8-Paper.pdf.

Guansong Pang, Longbing Cao, Ling Chen, and Huan Liu. Learning representations of ultrahigh-
  dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection. In Proceedings of the 24th
  ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’18,
  pp. 2041–2050, New York, NY, USA, 2018a. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450355520. doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220042. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3219819.3220042.

Guansong Pang, Longbing Cao, Ling Chen, and Huan Liu. Learning representations of ultrahigh-
  dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection. In KDD, pp. 2041–2050, 2018b.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, Huidong Jin, and Anton van den Hengel. Deep weakly-supervised
  anomaly detection. ArXiv, 1910.13601, 2019a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  13601.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Deep anomaly detection with deviation
  networks, 2019b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08623.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Deep anomaly detection with deviation
  networks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
  discovery & data mining, pp. 353–362, 2019c.

Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Deep anomaly detection with deviation
  networks. In KDD, pp. 353–362, 2019d.

Guansong Pang, Choubo Ding, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Explainable deep few-
  shot anomaly detection with deviation networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00462, 2021.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 488–489, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW.2017.70.

Lorenzo Perini and Jesse Davis. Unsupervised anomaly detection with rejection, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13189.

Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms, 2017. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747.

Lukas Ruff, Robert A. Vandermeulen, Nico Görnitz, Alexander Binder, Emmanuel Müller, Klaus-
  Robert Müller, and Marius Kloft. Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection. In ICLR. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2020.

Abhijeet Sahu, Truc Nguyen, Kejun Chen, Xiangyu Zhang, and Malik Hassanaly. Detection of false
  data injection attacks (fdia) on power dynamical systems with a state prediction method. IEEE
  Access, 2024.

Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training GANs. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
  pp. 2234–2242, 2016.

Thomas Schlegl, Philipp Seeböck, Sebastian M. Waldstein, Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth, and Georg
  Langs. Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks to guide marker
  discovery, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.05921.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347.
Vikash Sehwag, Mung Chiang, and Prateek Mittal. Ssd: A unified framework for self-supervised
  outlier detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12051, 2021.
Noam Shazeer, *Azalia Mirhoseini, *Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hin-
  ton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-
  experts layer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg.
Lifeng Shen, Zhuocong Li, and James Kwok. Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal hier-
  archical one-class network. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 13016–13026. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/97e401a02082021fd24957f852e0e475-Paper.pdf.
Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson.
   The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget, 2024. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/2305.17493.
Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation us-
  ing deep conditional generative models. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2015/file/8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520da2051-Paper.pdf.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 9(86):2579–2605, 2008. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/
  vandermaaten08a.html.
Shashanka Venkataramanan, Kuan-Chuan Peng, Rajat Vikram Singh, and Abhijit Mahalanobis. At-
  tention guided anomaly localization in images. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020: 16th European
  Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVII, pp. 485–503, Berlin,
  Heidelberg, 2020. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-030-58519-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58520-4
  29. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58520-4_29.
Jiehui Xu, Haixu Wu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Anomaly transformer: Time series
   anomaly detection with association discrepancy, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
   2110.02642.
Zhaozhao Xu, Derong Shen, Tiezheng Nie, Yue Kou, Nan Yin, and Xi Han. A cluster-based
  oversampling algorithm combining smote and k-means for imbalanced medical data. Infor-
  mation Sciences, 572:574–589, 2021. ISSN 0020-0255. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.
  2021.02.056. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0020025521001985.
Weiren Yu, Jianxin Li, Md Zakirul Alam Bhuiyan, Richong Zhang, and Jinpeng Huai. Ring: Real-
 time emerging anomaly monitoring system over text streams. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 5
 (4):506–519, 2017.
Chunhui Yuan and Haitao Yang. Research on k-value selection method of k-means clustering algo-
  rithm. J, 2(2):226–235, 2019.
M. Zaheer, Jin ha Lee, M. Astrid, and Seung-Ik Lee. Old is gold: Redefining the adversar-
 ially learned one-class classifier training paradigm. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
 puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 14171–14181, 2020. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215786155.
Jianpeng Zhang, Yutong Xie, Guansong Pang, Zhibin Liao, Johan Verjans, Wenxing Li, Zongji Sun,
   Jian He, Yi Li, Chunhua Shen, and Yong Xia. Viral pneumonia screening on chest x-rays using
   confidence-aware anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, PP:1–1, 11 2020.
   doi: 10.1109/TMI.2020.3040950.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ying Zhang, Jianhui Wang, and Bo Chen. Detecting false data injection attacks in smart grids:
  A semi-supervised deep learning approach. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 12(1):623–634,
  2021a. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2020.3010510.
Yingying Zhang, Zhengxiong Guan, Huajie Qian, Leili Xu, Hengbo Liu, Qingsong Wen, Liang Sun,
  Junwei Jiang, Lunting Fan, and Min Ke. Cloudrca: A root cause analysis framework for cloud
  computing platforms. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information
  & Knowledge Management, pp. 4373–4382, 2021b.
Kang Zhou, Yuting Xiao, Jianlong Yang, Jun Cheng, Wen Liu, Weixin Luo, Zaiwang Gu, Jiang
  Liu, and Shenghua Gao. Encoding Structure-Texture Relation with P-Net for Anomaly De-
  tection in Retinal Images, pp. 360–377. 11 2020. ISBN 978-3-030-58564-8. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-030-58565-5 22.
Qihang Zhou, Guansong Pang, Yu Tian, Shibo He, and Jiming Chen. AnomalyCLIP: Object-
  agnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection. In The Twelfth International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  buC4E91xZE.
Yingjie Zhou, Xucheng Song, Yanru Zhang, Fanxing Liu, Ce Zhu, and Lingqiao Liu. Feature
  encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection. TNNLS, 2021.
Bo Zong, Qi Song, Martin Renqiang Min, Wei Cheng, Cristian Lumezanu, Daeki Cho, and Haifeng
  Chen. Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection. In ICLR,
  2018.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     D ETAILS O F S WIFT H YDRA

A.1   S ELF -R EINFORCING G ENERATIVE M ODULE

The algorithm A.1 describes a self-reinforcing generative module for training a Conditional VAE
(C-VAE) based generator, a Mamba detector, and a policy network within a reinforcement learning
framework. The input includes the number of episodes E and steps per episode T , evolving datasets
Detrain , Debalance , and De,anomalous
                           train
                                       for each episode e, the generator Fθ = Gψ ◦ Mϕ , and the Mamba
detector Wκ . The process begins by initializing the policy πω , the generator Fθ , and the detector
Wκ . For each episode e, the generator is first trained on the current training dataset Detrain , and the
detector is trained using the balanced dataset Debalance . A trajectory buffer B is initialized to store
states, actions, and rewards.
During each step t in the episode, the generator produces a latent vector z for an anomalous data
point, and the policy network samples an action a = (µ, σ) based on the state s = (z, Detrain ). A
perturbation δ = σ · ϵ + µ is applied to obtain a new latent vector z ′ . If z ′ is within the supported
range, a new sample x′ = Mϕ (z ′ , y = 1) is generated; otherwise, the One-Step to Feasible Action
algorithm 2 is used to adjust the action, correcting z ′ and updating the action. The reward R(s, a, e)
is calculated and stored in B along with the state and action, and the generated sample x′ is added
to a temporary set X̂ .
After completing all steps within an episode, the policy πω is updated using reinforcement learn-
ing techniques—such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) or behavior cloning—based on the
collected trajectory B. The top l samples with the highest rewards from X̂ are then added to the
training set Detrain . Subsequently, Debalance is refined from Detrain using the helper function Trim(.),
ensuring an equal number of elements in both classes.
To further ensure efficient training and avoid unnecessary iterations, a convergence criterion based
on the average reward per episode is integrated into the process. At the end of each episode, the
algorithm computes the average reward over the collected trajectory. This average reward is com-
pared against the best observed average reward, and if the improvement does not exceed a specified
threshold Ω for N consecutive episodes, the training loop is terminated early. This mechanism en-
sures that once the models and policy have stabilized—indicating convergence—further training is
halted, thereby preventing overfitting and saving computational resources.
Moreover, if the total number of generated anomalous data combined with the training anomalous
data exceeds the total number of normal data in the training set, the Trim(.) function could remove
some of the generated data. However, across our experiments on all 57 datasets, we observed that
Swift Hydra consistently converges before the anomalous data surpasses the normal data in quantity.
Note that in most cases, the number of available anomalies in the training data only accounts for
1%-15% of the entire dataset (see Appendix C.6), representing the primary challenge in anomaly
detection. If the total anomalous data were to exceed the normal data, one approach would be to
start generating (or collecting) more synthetic (or real, respectively) normal data.

A.2   O NE -S TEP TO F EASIBLE ACTIONS

The algorithm implements a one-step optimization process to adjust a latent variable z, aiming
to increase the diversity in the evolving dataset Detrain using Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
and entropy maximization. The process begins with initializing key parameters: the gradient step
size η, which controls the size of updates to z; the regularization parameter γ, which determines
the importance of diversity in the optimization; and the number of sampled datapoints ς, used to
estimate the dataset’s distribution.
In each iteration, a KDE model (detailed in Appendix A.3) is constructed using the dataset Detrain
to capture its distribution. This model helps estimate the density of the data points within the current
dataset. After building the KDE, we sample ς data points from it to approximate the dataset’s overall
distribution. These sampled points are then used to calculate the entropy H(z) (explained further in
Appendix A.3), which quantifies the diversity or uncertainty present in the dataset.
Following this, the algorithm calculates the loss Lpred based on a reward function (as defined in
Equation 3). With the loss computed, the latent variable z is updated through gradient descent.


                                                   17
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Algorithm 1: Self-Reinforcing Generative Module
   Input: E episodes, h steps per episode
   Evolving datasets Detrain , Debalance , De,anomalous
                                                train
                                                           for each episode e ∈ [1, E]
   C-VAE-based Generator Fθ = Gψ ◦ Mϕ
   Mamba detector Wκ
   Convergence parameters: threshold Ω and maximum episodes N with no improvement
   Output: Trained models Fθ , Wκ , policy πω , and datasets Detrain , Debalance
   // Initialize models, policy, and convergence tracking
 1 Initialize Policy πω , Generator Fθ , and Detector Wκ
 2 Set best avg reward ← −∞, no improvement count ← 0, e ← 1
 3 while e ≤ E and no improvement count ≤ N do
        // Train VAE model on the current training set
 4      TrainVAE(Detrain , Fθ )
        // Train detector model on balanced training data
 5      TrainDetector(Debalance , Wκ )
 6      Initialize trajectory B ← ∅ and new samples set X̂ ← ∅
        // Generate new samples to expand the training dataset
 7      for t = 1 to h do
                                          train
             // For each x ∈ De,anomalous             , compute latent representation
 8           z = Fθ (x)
             // Sample action based on state s = (z, Detrain )
 9           Sample action a = (µ, σ) using policy πω
             // Compute perturbation and form new latent vector
10           δ = σ · ϵ + µ where ϵ ∼ N (0, I)
11           Form new latent vector z ′ = z + δ
12           if z ′ is within the supported range then
13                 x′ = Mϕ (z ′ , y = 1)
14           else
                   // Adjust latent vector if out of feasible range
15                 z ′ = OneStepToFeasibleAction(z, Detrain )
16                 x′ = Mϕ (z ′ , y = 1)
                   // Update action to reflect the feasible adjustment
17                 a = (δ̂ = z ′ − z, σ)
             // Calculate reward for the current state-action pair
18           Calculate reward R(s, a, e)
19           Append (s, a, R(s, a, e)) to trajectory B and sample (x′ , y = 1) to X̂
        // Update policy using a gradient descent method (e.g., PPO)
20      TrainPolicy(πω , B)
        // Add top-l highest reward samples to the training set
21      Detrain ← Detrain ∪ X̂ <l
        // Balance the dataset by trimming over-represented classes
22      Debalance ← Trim(Detrain )
        // Compute the average reward for episode e
                               1
                                  P
23      avg rewarde ← |B|            (s,a,R)∈B R(s, a, e)
        // Check convergence criteria based on average reward
24      if avg rewarde > best avg reward + Ω then
25           best avg reward ← avg rewarde
26           no improvement count ← 0
27      else
28           no improvement count ← no improvement count + 1
29      e←e+1
30   return Fθ , Wκ , πω , Detrain , Debalance



                                                    18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Algorithm 2: One-Step To Feasible Action
   Input: Latent variable z, Current evolving dataset Detrain
   Output: New Optimized Latent Variable z ′
 1 Initialize gradient step size η
 2 Initialize regularization parameter γ ∈ [0, 1]
 3 Initialize number of datapoints for KDE sampling ς
 4 for i = 0 to η do
        // Construct Kernel Density Estimation on Detrain
 5      KDE ← KernelDensityEstimation(Detrain )
        // Sampling ς datapoints from KDE
 6      sampled z ← KDE.sample(ς)
        // Calculate Entropy H(z) based on ς datapoints and KDE
             Probability function
 7      H(z) ← Entropy(sampled z, KDE)
        // Compute prediction loss with entropy regularization
 8      Lpred ← log Wκ (Mϕ (zi , yi = 1)) − γ e · H(zi )
        // Update z by gradient descent
 9      zi ← zi − α · ∇Lpred (x, zi )
    ′
10 z ← zi
             ′
11 return z


 This adjustment directs z towards minimizing the prediction loss, making it more representative of
 diverse data that can potentially deceive the detector Wκ . Once the optimization is completed, the
 refined latent variable z ′ is returned, concluding the One-Step to Feasible Action algorithm.

  A.3   E NTROPY E STIMATION IN DYNAMIC T RAINING DATASETS
                                                                        train
 To effectively evaluate the diversity of our current evolving dataset De,anomalous , we measure its
 entropy using Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) followed by sampling-based entropy estimation.
                                                                                          train
 KDE helps us estimate the probability density function p(x) from the empirical data De,anomalous  .
 The formula for KDE is:

                                                     n
                                               1 X            x − xi
                                    p̂(x) =          K
                                              nh i=1            h

 Here, p̂(x) is the estimated probability density at point x, n is the total number of points in
   train
 De,anomalous , h is the bandwidth, and K is the kernel function. This function, a probability den-
 sity itself, weights the data points around x. For our analysis, we use the Gaussian kernel due to its
 smooth properties and infinite support:

                                                 1  u2
                                         K(u) = √ e− 2
                                                 2π

 The choice of bandwidth h significantly affects the estimator’s bias and variance. A smaller h leads
 to a detailed but potentially noisy estimator (risk of overfitting), whereas a larger h may overly
 smooth the data (risk of underfitting). We can adopt Silverman’s rule of thumb for selecting band-
 width with Gaussian kernels:

                                           h = 1.06σn−1/5

 where σ is the standard deviation of the dataset.
                                                                         train
 After estimating p̂(x) with KDE, calculating the entropy directly from De,anomalous would be cum-
 bersome and computationally intensive:


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         Z
                                    train
                                 H(De,anomalous )=−           p̂(x) log p̂(x) dx

Instead, we employ Monte Carlo Sampling to select ς data points xj from this estimated distribution
and approximate the entropy using these samples:

                                                                   ς
                                     train                   1X
                                  H(De,anomalous )≈−               log p̂(xj )
                                                             ς j=1

Here, xj are the samples drawn from p̂(x), and log p̂(xj ) is the natural logarithm of the estimated
density at each sampled point. We calculate the average of these logarithms across all ς sampled
points to approximate the entropy. This method provides a practical and computationally efficient
                                                                                           train
approach to estimate the entropy, reflecting the diversity and uncertainty of the dataset De,anomalous .

B     T HEOREMS A ND P ROOFS

B.1   R EWARD E STIMATION C ONSISTENCY

Theorem 1 If the reward function R is differentiable, Fθ is well-converged, and ẑi := zi −
ϵ · ∇zi (−R(Mϕ (zi , yi = 1), e)) for some small ϵ, then R (x̂i , e) > R (xi , e), where x̂i =
Mϕ (ẑi , yi = 1).
Proof. To prove this theorem, we first prove that for a well-converged Fθ , Mϕ is Lipschitz-
continuous.
Consider the decoder Mϕ : Rd → RP composed of N layers. For j = 1 to N − 1, each layer
computes:
                          hj = qj (hj−1 ) = ReLU(Wj hj−1 + bj ),
where h0 = zi ∈ Rd , Wj ∈ Rdj ×dj−1 , and bj ∈ Rdj . The output layer computes:
                          xi = Mϕ (zi ) = qN (hN −1 ) = WN hN −1 + bN ,

with WN ∈ RP ×dN −1 and bN ∈ RP .
To prove that Mϕ is Lipschitz continuous, consider two inputs zi , ẑi ∈ Rd . We aim to show:
                                  ∥Mϕ (zi ) − Mϕ (ẑi )∥ ≤ K∥zi − ẑi ∥,
where K is a finite constant.
Starting from the output layer:
                                                         (z )                     (ẑ )
                  ∥Mϕ (zi ) − Mϕ (ẑi )∥ = ∥qN (hN i−1 ) − qN (hN i−1 )∥
                                                         (z )                             (ẑ )
                                             = ∥WN hN i−1 + bN − WN hN i−1 − bN ∥
                                                          (z )            (ẑ )
                                             = ∥WN (hN i−1 − hN i−1 )∥
                                                                 (z )         (ẑ )
                                             ≤ ∥WN ∥2 ∥hN i−1 − hN i−1 ∥,

where ∥WN ∥2 denotes the spectral norm of WN .
For each hidden layer j = N − 1 down to 1:
                 (z )    (ẑ )            (z )           (ẑ )
              ∥hj i − hj i ∥ = ∥qj (hj−1
                                       i            i
                                         ) − qj (hj−1 )∥
                                               i  (z )               i                     (ẑ )
                                 = ∥ReLU(Wj hj−1 + bj ) − ReLU(Wj hj−1 + bj )∥
                                          (z )
                                          i         i    (ẑ )
                                 ≤ ∥Wj hj−1 − Wj hj−1 ∥                 (since ReLU is 1-Lipschitz)
                                            (zi )    (ẑi )
                                 ≤ ∥Wj ∥2 ∥hj−1   − hj−1    ∥.

                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By recursively applying these inequalities, we obtain:
                          j                                               j
                                           !                                                  !
      (zi )    (ẑi )                           (z )   (ẑ )
                         Y                                                Y
    ∥hj − hj ∥ ≤            ∥WN −k+1 ∥2 ∥h0 i − h0 i ∥ =                        ∥WN −k+1 ∥2       ∥zi − ẑi ∥.
                          k=1                                             k=1


At the output layer:
                                                                   (z )         (ẑ )
                         ∥Mϕ (zi ) − Mϕ (ẑi )∥ ≤ ∥WN ∥2 ∥hN i−1 − hN i−1 ∥.

Substituting the recursive bound:
                                                                     
                                                         N
                                                         Y
                         ∥Mϕ (zi ) − Mϕ (ẑi )∥ ≤             ∥Wj ∥2  ∥zi − ẑi ∥.
                                                         j=1

             QN
Define K = j=1 ∥Wj ∥2 . To ensure K is finite, we enforce bounds (Layer Normalization) on the
spectral norms: ∥Wj ∥2 ≤ sj , where sj are finite constants. Then:
                                                     N
                                                     Y
                                               K≤          sj .
                                                     j=1


If we choose sj = s ≤ 1 for all j, then K ≤ sN ≤ 1, which is finite. Therefore, Mϕ is Lipschitz
continuous with Lipschitz constant K, satisfying:
                                 ∥Mϕ (zi ) − Mϕ (ẑi )∥ ≤ K∥zi − ẑi ∥.

Thus, we finished proving that Mϕ is Lipschitz-continuous. Given Fθ is well converged, With Mϕ
being Lipschitz continuous and differentiable, a small learning rate ϵ induces a small change in latent
vector zi which results in a small change in the data point xi reconstructed by C-VAE. We can use a
first-order Taylor expansion for small ∆zi = ẑi − zi :

                             x̂i = Mϕ (ẑi ) ≈ Mϕ (zi ) + JMϕ (zi ) · ∆zi

where JMϕ (zi ) is the Jacobian matrix of Mϕ at zi .
From the update rule:

                                   ∆zi = ẑi − zi = ϵ · ∇zi R (xi , e)

Thus, the change in xi is:

                       x̂i − xi ≈ JMϕ (zi ) · ∆zi = ϵ · JMϕ (zi ) · ∇zi R (xi , e)

Since xi = Mϕ (zi ), by the chain rule, we have:

                                                  ⊤
                                ∇zi R (xi , e) = JM ϕ
                                                      (zi ) · ∇xi R (xi , e)

Therefore:

                                                      ⊤
                          x̂i − xi ≈ ϵ · JMϕ (zi ) · JM ϕ
                                                          (zi ) · ∇xi R (xi , e)

                     ⊤
Let 𭟋 = JMϕ (zi ) · JM ϕ
                         (zi ), which is a positive semi-definite matrix. Thus:

                                     x̂i − xi ≈ ϵ · 𭟋 · ∇xi R (xi , e)


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using a first-order Taylor expansion of R around xi :

                                                                          ⊤
                      ∆R = R (x̂i , e) − R (xi , e) ≈ ∇xi R (xi , e) (x̂i − xi )

Substituting x̂i − xi :

                                                          ⊤
                             ∆R ≈ ϵ · ∇xi R (xi , e) F · ∇xi R (xi , e)

Since 𭟋 is positive semi-definite and ϵ > 0 :

                                                 ∆R ≥ 0

More specifically, ∆R = 0 if and only if ∇xi R (xi , e) = 0. Otherwise, ∆R > 0. Therefore, under
the given conditions and for a sufficiently small ϵ :

                                         R (x̂i , e) > R (xi , e)

This completes the proof.

B.2   O NE DETECTOR INEFFECTIVELY HANDLES EVOLVING BALANCE DATA

Theorem 2. Suppose a feature space X ⊂ RP contains Un normal clusters and Ua anomalous
clusters, where each cluster u-th ∈ [Un + Ua ] is modeled as a Gaussian distribution N (µu , σ 2 IP ).
Let Vcluster be the cluster’s volume and Λ be the total overlapping volume between normal and
anomalous clusters, where the number of anomalous data points is equal to the number of normal
data points, the training loss Ltrain (Wκ ) is lower bounded by 41 · U ·V Λ − Λ in a case of linear Wκ .
                                                                          a   cluster   2

                                             P
Proof. Consider the feature space X ⊂ R with Un normal Gaussian clusters and Ua anomalous
Gaussian clusters, each modeled as N (µu , σ 2 IP ). The volume of each cluster is:

                                                     π P/2 (3σ)P
                                        Vcluster =              ,
                                                     Γ P2 + 1

where 3σ represents the radius covering 99.7% of the data points in a cluster. The total volume
occupied by the normal clusters is:

                                      Vtotal normal = Un · Vcluster ,

and the total volume occupied by the anomalous clusters is:

                                     Vtotal anomalous = Ua · Vcluster .

The clusters overlap in certain regions, resulting in a total overlapping volume Λ between normal
and anomalous clusters. Under our assumption, this overlapping region contains 50% of Λ, i.e., Λ2
normal data and 50% of Λ, i.e., Λ2 anomalous data.
Note that since the datapoints are in the overlapping area, we assume that the unique features are
negligible while noise features from negative class are dominant. The unique volumes of the normal
and anomalous clusters, excluding the overlapping regions, are:

                                                                    Λ
                                  Vunique normal = Vtotal normal −
                                                                    2
                                                                    Λ
                                                  = Un · Vcluster −
                                                                     2

                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         Λ
                               Vunique anomalous = Vtotal anomalous −
                                                                         2
                                                                     Λ
                                                 = Ua · Vcluster −
                                                                     2
For simplicity, we assume that the detector Wκ constructs decision boundaries around the normal
clusters. Specifically, the detector aims to enclose the normal clusters within its decision regions
to classify them as normal, while any data points outside these regions are considered anomalous.
As indicated in the work of Chen et al. (2022), a single detector focuses on both unique features
and noise features, even though unique features are negligible. This means the detector Wκ seeks
to minimize False Negatives by primarily capturing the normal data based on noise features, while
overlooking unique features. As the model size χ increases, the decision boundaries of the detector
can more precisely conform to the normal clusters, potentially leading to overfitting of the normal
data. Let q(χ) denote the proportion of the unique normal volume that the detector’s decision
boundary covers:

                                Vcovered normal = q(χ) · Vunique normal .

The False Negative Rate (FNR), which represents the proportion of normal data not covered by the
detector, is:

                                          FNR = 1 − q(χ).

Because the detector’s decision boundary encloses the normal clusters, it inevitably includes parts
of the overlapping regions Λ. Therefore, the detector inadvertently covers some anomalous data
within the overlapping regions, leading to False Positives. The volume of anomalous data incorrectly
classified as normal (False Positives) is:

                                                           Λ
                                          VFP = q(χ) ·
                                                           2
The False Positive Rate (FPR), representing the proportion of anomalous data misclassified as nor-
mal, is:

                                                      VFP
                                     FPR =
                                                Vunique anomalous
                                                   q(χ) · Λ2
                                            =
                                                Ua · Vcluster − Λ2

Assuming equal prior probabilities for normal and anomalous data, the expected error L(Wκ ) is:

                                   1          1
                        L (Wκ ) =    · FNR + · FPR
                                   2          2                      !
                                   1                  q(χ) · Λ2
                                 =     1 − q(χ) +
                                   2              Ua · Vcluster − Λ2
                                                                             !
                                   1                     q(χ) · Λ
                                 =       1 − q(χ) +
                                                    2 Ua · Vcluster − Λ2

                                   2

Our goal is to find the minimum expected error Ltrain (Wκ ). To achieve this, we consider how
L(Wκ ) varies with q(χ). Since the detector aims to maximize coverage of the normal clusters (i.e.,
maximize q(χ)) to minimize False Negatives, we consider the case where q(χ) = 1, corresponding
to the detector fully covering the unique normal volume.
Substituting q(χ) = 1 into L(Wκ ), we get:


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                   !
                                          1                    1 · Λ2
                           Ltrain (Wκ ) ≥           1−1+
                                          2              Ua · Vcluster − Λ2
                                               1         Λ
                                           =     ·
                                               2 2 Ua · Vcluster − Λ2


                                            1         Λ
                                           =  ·
                                            2 2Ua · Vcluster − Λ
                                            1         Λ
                                           = ·
                                            4 Ua · Vcluster − Λ2

This expression represents the minimum expected error achievable by any detector that constructs
decision boundaries around the normal clusters. Due to the overlapping volume Λ between the
normal and anomalous clusters, there is an inherent lower bound on the expected error Ltrain (Wκ )
that any detector of this type can achieve. The detector cannot reduce the error below this bound
because, in maximizing coverage of the normal data to minimize False Negatives, it inevitably
includes portions of the overlapping anomalous data, resulting in unavoidable False Positives.

B.3   M O ME EFFECTIVELY HANDLES EVOLVING BALANCE DATA

Theorem 3. Let Ltest (F) and Ltest (Wκ ) represent the expected error on the test set for the Mixture
of Mamba Experts (MoME) model and a single detector, respectively. For any value of Λ, employing
MoME with {f1 , f2 , . . . , fM } guarantees that the minimum expected error on the training set is
Ltrain (F) = 0 and the expected error on the test set satisfies Ltest (F) ≤ Ltest (Wκ ).
Proof. Similar to the setting in Theorem 2, we also consider the feature space X ⊂ RP with Un
normal clusters and Ua anomalous clusters, each modeled as Gaussian distributions N (µu , σ 2 IP ).
                                                    P /2         P
Each cluster occupies a volume Vcluster = πΓ P(3σ)       and the total overlapping volume between
                                                ( 2 +1)
normal and anomalous clusters is Λ. Again, since the data points are in the overlapping area, we
assume that unique features are negligible while noise features from the negative class are dominant.
Recall that, we decompose the balanced dataset into clusters {C1 , C2 , . . . , CU }, where U = Un + Ua
is determined using the elbow method. After that, we train a set of experts {f1 , f2 , . . . , fM }, each
acting as an expert for specific data clusters, following the top k gated Mixture-of-Experts approach.
Let Detrain be the training dataset. Each data point x ∈ Detrain belongs to a cluster Cu and has a true
label y(x):

                                         −1, if x ∈ a normal cluster,
                            y(x) =
                                         +1, if x ∈ an anomalous cluster.

In the overlapping regions Λ, due to probabilistic assignment and expert overspecification, we as-
sume each cluster Cu has at least one specialized expert fm predicting y(x) using both unique and
noise features, similar to Wk . The gating network λ(x, ℵg , ℵnoise ) minimizes classification loss but
primarily focuses on unique features, assigning higher weights to the appropriate experts. These
properties of feature capturing have been highlighted by Chen et al. (2022). For each x ∈ Detrain ,
the MoE F’s output is given by:
                                                   X
                      F(x, ℵg , ℵnoise , W) =              λm (x, ℵg , ℵnoise )fm (x; W).
                                                   m∈Tx

Primarily based on unique features, the gating network learns to assign significant weights to the
expert(s) that correctly classify x, ensuring that the model output F(x) matches the true label y(x).
Thus, the expected error on the training set is:

                                               1           X
                            Ltrain (F) =                             1F(x)̸=y(x) = 0,
                                           |Detrain |
                                                      x∈D train
                                                             e


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where 1F(x)̸=y(x) is an indicator function that equals 1 if F(x) ̸= y(x) and 0 otherwise. This
completes the proof of the expected error of F on the training set.
For the test set, we aim to show that: Ltest (F) ≤ Ltest (Wκ )
Let’s consider the test dataset Dtest , drawn from the same distribution as the training dataset Detrain .
If the data points in the test set lie completely outside U clusters from the training set, both F and
W will fail to make correct predictions. This is because we are assuming that each classifier forms a
decision boundary that tightly fits the cluster it captures. Any data point lying outside these decision
boundaries is considered negative for the class corresponding to that cluster. Therefore, without
loss of generality, we only need to compare the errors of the two models within the region of the U
clusters.
Each data point x ∈ Dtest belongs to one of the clusters Cu and has a true label y(x) as defined earlier.
Suppose input x lying in a non-overlapping region DΛ̃ , the expert fm specialized in cluster Cu has
learned to classify data points from Cu correctly. The gating network λ (x, ℵg , ℵnoise ) effectively
routes x to the correct expert fm , resulting in the MoE model predicting y(x) accurately. Therefore,
for these non-overlapping regions, the MoE output is:

                        F (x, ℵg , ℵnoise , W) = y(x),      ∀x ∈ Cu and x ∈ DΛ̃
                        =⇒ LΛ̃ (F) = 0
Similarly, the single detector Wκ , having been trained on the entire dataset, can also correctly predict
y(x) in these non-overlapping regions since the classes are well-separated. Thus, the expected error
in this region is negligible:

                                                 1 X
                                 LΛ̃ (Wκ ) =          1Wκ (x)̸=y(x)
                                               |DΛ̃ |
                                                    x∈DΛ̃

                                           = LΛ̃ (F)
                                           =0

where 1Wκ (x)̸=y(x) is an indicator function that equals 1 if Wκ (x) ̸= y(x) and 0 otherwise.
Now, consider the overlapping region Λ. Assume an equal number of anomalous and normal data
points within Λ, with their features being significantly similar. The experts, specialized in their
respective clusters, capture cluster-specific patterns even in these overlapping areas. The gating
network λ (x, ℵg , ℵnoise ), trained to minimize overall classification loss based mainly on unique
features, assigns higher weights to the correct experts that are more likely to predict the true label
y(x). Consequently, F correctly classifies x in Λ with high probability, quantified as 1 − εΛ , where
εΛ is the MoE’s error rate in the overlapping region.
In contrast, the single detector Wκ encounters inherent ambiguity in Λ due to the negligible presence
of unique features and the dominance of noise features from the negative class within the cluster it
aims to capture. Furthermore, with an equal number of normal and anomalous data points assumed
in this region, the misclassification probability becomes:

                                                              1
                                          Loverlap (Wκ ) =
                                                              2
Let pΛ̃ be the probability that a test point lies in a non-overlapping region Λ̃, and pΛ be the prob-
ability that it lies in overlapping region Λ. The expected error of the single detector on the test set
is:

                                                                  1   pΛ
                                Ltest (Wκ ) = pΛ̃ × 0 + pΛ ×        =
                                                                  2    2
For the MoE model, the expected error on the test set is:

                                Ltest (F) = pΛ̃ × 0 + pΛ × εΛ = pΛ εΛ


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the overlapping region Λ, the worst-case scenario for F occurs when it fails to route the input to
the correct expert, resulting in a maximum error of 12 . However, if some test points are identical or
very similar to the training points, the routing network is more likely to direct these inputs to the
correct expert, as it primarily focuses on unique features. On the other hand, the single detector
Wκ considers both unique and noise features, with noise features dominating. Therefore, we have
εΛ ≤ 12 , leading to the conclusion:

                                       Ltest (F) = pΛ εΛ
                                                   pΛ
                                                 ≤
                                                    2
                                                 ≤ Ltest (Wκ ) .

This completes the proof.

C     M ORE E XPERIMENTS

C.1     S WIFT H YDRA S ETTINGS

C.1.1    H YPERPARAMETERS

              Hyperparameter                                         Value
              Learning rate for C-VAE Model                          0.003
              Learning rate for Mamba Model                          0.001
              Learning rate for Generator                           0.0001
              Total epoch for Detector Model                          600
              Total epoch for Generator Model                         500
              Optimizer                                   Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
              Number of steps per episode                             500
              Number of episodes                                      200
              Minibatch size                                          256
              Discount factor γ                                       0.95
              Activation function for Mamba Model                 LeakyReLU
              Layer Depth for Mamba Model                               2
              Activation function for C-VAE Model                    ReLU
              Bandwidth                                                0.5
              Weight KL                                               0.55
              Number of experts                                        20
              Top k experts                                             2
              Detection threshold                                      0.2
              Sampling from a KDE                                     300
              Policy Training                             Proximal Policy Optimization

                             Table 2: Hyperparameters for Swift Hydra

In this section, we present the hyperparameters selected for Swift Hydra, as shown in Table 2, and
explain the rationale behind each choice. These hyperparameters are carefully designed to balance
model performance, training stability, and computational efficiency.
The learning rates for different models are chosen based on their complexity and training dynamics.
The C-VAE model uses a relatively high learning rate of 0.003 to promote faster convergence during
training. In contrast, the single Mamba-based detector is over-specified in terms of the number of
parameters to effectively capture the data generated by the C-VAE, stored in Debalance . To ensure
stability during its optimization, a lower learning rate of 0.001 is set, considering its sensitivity to
parameter updates. The Generator model, which is part of a more delicate generative process, has
an even smaller learning rate of 0.0001 to prevent large updates that could destabilize training.
The number of steps per episode (500) and the total number of episodes (200) are chosen to allow
the model to generate a total of 100,000 datapoints (200 * 500) across all episodes. This quantity


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is sufficient to augment any imbalanced dataset within ADBench. The minibatch size of 256 is
selected to strike a balance between training stability and computational efficiency, ensuring enough
data is processed per update without causing excessive memory usage.
The discount factor γ = 0.95 is set to ensure that, in the initial phase, the RL agent not only focuses
on generating datapoints to deceive Wκ but also actively explores its surrounding environment. As
training progresses, the entropy term in the reward function gradually diminishes due to γ, the model
increasingly concentrates on generating points specifically aimed at deceiving the detector Wκ .
For activation functions, LeakyReLU is used in the Mamba Model to address the “dying ReLU”
problem, allowing the model to handle negative inputs more effectively, while ReLU is used in the
VAE model to facilitate faster training.
Recall the fact that, we use Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) to learn the feature distribution of
the dataset Detrain in our framework. An important hyperparameter in this process is the bandwidth
h, which controls the smoothness of the probability density function, thereby balancing bias and
variance. While h can be determined using Silverman’s rule of thumb, as described in Appendix
A.3, for our experiments, we opted to use the well-known bandwidth parameter of 0.5 for KDE.
Despite this simple choice, we still achieved the desired results.
The weight of the KL divergence in the VAE is set to 0.55. This is carefully selected to balance
reconstruction accuracy and latent space regularization, preventing overfitting while maintaining
meaningful latent representations. For a more detailed explanation of how the trade-off between
reconstruction loss and KL loss affects the performance of Swift Hydra, we encourage readers to
refer to Appendix C.4.
To ensure that the model can capture all potential clusters generated, we overspecified the number
of experts to 20. This allows the model to avoid missing any clusters. Indeed, the number of clusters
found using KMeans+Elbow on datasets in ADBench is usually no more than 10. For selecting
the top k in the Mixture of Experts to ensure only k experts are used during inference (thus saving
inference time), we set k = 2.
Our policy training algorithm is Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Do et al., 2024; Schulman
et al., 2017; Do et al., 2021; Ngo et al., 2024; Khoi et al., 2021). In addition, the detection threshold
of 0.2 is chosen so that if the model’s confidence exceeds this threshold, the predicted datapoint is
considered anomalous. Finally, sampling 300 times from KDE provides enough data to accurately
model the underlying distributions without incurring excessive computational costs. Overall, these
hyperparameters are carefully tuned to enhance model performance, ensure training stability, and
optimize computational resources.

C.1.2      M ODEL S IZE A ND T RAINING C OST

 AI Module Type                                                        Number of Parameters   Training time per batch   Total training time
 C-VAE Generator                                                             458,907                  0.0011                  3.265
 Mamba-based Detector (Single)                                               274,542                  0.0083                  8.723
                                            Gating Network                    6,164                   0.0001                  0.286
 Mixture of Mamba Experts Detector (MoME)   Expert Network                   33,021                   0.0026                  1.287
                                            Mixture of Mamba Experts
                                                                             666,584                  0.0032                 489.003
                                            (20 Experts, topK=2)


Table 3: Number of parameters for each component in Swift Hydra, training time per batch, and
total training time. The total training time for the C-VAE and the Mamba-based Detector (Single)
is measured per episode. For MoME, the two components, Gating Network and Expert Network,
are measured over the entire training data and generated data after completing the Self-Reinforcing
Module, calculated across all batches in a single epoch. Additionally, we report the total training
time of the Mixture of Mamba Experts (20 Experts, topK=2) across all epochs, as shown in the table.

Table 3 presents the number of parameters for each model, including the C-VAE Generator, Mamba-
based Detector (Single model), and Mixture of Mamba Experts Detector (MoME). On average, a
single expert in MoME has approximately 33,021 parameters. However, with 20 experts and a gating
network, the total parameter count for MoME reaches 666,584. In contrast, the Single Mamba-based


                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Detector contains around 274,542 parameters, while the C-VAE Generator comprises approximately
458,907 parameters.
In addition to reporting the training time per batch alongside the number of parameters, we have
also measured the total training time for each stage of our algorithm. These times were recorded on
a workstation equipped with two Nvidia RTX 4090 GPUs. Since this is a reinforcement learning
framework, the number of episodes required for training heavily depends on the specific problem
being addressed. Therefore, we only measure the total training time of the C-VAE Generator and
Single Mamba Detector per episode. On the other hand, the total training time for the Mixture of
Mamba Experts Detector is measured after completing Phase 1, using all the data generated during
that phase.
Our training methodology supports two approaches depending on the hardware configuration: se-
quential training or parallel training of the experts. In the sequential approach, each expert is trained
one at a time, selecting and training on clusters sequentially. This approach is more memory-efficient
and requires less GPU VRAM. In contrast, the parallel approach involves all experts selecting their
clusters simultaneously and training concurrently. While faster, this method demands significantly
more GPU VRAM. The total training time for the Mixture of Mamba Experts (20 Experts, topK=2)
across all epochs, as shown in the table, was measured using the parallel training method.

C.2       S WIFT H YDRA : M ORE P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

C.2.1        B ENCHMARKING AGAINST A DDITIONAL D ETECTION M ETHODS O N ADB ENCH
We conducted additional experiments to compare our proposed method, Swift Hydra, with several
state-of-the-art tabular anomaly detection methods, including the supervised FTTransformer (Gor-
ishniy et al., 2023), the unsupervised ECOD (Li et al., 2022), and the semi-supervised DevNet (Pang
et al., 2019b), PreNet (Pang et al., 2019a), DeepSAD (Ruff et al., 2020), and FEAWAD (Zhou et al.,
2021). The results is shown in Table 4.

        Method                 ECOD              DevNet             PReNet           DeepSAD          FEAWAD           FTTransformer    SwifHydra (MoME)
                            AUCROC    TIF     AUCROC      TIF   AUCROC       TIF   AUCROC   TIF     AUCROC    TIF     AUCROC     TIF    AUCROC        TIF
Train/Test Ratio (40/60%)    0.80     26.00    0.82    24.08     0.85    128.71     0.84    19.02    0.86    168.62    0.89     50.66      0.93      4.01
Train/Test Ratio (30/70%)    0.78     28.32    0.81    25.54     0.84    147.74     0.83    20.53    0.82    215.26    0.84     56.23      0.91      4.79
Train/Test Ratio (20/80%)    0.77     30.04    0.80    26.00     0.83    184.29     0.82    22.75    0.80    225.00    0.80     60.98      0.90      5.22
Train/Test Ratio (10/90%)    0.75     33.36    0.79    27.90     0.82    190.39     0.81    27.58    0.79    233.13    0.77     66.23      0.87      5.84
                                                                                                                       TIF = Total Inference Time (Seconds)


Table 4: The performance of Swift Hydra and other baseline models, including ECOD, DevNet,
PReNet, DeepSAD, FEAWAD, and FTTransformer, is evaluated on ADBench using two key crite-
ria: AUC-ROC and Total Inference Time (TIF). The AUC-ROC is computed as the average across
all 57 datasets, while the TIF measures the total time required by each model to predict all data
points across these datasets. To analyze the impact of training data size on performance, we vary the
train/test ratios. The highest AUC-ROC values are highlighted for clarity.

Semi-supervised methods typically require only a small amount of labeled data to achieve AUC-
ROC scores comparable to modern unsupervised methods such as DTE, Rejex (as shown in Table
1), and ECOD. However, these methods often come with high computational costs, particularly
when applied to large datasets. While PReNet and FEAWAD generally deliver fast prediction times,
their performance can significantly slow down on certain datasets within ADBench (e.g., backdoor,
celeba, census, donor, fraud), leading to higher overall inference times. This slowdown occurs
because some components in these models rely on per-datapoint computations that do not support
parallelization, resulting in substantial delays for datasets with a large number of records. The
supervised FTTransformer, built on robust backbone architectures like ResNet and Transformer,
achieves AUC-ROC scores that are among the highest across all SOTA methods in baselines, nearly
matching those of Swift Hydra. However, its performance declines significantly when applied to
sparse datasets.
On the other hand, Swift Hydra offers a distinct advantage by generating unseen data to enhance test
set coverage. Through its integration with the Mixture of Mamba Experts (MoME), Swift Hydra
consistently outperforms other methods in both AUC-ROC and inference time, establishing itself as
the most effective and efficient solution for tabular anomaly detection.


                                                                              28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2.2    B ENCHMARKING AGAINST A DDITIONAL OVERSAMPLING M ETHODS O N ADBENCH


Figure 5: The average performance of various oversampling methods on the ADBench dataset. The
evaluation metric is AUC-ROC

In addition to the previously discussed experiments, we also compare the performance of Swift Hy-
dra against other oversampling methods using the AUC-ROC metric. As shown in Figure 3, our
method is capable of generating the most diverse set of anomalous data points. The goal of this
experiment is to assess how accurately Swift Hydra (MoME) performs given these diverse gen-
erated data points. Figure 5 presents a comparison of our method’s performance against various
oversampling techniques included in the ADBench baselines. The results clearly demonstrate that
Swift Hydra outperforms all other methods, achieving the highest AUC-ROC on the test set, with a
40/60% train/test ratio. This performance is primarily due to Swift Hydra’s ability to generate data
points that extend beyond the boundaries of the training set.
Specifically, in the dataset illustrated in Figure 3, it is evident that the anomalous data points in the
test set lie outside the boundaries of those in the training set. Traditional oversampling methods
fail to generate data beyond these boundaries, which naturally results in a lower AUC-ROC on the
test set. Deep learning-based oversampling methods, such as VAE-Geometry and Oversampling
GAN, can produce more diverse data than traditional techniques. However, Oversampling GAN
often encounters a model collapse issue, where it focuses on generating data points that deceive the
detector very effectively, leading to an over-concentration of samples. On the other hand, VAE-
Geometry relies on the geometric structure of the data for generation, but if the structure is too
complex, it struggles to produce sufficiently diverse data points. As a result, both methods ultimately
fall short of Swift Hydra in terms of AUC-ROC performance.

C.3     T OY E XAMPLE : G ENERALIZATION A BILITY AND D ECISION B OUNDARY ON 2D DATA

We conduct a toy example with 2D data to illustrate the generalization ability and decision boundary
of the MoME module. First, we generate a dataset where the normal data follows a sine curve, while
the anomalies are randomly distributed around the sine curve. Then, we use the Self-Reinforcing
Module to generate additional anomalous data and visualize the boundary of the MoME in Figure 6.
From the visualization, we can observe that the red regions (indicating areas predicted by MoME
as containing normal data) fully encapsulate the dark blue points (normal data). The blue regions
(indicating areas predicted by MoME as containing anomalous data) completely cover the generated
anomalous points (green) and the test set anomalies (orange). An interesting observation is that the
green points (generated anomalies) cause the decision boundary to tightly enclose the dark blue
points (normal data). This enhances MoME’s ability to accurately identify anomalous data in the
test set, as these anomalies are positioned farther from the decision boundary. As expected, the
model generalized well to the anomalies in the test set.

C.4     A BLATION S TUDY

C.4.1    I MPACT OF S ELF -R EINFORCING M ODULE ON P ERFORMANCE ACROSS D EEP M ODELS
We also compare the performance of Swift Hydra with various deep models (as backbone models)
using two key metrics: AUC-ROC and Total Inference Time (for predicting the entire ADBench
dataset) under two settings: with and without the use of an oversampling technique (i.e., VAE-


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Visualization of the decision boundaries of the Detector Mixture of Mamba Experts
(MoME) after training on generated anomalous data, original anomalous data, and normal data from
the training set. The visualization highlights the resulting boundaries distinguishing anomalous and
normal data in the test set.

          Methods                     Transformer          Mamba             Swift Hydra(Transformer)             Swift Hydra(Mamba)
                                 AUCROC        TIF    AUCROC         TIF     AUCROC                 TIF           AUCROC          TIF
 Train/Test Ratio (40/60%)            0.78     5.18       0.80       3.54          0.90            7.96              0.93         4.01
 Train/Test Ratio (30/70%)            0.75     6.07       0.77       3.62          0.88            8.79              0.91         4.79
 Train/Test Ratio (20/80%)            0.72     7.10       0.73       4.11          0.86            9.91              0.90         5.22
 Train/Test Ratio (10/90%)            0.69     8.22       0.71       4.63          0.82            10.36             0.87         5.84
                                                                                               TIF = Total Inference Time (Seconds)

Table 5: Comparison of Vanilla Transformer and Vanilla Mamba with Transformer and Mamba
enhanced by the Self-Reinforcing Module in Swift Hydra, evaluated based on AUC-ROC and Total
Inference Time (TIF).

        Methods              Transformer (VAE-Geometry)    Mamba (VAE-Geometry)           Swift Hydra(Transformer)   Swift Hydra(Mamba)
                             AUCROC           TIF          AUCROC           TIF           AUCROC           TIF       AUCROC        TIF
 Train/Test Ratio (40/60%)     0.83           5.23           0.85           3.40            0.90           7.96         0.93       4.01
 Train/Test Ratio (30/70%)     0.80           6.11           0.83           3.58            0.88           8.79         0.91       4.79
 Train/Test Ratio (20/80%)     0.78           7.02           0.81           4.02            0.86           9.91         0.90       5.22
 Train/Test Ratio (10/90%)     0.75           8.38           0.78           4.65            0.82           8.36         0.87       5.84
                                                                                                      TIF = Total Inference Time (Seconds)


Table 6: AUC-ROC performance of various backbone models when applying oversampling tech-
niques


Geometry). It is important to note that VAE-Geometry is chosen as the oversampling method for
other backbone models due to its best performance among the oversampling baselines. As shown
in Table 5 and Table 6, Swift Hydra outperforms other methods in terms of AUC-ROC while main-
taining competitive total inference time.


                                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AUC-ROC Evaluation. Regarding the accuracy in Table 5, standalone Mamba or Transformer
models on ADBench exhibit significantly lower AUC-ROC compared to Swift Hydra (Mamba) and
Swift Hydra (Transformer), which leverage the Self-Reinforcing Module. This is primarily because
these models do not utilize any oversampling techniques (RL-guiled GenAI), which limits their data
generalization capabilities. However, even when employing a powerful oversampling technique like
VAE-Geometry (Table 6), the AUC-ROC of these models still falls short of that achieved by Swift
Hydra. This is due to the fact that the datapoints generated by VAE-Geometry are not as diverse or
of as high quality as those generated by Swift Hydra, as discussed in the previous experiment.
Total Inference Time Evaluation. In terms of total inference time, it is important to note that
the Mamba model has a prediction complexity of O(1), while the Transformer has a prediction com-
plexity of O(N). This makes Mamba substantially faster than both Transformer and Fully Connected
networks. When Mamba is integrated into Swift Hydra with a Top k Mixture of Experts (k = 2),
one might expect the prediction time of Swift Hydra to be nearly double that of the regular Mamba
model. However, the interesting outcome here is that we use only a two-layer depth for Mamba
and overspecify the number of experts to 20. This allows us to capture the data complexity effec-
tively, and since the model has just two layers, the additional time difference with k = 2 is minimal
compared to a larger Mamba model.


C.4.2       I MPACT OF P ROBABILISTIC C LUSTER A SSIGNMENT ON M O ME P ERFORMANCE


         Method              Swift Hydra (MoME-Traditional Training Approach)           Swift Hydra (MoME-Our Training Approach)
                                                AUCROC                          TIF                    AUCROC                      TIF
 Train/Test Ratio (40/60%)                        0.892                         4.015                    0.934                     4.012
 Train/Test Ratio (30/70%)                        0.865                         4.771                    0.913                     4.793
 Train/Test Ratio (20/80%)                        0.853                         5.234                    0.902                     5.221
 Train/Test Ratio (10/90%)                        0.828                         5.922                    0.874                     5.843


Table 7: Comparison of AUC-ROC and Total Inference Time (TIF) between Swift Hydra using
the traditional MoME training approach and Swift Hydra with the proposed probabilistic training
approach across different train/test ratios.


The results in Table 7 highlight a clear advantage of Swift Hydra with the proposed probabilistic
training approach for MoME over the traditional MoME training approach. The primary reason
for this improvement lies in addressing the “winner-take-all” problem that commonly affects the
traditional training method.
In the traditional MoME approach, the gating network immediately starts assigning samples to ex-
perts based on their performance scores. During the early training steps, when the experts have not
yet converged, their performance scores are arbitrary. This randomness can lead to one expert re-
ceiving disproportionately more samples than others, simply due to chance. As a result, this expert
improves faster and continues to dominate sample assignments, creating a feedback loop where it
becomes the sole contributor to predictions. This phenomenon, known as “winner-take-all,” reduces
the diversity of the expert ensemble and significantly hinders the generalization ability of the model.
In contrast, Swift Hydra with the probabilistic training approach temporarily deactivates the gating
network during the early training phase. Instead, it uses a probabilistic assignment mechanism (as
described in Equation 6) to ensure that all experts receive equal opportunities to learn. Once the
experts have sufficiently converged, the gating network is reactivated to assign samples based on
their performance. This method prevents any single expert from monopolizing the training process
early on and ensures a more balanced and effective ensemble.
The results in the table demonstrate that this improved training strategy consistently achieves higher
AUC-ROC scores across all train/test ratios compared to the traditional approach, without incurring
additional Total Inference Time (TIF). This validates the effectiveness of addressing the ”winner-
take-all” problem to enhance both the generalization and overall performance of the model.


                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: The average performance of various oversampling methods on the ADBench dataset. The
evaluation metric is AUC-ROC


C.4.3    KL D IVERGENCE AND R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS T RADE - OFF IN C ONDITIONAL
         VARIATIONAL AUTO E NCODER
In this section, we provide insights into how the weight impacts the C-VAE during data generation.
Specifically, when optimizing the ELBO loss of C-VAE, we need to consider two components: the
Reconstruction Loss and the KL Loss. If more weight is placed on the Reconstruction Loss, the C-
VAE will generate data more cautiously, closely adhering to the target class. However, this caution
results in less diverse samples. Conversely, if the weight is placed more on the KL Loss, the C-VAE
generates more diverse data, but it may also produce samples that overlap with other classes.
To identify the optimal weight for the KL Loss, we experimented with various values of p ranging
from 0.4 to 0.7. If the weight for the KL Loss is p, the weight for the Reconstruction Loss will
be 1 − p. As shown in Figure 7, the optimal weight for the KL Loss is found to be 0.55. In the
range of 0.4 to 0.5, the C-VAE generates overly cautious samples, resulting in a lack of diversity.
Consequently, the 200 episodes of RL training are insufficient to cover the entire set of anomalous
data in the test set. On the other hand, in the range of 0.6 to 0.7, the model focuses too much on
optimizing the KL Loss, leading to the generation of highly diverse anomalous samples. However,
these samples tend to overlap significantly with normal samples, causing Swift Hydra’s performance
to decline after 200 episodes.

C.5     RL-AGENT A SSISTANCE F REQUENCY E XPERIMENT

In this section, we illustrate the average percentage of invalid actions taken by the agent in each
episode (averaged over 57 datasets from ADBench). From Figure 8, it is evident that in the initial
stages, the RL-Agent generates a high number of invalid actions, frequently requiring assistance
from the One-Step to Feasible Action algorithm described in Section 3.1.2. However, since every
time the RL-Agent takes an invalid action, it learns in a supervised manner using the feasible action
provided by the One-Step to Feasible Action algorithm, a significant reduction in invalid actions is
observed after about 25 to 50 episodes.
As a result, the training time becomes considerably faster since fewer Gradient Descent steps are
needed (as Gradient Descent is primarily performed to optimize the reward function whenever an
invalid action is taken). From episode 150 onward, the RL-Agent rarely makes invalid actions, and
its actions become highly effective (as reflected in the AUC-ROC in previous experiment), indicating
that the RL-Agent has successfully generalized.

C.6     DATASETS I N ADB ENCH

ADBench features a comprehensive collection of 57 datasets designed for anomaly detection re-
search, as detailed in the table. Among these, 47 datasets are well-established and widely used
across various real-world domains, such as healthcare (e.g., disease diagnosis), audio and language


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Percentage of invalid actions provided by the RL-Agent in each episode, with each episode
consisting of 500 timesteps. The measurement is conducted over a total of 200 episodes. The X-
axis represents the episodes, and the Y-axis shows the percentage of invalid actions provided by the
RL-Agent.


processing (e.g., speech recognition), image analysis (e.g., object identification), and finance (e.g.,
fraud detection). Additionally, ADBench introduces 10 more complex datasets from computer vi-
sion (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) domains, enriched with larger sample sizes and
higher-dimensional features. These datasets utilize pretrained models to extract embeddings, en-
abling the representation of more complex patterns. All datasets are provided in a user-friendly
format as compressed NumPy array files (‘.npz‘), with detailed instructions and processing codes
available for seamless application

 Number      Data                 # Samples     # Features    # Anomaly      % Anomaly      Category
 1           ALOI                 49534         27            1508           3.04           Image
 2           annthyroid           7200          6             534            7.42           Healthcare
 3           backdoor             95329         196           2329           2.44           Network
 4           breastw              683           9             239            34.99          Healthcare
 5           campaign             41188         62            4640           11.27          Finance
 6           cardio               1831          21            176            9.61           Healthcare
 7           Cardiotocography     2114          21            466            22.04          Healthcare
 8           celeba               202599        39            4547           2.24           Image
 9           census               299285        500           18568          6.20           Sociology
 10          cover                286048        10            2747           0.96           Botany
 11          donors               619326        10            36710          5.93           Sociology
 12          fault                1941          27            673            34.67          Physical
 13          fraud                284807        29            492            0.17           Finance
 14          glass                214           7             9              4.21           Forensic
 15          Hepatitis            80            19            13             16.25          Healthcare
 16          http                 567498        3             2211           0.39           Web
 17          InternetAds          1966          1555          368            18.72          Image
 18          Ionosphere           351           32            126            35.90          Oryctognosy
 19          landsat              6435          36            1333           20.71          Astronautics
 20          letter               1600          32            100            6.25           Image
 21          Lymphography         148           18            6              4.05           Healthcare
 22          magic.gamma          19020         10            6688           35.16          Physical
 23          mammography          11183         6             260            2.32           Healthcare
 24          mnist                7603          100           700            9.21           Image
 25          musk                 3062          166           97             3.17           Chemistry
 26          optdigits            5216          64            150            2.88           Image
 27          PageBlocks           5393          10            510            9.46           Document
 28          pendigits            6870          16            156            2.27           Image
 29          Pima                 768           8             268            34.90          Healthcare


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 30         satellite             6435           36               2036            31.64          Astronautics
 31         satimage-2            5803           36               71              1.22           Astronautics
 32         shuttle               49097          9                3511            7.15           Astronautics
 33         skin                  245057         3                50859           20.75          Image
 34         smtp                  95156          3                30              0.03           Web
 35         SpamBase              4207           57               1679            39.91          Document
 36         speech                3686           400              61              1.65           Linguistics
 37         Stamps                340            9                31              9.12           Document
 38         thyroid               3772           6                93              2.47           Healthcare
 39         vertebral             240            6                30              12.50          Biology
 40         vowels                1456           12               50              3.43           Linguistics
 41         Waveform              3443           21               100             2.90           Physics
 42         WBC                   223            9                10              4.48           Healthcare
 43         WDBC                  367            30               10              2.72           Healthcare
 44         Wilt                  4819           5                257             5.33           Botany
 45         wine                  129            13               10              7.75           Chemistry
 46         WPBC                  198            33               47              23.74          Healthcare
 47         yeast                 1484           8                507             34.16          Biology
 48         CIFAR10               5263           512              263             5.00           Image
 49         FashionMNIST          6315           512              315             5.00           Image
 50         MNIST-C               10000          512              500             5.00           Image
 51         MVTec-AD              5354           512              1258            23.50          Image
 52         SVHN                  5208           512              260             5.00           Image
 53         Agnews                10000          768              500             5.00           NLP
 54         Amazon                10000          768              500             5.00           NLP
 55         Imdb                  10000          768              500             5.00           NLP
 56         Yelp                  10000          768              500             5.00           NLP
 57         20newsgroups          11905          768              591             4.96           NLP

  Table 8: Summary of Datasets used in ADBench Benchmark. The table outlines key characteristics
  of 57 anomaly detection datasets, including the number of samples, features, anomalies, and their
  respective categories, spanning diverse domains such as image analysis, healthcare, finance, and
  natural language processing.


C.7   S WIFT H YDRA : C LASS -W ISE P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE ON ADBENCH

This final section provides a comprehensive comparison of various state-of-the-art anomaly detec-
tion methods, including DTE, Rejex, and ADGym, against Swift Hydra across 57 datasets from
ADBench. The evaluation criteria include Precision, Recall, F1 score, support for each class, and
AUC-ROC. It is important to note that we did not set a unique threshold for each individual dataset;
instead, we applied a common threshold across all 57 datasets in ADBench. As a result, the Pre-
cision might not be very high. However, the focus should also be on the Recall and AUC-ROC,
as these metrics more accurately reflect the model’s ability to detect anomalous data if the correct
threshold is chosen. This approach gives a clearer picture of how well Swift Hydra can identify
anomalies in various datasets.

                               DTE              Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
             ALOI          P    R      F1   P    R      F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1         0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.92 0.38 0.54 0.99 0.44 0.61 28821
               1          0.03 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.07 0.05 0.00 0.75 0.05 0.04 0.81 0.08         900
            accuracy           0.94             0.92              0.39            0.45       29721
           macro avg      0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.51 0.50 0.46 0.57 0.30 0.52 0.63 0.35 29721
          weighted avg    0.94 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.92 0.93 0.89 0.39 0.53 0.96 0.45 0.60 29721
           AUC-ROC             0.535            0.53              0.66            0.70



                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
          annthyroid     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.94 0.95 0.95 0.98 0.94 0.96 0.95 0.88 0.92 1.00 0.95 0.97       4001
               1        0.32 0.29 0.31 0.52 0.77 0.62 0.56 0.92 0.71 0.60 0.98 0.75        319
           accuracy          0.90            0.93              0.89            0.95       4320
           macro avg    0.63 0.62 0.63 0.75 0.86 0.79 0.75 0.90 0.82 0.80 0.97 0.86       4320
         weighted avg   0.90 0.90 0.90 0.95 0.93 0.94 0.92 0.89 0.91 0.97 0.95 0.96       4320
          AUC-ROC            0.81            0.96              0.93            0.98
           backdoor      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.98 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.94 0.95 0.96 1.00 0.99 0.99 55790
               1        0.01 0.01 0.01 0.68 0.47 0.56 0.55 0.89 0.67 0.61 0.92 0.74       1408
           accuracy          0.95            0.98              0.95            0.98       57198
           macro avg    0.49 0.49 0.49 0.83 0.73 0.77 0.75 0.92 0.82 0.81 0.95 0.86 57198
         weighted avg   0.95 0.95 0.95 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.93 0.95 0.95 0.99 0.98 0.99 57198
          AUC-ROC            0.76            0.90              0.94            0.98
           breastw       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.94 0.97 1.00 0.69 0.82 0.95 0.93 0.94 0.99 0.97 0.98        264
               1        0.91 0.99 0.94 0.64 1.00 0.78 0.88 0.92 0.91 0.94 0.98 0.96        146
           accuracy          0.96            0.80              0.93            0.97        410
           macro avg    0.95 0.97 0.96 0.82 0.85 0.80 0.92 0.92 0.92 0.97 0.97 0.97        410
         weighted avg   0.96 0.96 0.96 0.87 0.80 0.80 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.97 0.97 0.97        410
          AUC-ROC            0.99            0.93              0.94            0.99
           campaign      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.91 0.91 0.91 0.89 0.99 0.94 0.92 0.79 0.85 0.98 0.82 0.89 21920
               1        0.32 0.32 0.32 0.27 0.04 0.08 0.33 0.79 0.47 0.38 0.83 0.52       2793
           accuracy          0.84            0.88              0.79            0.83       24713
           macro avg    0.62 0.62 0.62 0.58 0.51 0.51 0.63 0.79 0.66 0.68 0.83 0.71 24713
         weighted avg   0.85 0.84 0.85 0.82 0.88 0.84 0.86 0.79 0.81 0.91 0.83 0.85 24713
          AUC-ROC            0.73            0.77              0.84            0.90
            cardio       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.94 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.82 0.87 0.95 0.88 0.93 0.99 0.94 0.97        990
               1        0.42 0.50 0.45 0.23 0.51 0.32 0.57 0.89 0.72 0.64 0.95 0.76        109
           accuracy          0.88            0.79              0.88            0.94       1099
           macro avg    0.68 0.71 0.69 0.59 0.66 0.60 0.76 0.88 0.83 0.82 0.94 0.86       1099
         weighted avg   0.89 0.88 0.89 0.87 0.79 0.82 0.91 0.88 0.91 0.96 0.94 0.95       1099
          AUC-ROC            0.92            0.74              0.95            0.98
       Cardiotocography P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.82 0.83 0.82 0.80 0.75 0.78 0.92 0.83 0.90 0.98 0.90 0.93        991
               1        0.37 0.36 0.36 0.27 0.33 0.30 0.68 0.87 0.74 0.71 0.92 0.80        278
           accuracy          0.72            0.66              0.84            0.90       1269
           macro avg    0.59 0.59 0.59 0.54 0.54 0.54 0.80 0.85 0.82 0.84 0.91 0.87       1269
         weighted avg   0.72 0.72 0.72 0.68 0.66 0.67 0.87 0.84 0.87 0.92 0.90 0.91       1269



                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
          AUC-ROC            0.73            0.53              0.91            0.95
            celeba       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 1.00 0.99 0.96 0.83 0.88 1.00 0.89 0.94 118850
               1        0.09 0.09 0.09 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.85 0.21 0.15 0.91 0.26       2710
           accuracy          0.96            0.98              0.83            0.89      121560
           macro avg    0.53 0.53 0.53 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.53 0.84 0.55 0.58 0.90 0.60 121560
         weighted avg   0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.98 0.97 0.94 0.83 0.86 0.98 0.89 0.92 121560
          AUC-ROC            0.72            0.79              0.88            0.95
            census       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.94 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.88 0.91 0.92 0.72 0.84 0.99 0.79 0.88 168432
               1        0.04 0.04 0.04 0.06 0.12 0.08 0.15 0.77 0.31 0.21 0.84 0.34 11139
           accuracy          0.88            0.84              0.73            0.79      179571
           macro avg    0.49 0.49 0.49 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.54 0.75 0.58 0.60 0.82 0.61 179571
         weighted avg   0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.84 0.86 0.87 0.73 0.81 0.94 0.79 0.84 179571
          AUC-ROC            0.59            0.65              0.79            0.85
             cover       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.95 0.96 0.94 1.00 0.99 1.00 169976
               1        0.09 0.09 0.09 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.50 0.95 0.65 0.54 1.00 0.70       1653
           accuracy          0.98            0.98              0.96            0.99      171629
           macro avg    0.54 0.54 0.54 0.53 0.52 0.52 0.73 0.96 0.80 0.77 0.99 0.85 171629
         weighted avg   0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.95 0.96 0.94 1.00 0.99 0.99 171629
          AUC-ROC            0.90            0.74              0.97            1.00
            donors       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.94 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.99 0.96 0.93 0.95 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 349483
               1        0.10 0.10 0.10 0.14 0.03 0.05 0.95 0.95 0.95 1.00 1.00 1.00 22113
           accuracy          0.89            0.93              0.95            1.00      371596
           macro avg    0.52 0.52 0.52 0.54 0.51 0.51 0.94 0.95 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 371596
         weighted avg   0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.93 0.91 0.93 0.95 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 371596
          AUC-ROC            0.76            0.74              0.95            1.00
             fault       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.69 0.66 0.68 0.68 0.89 0.77 0.78 0.62 0.69 0.81 0.65 0.72        751
               1        0.43 0.45 0.44 0.53 0.23 0.32 0.49 0.68 0.57 0.54 0.73 0.62        414
           accuracy          0.59            0.65              0.64            0.68       1165
           macro avg    0.56 0.56 0.56 0.60 0.56 0.54 0.63 0.65 0.63 0.67 0.69 0.67       1165
         weighted avg   0.60 0.59 0.59 0.62 0.65 0.61 0.67 0.64 0.65 0.71 0.68 0.69       1165
          AUC-ROC            0.54            0.58              0.68            0.74
             fraud       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.96 0.86 0.91 1.00 0.92 0.96 170593
               1        0.30 0.28 0.29 0.13 0.81 0.22 0.00 0.85 0.00 0.02 0.92 0.04        292
           accuracy          1.00            0.99              0.86            0.92      170885
           macro avg    0.65 0.64 0.65 0.56 0.90 0.61 0.48 0.85 0.45 0.51 0.92 0.50 170885



                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
         weighted avg   1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99 0.99 0.96 0.86 0.91 1.00 0.92 0.96 170885
          AUC-ROC            0.95            0.95              0.92            0.96
             glass       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.95 0.98 0.96 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.93 0.75 0.83 0.96 0.81 0.88        123
               1        0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 1.00 0.09 0.04 0.27 0.09 0.08 0.33 0.13         6
           accuracy          0.93            0.05              0.73            0.79        129
           macro avg    0.48 0.49 0.48 0.02 0.50 0.04 0.48 0.51 0.46 0.52 0.57 0.51        129
         weighted avg   0.91 0.93 0.92 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.89 0.73 0.80 0.92 0.79 0.85        129
          AUC-ROC            0.76            0.75              0.78            0.84
           Hepatitis     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.85 0.83 0.84 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.90 0.62 0.75 0.97 0.67 0.79        42
               1        0.00 0.00 0.00 0.13 1.00 0.22 0.22 0.79 0.33 0.26 0.83 0.40         6
           accuracy          0.73            0.13              0.64            0.69        0.69
           macro avg    0.43 0.42 0.42 0.06 0.50 0.11 0.56 0.71 0.54 0.61 0.75 0.59        48
         weighted avg   0.75 0.73 0.74 0.02 0.13 0.03 0.81 0.64 0.70 0.88 0.69 0.74        48
          AUC-ROC            0.72            0.42              0.74            0.80
             http        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.94 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 339161
               1        0.23 0.02 0.03 0.06 1.00 0.12 0.72 0.95 0.79 0.76 1.00 0.86       1338
           accuracy          1.00            0.94              0.96            1.00      340499
           macro avg    0.61 0.51 0.51 0.53 0.97 0.54 0.84 0.96 0.87 0.88 1.00 0.93 340499
         weighted avg   0.99 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.94 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 340499
          AUC-ROC            1.00            1.00              0.94            1.00
          InternetAds    P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.44 0.59 0.93 0.63 0.74 0.98 0.68 0.81        965
               1        0.45 0.46 0.46 0.23 0.75 0.35 0.37 0.88 0.53 0.40 0.94 0.56        215
           accuracy          0.80            0.50              0.67            0.73       1180
           macro avg    0.67 0.67 0.67 0.56 0.60 0.47 0.65 0.75 0.63 0.69 0.81 0.68       1180
         weighted avg   0.80 0.80 0.80 0.77 0.50 0.55 0.83 0.67 0.70 0.88 0.73 0.76       1180
          AUC-ROC            0.68            0.67              0.88            0.92
          Ionosphere     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.82 0.76 0.79 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.86 0.85 0.84 0.90 0.90 0.90        135
               1        0.62 0.70 0.65 0.36 1.00 0.53 0.76 0.78 0.76 0.83 0.82 0.82        76
           accuracy          0.74            0.36              0.82            0.87        211
           macro avg    0.72 0.73 0.72 0.18 0.50 0.27 0.81 0.81 0.80 0.86 0.86 0.86        211
         weighted avg   0.74 0.74 0.74 0.13 0.36 0.19 0.82 0.82 0.81 0.87 0.87 0.87        211
          AUC-ROC            0.86            0.96              0.85            0.91
            landsat      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.81 0.79 0.80 0.80 0.94 0.86 0.92 0.80 0.86 0.97 0.86 0.91       3068
               1        0.24 0.26 0.25 0.23 0.06 0.10 0.56 0.83 0.68 0.62 0.89 0.73        793
           accuracy          0.68            0.76              0.80            0.87       3861



                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
           macro avg    0.52 0.52 0.52 0.51 0.50 0.48 0.74 0.81 0.77 0.79 0.87 0.82       3861
         weighted avg   0.69 0.68 0.68 0.68 0.76 0.71 0.85 0.80 0.82 0.90 0.87 0.87       3861
          AUC-ROC            0.50            0.53              0.91            0.94
             letter      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.94 0.94 0.94 0.98 0.65 0.78 0.94 0.76 0.83 0.98 0.82 0.89        900
               1        0.09 0.10 0.10 0.14 0.83 0.24 0.16 0.63 0.27 0.20 0.68 0.31        60
           accuracy          0.88            0.66              0.75            0.81        960
           macro avg    0.52 0.52 0.52 0.56 0.74 0.51 0.55 0.69 0.55 0.59 0.75 0.60        960
         weighted avg   0.89 0.88 0.89 0.93 0.66 0.75 0.89 0.75 0.80 0.93 0.81 0.85        960
          AUC-ROC            0.57            0.85              0.77            0.80
        Lymphography     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        1.00 0.95 0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.90 0.94 0.92 0.95 0.99 0.97        84
               1        0.56 1.00 0.71 0.06 1.00 0.11 0.47 0.17 0.24 0.50 0.20 0.29         5
           accuracy          0.96            0.06              0.90            0.94        89
           macro avg    0.78 0.98 0.85 0.03 0.50 0.05 0.68 0.56 0.58 0.73 0.59 0.63        89
         weighted avg   0.98 0.96 0.96 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.88 0.90 0.89 0.93 0.94 0.93        89
          AUC-ROC            0.99            0.99              0.64            0.69
         magic.gamma     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.75 0.75 0.75 0.72 0.95 0.82 0.87 0.69 0.76 0.93 0.74 0.82       7422
               1        0.54 0.55 0.54 0.75 0.31 0.44 0.60 0.86 0.71 0.65 0.90 0.75       3990
           accuracy          0.68            0.72              0.75            0.79       11412
           macro avg    0.65 0.65 0.65 0.74 0.63 0.63 0.73 0.77 0.74 0.79 0.82 0.79 11412
         weighted avg   0.68 0.68 0.68 0.73 0.72 0.69 0.77 0.75 0.75 0.83 0.79 0.80 11412
          AUC-ROC            0.73            0.76              0.88            0.92
        mammography      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.98 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.83 0.90 0.93 0.80 0.90 1.00 0.87 0.93       6558
               1        0.25 0.26 0.25 0.08 0.62 0.14 0.06 0.83 0.17 0.13 0.88 0.23        152
           accuracy          0.97            0.82              0.80            0.87       6710
           macro avg    0.62 0.62 0.62 0.53 0.72 0.52 0.50 0.82 0.53 0.56 0.87 0.58       6710
         weighted avg   0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.82 0.88 0.91 0.80 0.88 0.98 0.87 0.91       6710
          AUC-ROC            0.86            0.84              0.86            0.91
             mnist       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.93 0.93 0.93 0.94 0.97 0.95 0.94 0.89 0.91 1.00 0.94 0.97       4172
               1        0.29 0.30 0.29 0.46 0.28 0.35 0.57 0.91 0.70 0.60 0.97 0.74        390
           accuracy          0.88            0.91              0.90            0.94       4562
           macro avg    0.61 0.61 0.61 0.70 0.62 0.65 0.76 0.90 0.80 0.80 0.95 0.85       4562
         weighted avg   0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.91 0.90 0.91 0.90 0.89 0.96 0.94 0.95       4562
          AUC-ROC            0.77            0.79              0.92            0.98
             musk        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 1.00 0.99 0.96 0.93 0.95 1.00 1.00 1.00       1777
               1        0.95 1.00 0.98 0.72 0.34 0.47 0.95 0.94 0.96 1.00 1.00 1.00        61



                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
           accuracy          1.00            0.97              0.93            1.00       1838
           macro avg    0.98 1.00 0.99 0.85 0.67 0.73 0.95 0.94 0.95 1.00 1.00 1.00       1838
         weighted avg   1.00 1.00 1.00 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.96 0.93 0.95 1.00 1.00 1.00       1838
          AUC-ROC            1.00            0.96              0.94            1.00
           optdigits     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       0.97 0.96 0.97 0.97 0.88 0.92 0.94 0.91 0.92 1.00 0.97 0.98       3044
               1        0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.38 0.97 0.59 0.45 1.00 0.62        86
           accuracy          0.94            0.86              0.91            0.97       3130
           macro avg    0.49 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.45 0.46 0.66 0.94 0.75 0.72 0.98 0.80       3130
         weighted avg   0.95 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.86 0.90 0.93 0.91 0.91 0.99 0.97 0.97       3130
          AUC-ROC            0.71            0.36              0.97            1.00
          PageBlocks     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       0.94 0.94 0.94 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.94 0.86 0.89 1.00 0.92 0.95       2916
               1        0.43 0.45 0.44 0.59 0.69 0.64 0.49 0.90 0.66 0.56 0.96 0.71        320
           accuracy          0.89            0.92              0.86            0.92       3236
           macro avg    0.69 0.69 0.69 0.78 0.82 0.80 0.72 0.88 0.78 0.78 0.94 0.83       3236
         weighted avg   0.89 0.89 0.89 0.93 0.92 0.93 0.90 0.86 0.87 0.95 0.92 0.93       3236
          AUC-ROC            0.92            0.95              0.92            0.98
           pendigits     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       0.98 0.98 0.98 0.99 0.82 0.89 0.95 0.93 0.94 1.00 0.98 0.99       4032
               1        0.26 0.26 0.26 0.07 0.59 0.12 0.50 0.94 0.68 0.56 0.99 0.72        90
           accuracy          0.97            0.81              0.93            0.98       4122
           macro avg    0.62 0.62 0.62 0.53 0.70 0.51 0.72 0.93 0.81 0.78 0.99 0.85       4122
         weighted avg   0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.81 0.88 0.94 0.93 0.94 0.99 0.98 0.99       4122
          AUC-ROC            0.93            0.83              0.95            1.00
             Pima        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       0.73 0.66 0.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.74 0.59 0.66 0.78 0.64 0.70        294
               1        0.48 0.56 0.52 0.36 1.00 0.53 0.48 0.60 0.54 0.52 0.67 0.58        167
           accuracy          0.62            0.36              0.60            0.65        461
           macro avg    0.60 0.61 0.60 0.18 0.50 0.27 0.61 0.60 0.60 0.65 0.66 0.64        461
         weighted avg   0.64 0.62 0.63 0.13 0.36 0.19 0.65 0.60 0.62 0.68 0.65 0.66        461
          AUC-ROC            0.66            0.57              0.66            0.70
            satellite    P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       0.81 0.79 0.80 0.70 0.98 0.82 0.91 0.84 0.86 0.96 0.88 0.92       2626
               1        0.58 0.62 0.60 0.75 0.11 0.20 0.74 0.89 0.80 0.79 0.92 0.85       1235
           accuracy          0.74            0.70              0.86            0.89       3861
           macro avg    0.70 0.70 0.70 0.72 0.55 0.51 0.82 0.87 0.83 0.87 0.90 0.88       3861
         weighted avg   0.74 0.74 0.74 0.72 0.70 0.62 0.85 0.86 0.84 0.90 0.89 0.90       3861
          AUC-ROC            0.70            0.73              0.89            0.96
          satimage-2     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
               -1       1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.93 0.96 0.97 0.93 0.96 1.00 0.98 0.99       3440



                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
               1        0.80 0.83 0.81 0.13 0.86 0.22 0.30 0.86 0.46 0.36 0.91 0.52        42
           accuracy          1.00            0.93              0.93            0.98       3482
           macro avg    0.90 0.92 0.91 0.56 0.89 0.59 0.63 0.89 0.71 0.68 0.94 0.75       3482
         weighted avg   1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99 0.93 0.95 0.96 0.93 0.95 0.99 0.98 0.98       3482
          AUC-ROC            0.99            0.97              0.94            0.99
            shuttle      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 1.00 1.00 0.94 1.00 0.96 0.97 0.96 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 27388
               1        0.95 0.92 0.93 0.55 0.09 0.15 0.91 0.93 0.92 0.95 1.00 0.98       2071
           accuracy          0.99            0.93              0.96            1.00       29459
           macro avg    0.97 0.96 0.96 0.74 0.54 0.56 0.94 0.94 0.93 0.98 1.00 0.99 29459
         weighted avg   0.99 0.99 0.99 0.91 0.93 0.91 0.96 0.96 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 29459
          AUC-ROC            1.00            0.99              0.95            1.00
             skin        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.76 0.76 0.76 0.79 0.79 0.79 0.94 0.94 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 116448
               1        0.09 0.09 0.09 0.19 0.18 0.18 0.95 0.94 0.96 1.00 1.00 1.00 30587
           accuracy          0.62            0.66              0.94            1.00      147035
           macro avg    0.42 0.43 0.42 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.95 0.94 0.95 1.00 1.00 1.00 147035
         weighted avg   0.62 0.62 0.62 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.94 0.94 0.94 1.00 1.00 1.00 147035
          AUC-ROC            0.68            0.74              0.94            1.00
             smtp        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.68 0.81 0.95 0.85 0.91 1.00 0.90 0.95 57075
               1        0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.81 0.00 0.00 0.84 0.01        19
           accuracy          1.00            0.68              0.85            0.90       57094
           macro avg    0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.84 0.41 0.48 0.83 0.45 0.50 0.87 0.48 57094
         weighted avg   1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.68 0.81 0.95 0.85 0.91 1.00 0.90 0.95 57094
          AUC-ROC            0.92            0.95              0.81            0.85
          SpamBase       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.65 0.67 0.66 0.58 0.64 0.61 0.92 0.81 0.86 0.96 0.86 0.91       1513
               1        0.49 0.47 0.48 0.37 0.32 0.34 0.77 0.89 0.84 0.82 0.95 0.88       1012
           accuracy          0.59            0.51              0.84            0.89       2525
           macro avg    0.57 0.57 0.57 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.84 0.85 0.85 0.89 0.90 0.89       2525
         weighted avg   0.59 0.59 0.59 0.50 0.51 0.50 0.86 0.84 0.85 0.90 0.89 0.89       2525
          AUC-ROC            0.61            0.51              0.92            0.95
            speech       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.98 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.13 0.23 0.93 0.49 0.67 1.00 0.53 0.70       2177
               1        0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.91 0.03 0.00 0.83 0.01 0.03 0.89 0.06        35
           accuracy          0.97            0.15              0.49            0.54       2212
           macro avg    0.49 0.49 0.49 0.50 0.52 0.13 0.47 0.66 0.34 0.51 0.71 0.38       2212
         weighted avg   0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.15 0.23 0.92 0.49 0.65 0.98 0.54 0.69       2212
          AUC-ROC            0.47            0.47              0.67            0.73
            Stamps       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support



                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
              -1        0.97 0.90 0.93 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.96 0.79 0.87 1.00 0.86 0.92        185
               1        0.41 0.68 0.51 0.09 1.00 0.17 0.39 0.94 0.54 0.42 1.00 0.59        19
           accuracy          0.88            0.09              0.81            0.87        204
           macro avg    0.69 0.79 0.72 0.05 0.50 0.09 0.67 0.87 0.70 0.71 0.93 0.76        204
         weighted avg   0.91 0.88 0.89 0.01 0.09 0.02 0.91 0.81 0.84 0.95 0.87 0.89        204
          AUC-ROC            0.89            0.74              0.93            0.96
            thyroid      P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.99 0.99 1.00 0.88 0.94 0.96 0.93 0.92 1.00 0.97 0.99       2207
               1        0.63 0.65 0.64 0.18 0.98 0.30 0.43 0.97 0.60 0.49 1.00 0.66        57
           accuracy          0.98            0.88              0.93            0.97       2264
           macro avg    0.81 0.82 0.81 0.59 0.93 0.62 0.69 0.95 0.76 0.75 0.99 0.82       2264
         weighted avg   0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.88 0.92 0.94 0.93 0.91 0.99 0.97 0.98       2264
          AUC-ROC            0.98            0.99              0.94            1.00
           vertebral     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.85 0.86 0.86 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.90 0.73 0.81 0.93 0.77 0.84        123
               1        0.11 0.10 0.10 0.15 1.00 0.26 0.29 0.63 0.40 0.33 0.67 0.44        21
           accuracy          0.75            0.15              0.72            0.76        144
           macro avg    0.48 0.48 0.48 0.07 0.50 0.13 0.59 0.68 0.60 0.63 0.72 0.64        144
         weighted avg   0.74 0.75 0.75 0.02 0.15 0.04 0.81 0.72 0.75 0.84 0.76 0.79        144
          AUC-ROC            0.42            0.37              0.72            0.79
            vowels       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.97 0.98 0.98 1.00 0.69 0.82 0.95 0.80 0.89 1.00 0.86 0.92        844
               1        0.26 0.17 0.20 0.10 0.93 0.18 0.15 0.89 0.27 0.19 0.93 0.32        30
           accuracy          0.96            0.70              0.80            0.86        874
           macro avg    0.62 0.58 0.59 0.55 0.81 0.50 0.55 0.84 0.58 0.59 0.90 0.62        874
         weighted avg   0.95 0.96 0.95 0.97 0.70 0.79 0.92 0.80 0.87 0.97 0.86 0.90        874
          AUC-ROC            0.76            0.91              0.92            0.97
          Waveform       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.53 0.69 0.96 0.75 0.83 1.00 0.82 0.90       2008
               1        0.04 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.48 0.05 0.09 0.81 0.16 0.12 0.88 0.21        58
           accuracy          0.95            0.53              0.75            0.82       2066
           macro avg    0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.51 0.37 0.52 0.78 0.49 0.56 0.85 0.55       2066
         weighted avg   0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.53 0.67 0.93 0.75 0.81 0.97 0.82 0.88       2066
          AUC-ROC            0.78            0.54              0.83            0.90
             WBC         P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.99 0.99 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.94 0.93 0.94 1.00 0.98 0.99        128
               1        0.83 0.83 0.83 0.05 1.00 0.09 0.70 0.95 0.79 0.75 1.00 0.86         6
           accuracy          0.99            0.05              0.93            0.99        134
           macro avg    0.91 0.91 0.91 0.02 0.50 0.04 0.82 0.94 0.87 0.88 0.99 0.93        134
         weighted avg   0.99 0.99 0.99 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.92 0.93 0.93 0.99 0.99 0.99        134
          AUC-ROC            0.99            0.90              0.94            1.00



                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
            WDBC         P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.99 0.99 0.98 0.19 0.32 0.96 0.89 0.91 1.00 0.93 0.96        217
               1        0.25 0.25 0.25 0.02 0.75 0.03 0.18 0.95 0.29 0.21 1.00 0.35         4
           accuracy          0.97            0.20              0.90            0.93        221
           macro avg    0.62 0.62 0.62 0.50 0.47 0.18 0.57 0.92 0.60 0.61 0.97 0.66        221
         weighted avg   0.97 0.97 0.97 0.96 0.20 0.32 0.95 0.90 0.90 0.99 0.93 0.95        221
          AUC-ROC            0.98            0.51              0.93            1.00
             Wilt        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.95 0.95 0.95 0.98 0.77 0.86 0.93 0.87 0.91 1.00 0.92 0.96       2746
               1        0.01 0.01 0.01 0.14 0.68 0.23 0.35 0.93 0.50 0.38 0.96 0.55        146
           accuracy          0.90            0.77              0.88            0.92       2892
           macro avg    0.48 0.48 0.48 0.56 0.72 0.54 0.64 0.90 0.70 0.69 0.94 0.75       2892
         weighted avg   0.90 0.90 0.90 0.94 0.77 0.83 0.90 0.88 0.89 0.97 0.92 0.94       2892
          AUC-ROC            0.42            0.79              0.94            0.98
             wine        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.96 0.95 0.95 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.95 0.91 0.92 1.00 0.95 0.97        73
               1        0.33 0.40 0.36 0.06 1.00 0.12 0.52 0.97 0.67 0.56 1.00 0.71         5
           accuracy          0.91            0.06              0.91            0.95        78
           macro avg    0.65 0.67 0.66 0.03 0.50 0.06 0.74 0.94 0.79 0.78 0.97 0.84        78
         weighted avg   0.92 0.91 0.91 0.00 0.06 0.01 0.92 0.91 0.90 0.97 0.95 0.96        78
          AUC-ROC            0.84            0.35              0.95            0.99
            WPBC         P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.78 0.86 0.82 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.76 0.43 0.55 0.83 0.47 0.60        93
               1        0.24 0.15 0.19 0.22 1.00 0.36 0.20 0.62 0.33 0.26 0.65 0.37        26
           accuracy          0.71            0.22              0.47            0.51        119
           macro avg    0.51 0.51 0.50 0.11 0.50 0.18 0.48 0.52 0.44 0.54 0.56 0.49        119
         weighted avg   0.66 0.71 0.68 0.05 0.22 0.08 0.64 0.47 0.50 0.71 0.51 0.55        119
          AUC-ROC            0.54            0.53              0.54            0.59
             yeast       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.60 0.61 0.60 0.64 0.87 0.74 0.77 0.49 0.62 0.80 0.54 0.65        587
               1        0.22 0.21 0.22 0.19 0.06 0.09 0.40 0.68 0.53 0.46 0.74 0.57        304
           accuracy          0.47            0.60              0.56            0.61        891
           macro avg    0.41 0.41 0.41 0.42 0.47 0.42 0.59 0.59 0.57 0.63 0.64 0.61        891
         weighted avg   0.47 0.47 0.47 0.49 0.60 0.52 0.64 0.56 0.59 0.69 0.61 0.62        891
          AUC-ROC            0.37            0.41              0.65            0.70
           CIFAR10       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.97 0.84 0.90 0.98 1.00 0.99 0.98 0.87 0.92 0.99 0.99 0.99       2812
               1        0.29 0.74 0.42 0.80 0.52 0.63 0.34 0.75 0.47 0.79 0.79 0.79        106
           accuracy          0.83            0.98              0.86            0.98       2918
           macro avg    0.63 0.79 0.66 0.89 0.76 0.81 0.66 0.81 0.69 0.89 0.89 0.89       2918
         weighted avg   0.92 0.83 0.86 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.92 0.86 0.88 0.98 0.98 0.98       2918



                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
          AUC-ROC            0.88            0.76              0.90            0.98
        FashionMNIST     P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.99 0.85 0.92 0.99 1.00 0.99 0.99 0.93 0.96 1.00 1.00 1.00       3441
               1        0.35 0.94 0.52 0.85 0.70 0.77 0.51 0.92 0.66 0.93 0.91 0.92        92
           accuracy          0.85            0.99              0.93            0.99
           macro avg    0.67 0.89 0.71 0.92 0.85 0.88 0.73 0.92 0.81 0.97 0.95 0.96       3533
         weighted avg   0.94 0.86 0.88 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.95 0.92 0.93 0.99 0.99 0.99       3533
          AUC-ROC            0.96            0.85              0.97            0.99
           MNIST-C       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.60 0.61 0.60 0.64 0.87 0.74 0.77 0.49 0.62 0.80 0.54 0.65        587
               1        0.22 0.21 0.22 0.19 0.06 0.09 0.40 0.68 0.53 0.46 0.74 0.57        304
           accuracy          0.47            0.60              0.56            0.61        891
           macro avg    0.41 0.41 0.41 0.42 0.47 0.42 0.59 0.59 0.57 0.63 0.64 0.61        891
         weighted avg   0.47 0.47 0.47 0.49 0.60 0.52 0.64 0.56 0.59 0.69 0.61 0.62        891
          AUC-ROC            0.37            0.41              0.65            0.70
          MVTec-AD       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.60 0.61 0.60 0.64 0.87 0.74 0.77 0.49 0.62 0.80 0.54 0.65        587
               1        0.22 0.21 0.22 0.19 0.06 0.09 0.40 0.68 0.53 0.46 0.74 0.57        304
           accuracy          0.47            0.60              0.56            0.61        891
           macro avg    0.41 0.41 0.41 0.42 0.47 0.42 0.59 0.59 0.57 0.63 0.64 0.61        891
         weighted avg   0.47 0.47 0.47 0.49 0.60 0.52 0.64 0.56 0.59 0.69 0.61 0.62        891
          AUC-ROC            0.37            0.41              0.65            0.70
            SVHN         P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.92 0.87 0.90 0.95 0.98 0.97 0.92 0.89 0.91 0.96 0.98 0.97       2562
               1        0.10 0.16 0.12 0.08 0.03 0.04 0.12 0.16 0.13 0.26 0.16 0.02        133
           accuracy          0.82            0.94              0.83            0.93       2695
           macro avg    0.51 0.51 0.51 0.52 0.51 0.51 0.52 0.53 0.52 0.61 0.57 0.58       2695
         weighted avg   0.86 0.82 0.83 0.91 0.94 0.92 0.86 0.83 0.84 0.92 0.93 0.93       2695
          AUC-ROC            0.37            0.51              0.55            0.63
            Agnews       P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.95 0.90 0.93 0.95 0.97 0.96 0.94 0.96 0.95 0.98 0.99 0.99       5383
               1        0.30 0.50 0.38 0.10 0.06 0.07 0.46 0.39 0.42 0.75 0.69 0.72        277
           accuracy          0.87            0.93              0.91            0.97       5660
           macro avg    0.63 0.70 0.65 0.52 0.51 0.52 0.70 0.67 0.69 0.87 0.84 0.85       5660
         weighted avg   0.90 0.87 0.88 0.91 0.93 0.92 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.97 0.97 0.97       5660
          AUC-ROC            0.79            0.51              0.80            0.90
           Amazon        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.92 0.94 0.93 0.95 0.97 0.96 0.92 0.94 0.93 0.97 0.98 0.98       5393
               1        0.11 0.09 0.10 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.07 0.05 0.06 0.54 0.36 0.43        288
           accuracy          0.87            0.92              0.86            0.95       5681
           macro avg    0.52 0.51 0.51 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.51 0.75 0.67 0.70       5681



                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Table 9 continued from previous page
                             DTE             Rejex            ADGym        Swift Hydra
         weighted avg   0.86 0.87 0.86 0.90 0.92 0.91 0.95 0.86 0.86 0.95 0.95 0.95       5681
          AUC-ROC            0.58            0.50              0.53            0.93
             Imdb        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.92 0.94 0.93 0.95 0.97 0.96 0.92 0.95 0.94 0.97 0.98 0.98       5389
               1        0.09 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.09 0.05 0.06 0.54 0.36 0.43        290
           accuracy          0.87            0.92              0.88            0.95       5679
           macro avg    0.51 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.51 0.50 0.75 0.67 0.70       5679
         weighted avg   0.85 0.87 0.86 0.90 0.92 0.91 0.85 0.88 0.87 0.95 0.95 0.95       5679
          AUC-ROC            0.55            0.50              0.55            0.93
             Yelp        P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.92 0.94 0.93 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.89 0.96 0.93 0.98 0.98 0.98       5369
               1        0.09 0.07 0.09 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.25 0.09 0.13 0.66 0.65 0.66        283
           accuracy          0.89            0.92              0.86            0.97       5652
           macro avg    0.53 0.52 0.52 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.57 0.53 0.53 0.82 0.82 0.82        891
         weighted avg   0.86 0.89 0.87 0.90 0.92 0.91 0.81 0.86 0.83 0.97 0.97 0.97       5652
          AUC-ROC            0.58            0.49              0.62            0.94
         20newsgroups    P    R     F1   P     R     F1   P     R     F1   P    R     F1 support
              -1        0.97 0.40 0.57 0.95 1.00 0.97 0.95 0.68 0.79 0.98 0.99 0.98        787
               1        0.11 0.89 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.23 0.71 0.34 0.74 0.57 0.64        39
           accuracy          0.44            0.95              0.68            0.61        826
           macro avg    0.55 0.65 0.39 0.48 0.50 0.49 0.59 0.69 0.57 0.86 0.78 0.81        826
         weighted avg   0.91 0.44 0.54 0.91 0.95 0.93 0.86 0.68 0.74 0.97 0.97 0.97        826
          AUC-ROC            0.76            0.50              0.77            0.94
                             P = Precision, R = Recall, F1 = F1-Score


                                               44
