Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S OFT CVI: C ONTRASTIVE VARIATIONAL INFERENCE
WITH SELF - GENERATED SOFT LABELS

  Daniel Ward1 , Mark Beaumont2 , Matteo Fasiolo1
 1
   School of Mathematics, Bristol University, UK
 2
   School of Biological Sciences, Bristol University, UK



                                            A BSTRACT

         Estimating a distribution given access to its unnormalized density is pivotal in
         Bayesian inference, where the posterior is generally known only up to an unknown
         normalizing constant. Variational inference and Markov chain Monte Carlo meth-
         ods are the predominant tools for this task; however, both are often challenging to
         apply reliably, particularly when the posterior has complex geometry. Here, we
         introduce Soft Contrastive Variational Inference (SoftCVI), which allows a family
         of variational objectives to be derived through a contrastive estimation framework.
         The approach parameterizes a classifier in terms of a variational distribution, re-
         framing the inference task as a contrastive estimation problem aiming to identify
         a single true posterior sample among a set of samples. Despite this framing, we
         do not require positive or negative samples, but rather learn by sampling the vari-
         ational distribution and computing ground truth soft classification labels from the
         unnormalized posterior itself. The objectives have zero variance gradient when
         the variational approximation is exact, without the need for specialized gradient
         estimators. We empirically investigate the performance on a variety of Bayesian
         inference tasks, using both simple (e.g. normal) and expressive (normalizing flow)
         variational distributions. We find that SoftCVI can be used to form objectives
         which are stable to train and mass-covering, frequently outperforming inference
         with other variational approaches.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Consider a probabilistic model with a set of parameters θ, for which given a set of observations
xobs we wish to infer a posterior p(θ|xobs ). Unless the model takes a particularly convenient form,
the posterior cannot be directly computed. However, typically p(θ, xobs ) is available, related to the
posterior byRp(θ|xobs ) = p(θ, xobs )/p(xobs ), where p(xobs ) is an intractable normalizing constant
p(xobs ) = p(θ, xobs )dθ. In these cases, computational methods such as Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) (Hastings, 1970; Metropolis et al., 1953) or variational inference (Jordan et al.,
1999; Kingma & Welling, 2014) are required to perform inference.
Variational inference approaches the inference task as an optimization problem by defining a vari-
ational distribution qϕ (θ) and minimizing its divergence to the true posterior p(θ|xobs ). The per-
formance and reliability of variational inference is dependent on numerous factors, including the
choice of divergence, variational distribution and parameter initialization. Whilst choosing a diver-
gence that favors mass-covering posterior estimates may facilitate reliable inference, in many cases
these divergences introduce bias or are less stable to train, leading to worse performance (Dhaka
et al., 2021; Naesseth et al., 2020). Alongside difficulties in assessing performance (Yao et al.,
2018), these issues hinder practical applications of variational inference, particularly in applications
such as scientific research, where accurate uncertainty quantification is crucial.
In contrast to variational inference, contrastive learning is generally used to perform inference when
the likelihood function is only available through an intractable integral, such as for fitting energy-
based models or for performing simulation-based inference (Gutmann et al., 2022). Learning is
achieved by contrasting positive samples with negative samples, with the latter often generated by
augmenting positive samples or by drawing samples from a carefully chosen noise distribution. A


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


common theme is to leverage the invariance of classification-based objectives to unknown normal-
izing constants to enable learning where likelihood-based methods are infeasible.
Contribution
We show that contrastive estimation can be used to derive a family of variational objectives, terming
the approach Soft Contrastive Variational Inference (SoftCVI). The task of fitting the posterior ap-
proximation is reframed as a classification task aiming to identify a single true posterior sample
among a set of samples. Instead of using explicitly positive and negative samples, we show that for
arbitrary samples from a proposal distribution, we can generate ground truth soft classification labels
using the unnormalized posterior density itself. The samples and corresponding labels are used for
fitting a classifier parameterized in terms of the variational distribution, such that the optimal classi-
fier recovers the true posterior. SoftCVI enables derivation of stable, mass-covering objectives, and
performance is demonstrated across a series of experiments using both simple and flexible (normal-
izing flow) variational distributions. Compared to alternative variational objectives, we find SoftCVI
generally yields better calibrated posteriors with a lower forward Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
to the true posterior. We provide a pair of Python packages, pyrox and softcvi validation, which
provide the implementation, and the code for reproducing the results of this paper, respectively.

2     S OFT CVI
In order to fit a variational distribution with SoftCVI, we must define a proposal distribution π(θ), a
negative distribution p− (θ), and the variational distribution itself, qϕ (θ). At each optimization step,
three steps are performed which allow fitting the variational distribution:

      1. Sample parameters {θk }K
                                k=1 ∼ π(θ) from the proposal distribution π(θ).
      2. Generate corresponding ground truth soft labels y ∈ (0, 1)K for the task of classifying
         between positive and negative samples, presumed to be from p(θ|xobs ) and p− (θ), respec-
         tively.
      3. Use {θk }K k=1 along with the soft labels y to optimize a classifier parameterized in terms of
         the variational distribution qϕ (θ), such that the optimal classifier recovers the true posterior.

The choice of proposal distribution in step one will influence the region in which learning is fo-
cused. Throughout the experiments here, we take the intuitive and convenient choice of using the
variational distribution itself as the proposal distribution π(θ) = qϕ (θ), which over the course of
training directs learning towards regions with reasonable posterior mass. The remainder of this
section is structured as follows: section 2.1 details the assignment of ground truth labels to arbi-
trary proposal samples; section 2.2 discusses the parameterization and optimization of the classifier;
finally, section 2.3 considers the choice of negative distribution.

2.1   G ENERATING GROUND TRUTH SOFT LABELS

Classification can be used to estimate the density ratio between positive and negative distributions
(Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2012; Hastie, 2009; Oord et al., 2018; Thomas et al., 2022). Conversely, if
the positive and negative densities are known, the density ratio and ground truth classification labels
can be directly computed. Consider we have a set of {θk }K    k=1 samples from the proposal distribution
π(θ). SoftCVI reframes inference as a classification task, where the problem is chosen such that
analytical ground truth labels can be assigned to the K samples. Specifically, if we consider the true
posterior p(θ|xobs ) to be the positive distribution, and p− (θ) to be a chosen negative distribution, the
ratio p(θk |xobs )/p− (θk ) represents the relative likelihood of a sample being a true posterior sample
under the classification problem. By contrasting the K samples, assuming a setting where {θk }K       k=1
consists of exactly one positive sample from the true posterior p(θ|xobs ), and K −1 negative samples
from p− (θ), the optimal classifier is then given by
                                             p(θk |xobs )/p− (θk )
                                  yk = PK                                    ,                         (1)
                                                                  − (θ ′ )
                                           k′ =1 p(θk |xobs )/p
                                                     ′                k

where yk is the probability on the interval (0, 1) that θk is the positive sample among all the consid-
                   PK
ered samples, and k=1 yk = 1. This approach of contrasting samples is invariant to multiplicative


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scaling of the density ratio p(θ|xobs )/p− (θ), meaning that access only to unnormalized forms of
p(θ|xobs ) and p− (θ) is sufficient for computing the labels. Since typically p(θ, xobs ) is known and
proportional to p(θ|xobs ), we can analytically compute the labels as
                                      p(θk , xobs )/p− (θk )
                          yk = P K                                          ,
                                                         −
                                    k′ =1 p(θk , xobs )/p (θk )
                                              ′              ′
                                                                                                          (2)
                                                                                p(θk , xobs )
                           y = softmax(z),          where zk = log                            ,
                                                                                  p− (θk )
where p− (θ) may be unnormalized. While contrastive estimation methods generally use explicitly
positive and negative examples with hard labels y ∈ {0, 1}K , here, in our framework, we lack
access to positive samples from p(θ|xobs ), and we may not have access to samples from p− (θ).
Nonetheless, by instead generating samples from a proposal distribution, {θk }K     k=1 ∼ π(θ), and by
assigning soft labels to these samples using eq. (2), it is still possible to train a classifier which at
optimality recovers the true posterior, as we will discuss in the subsequent section.

2.2   PARAMETERIZATION AND OPTIMIZATION OF THE CLASSIFIER

Analogously to the computation of the labels in eq. (2), we can parameterize the classifier in terms
of the ratio between the variational and negative distribution
                                        qϕ (θk )/p− (θk )
                             ŷk = PK                                   ,
                                                             − (θ ′ )
                                      k′ =1 qϕ (θk )/p
                                                   ′             k
                                                                                                          (3)
                                                                      qϕ (θk )
                              ŷ = softmax(ẑ),        where ẑk = log −       .
                                                                      p (θk )
Given a set of samples {θk }K k=1 ∼ π(θ) and corresponding labels y computed using eq. (2), an
optimization step with respect to ϕ can be taken to minimize the softmax cross-entropy loss function
                                  K                     K
                                                                                            !
                    K
                                 X                     X                qϕ (θk )/p− (θk )
  LSoftCVI (ϕ; {θk }k=1 , y) = −     yk log (ŷk ) = −     yk log PK                          . (4)
                                                                                      −
                                                                     k′ =1 qϕ (θk )/p (θk )
                                                                                  ′       ′
                                 k=1                   k=1

This is equivalent to maximizing the categorical log-likelihood, or equivalently, minimizing the
forward KL divergence between the true categorical label distribution and the predicted distribution
(appendix A.4). While a wide variety of divergence measures, such as f -divergences, could also be
employed, which we briefly discuss in appendix A.4, we leave a detailed exploration of these for
future work.
Let Θ represent the support of the proposal distribution, with p(θ|xobs ) and qϕ (θ) supported on
the same set, and p− (θ) supported on a superset of Θ. Assume that there exists a ϕ such that
p(θ|xobs ) = qϕ (θ). The optimal classifier, i.e. which minimizes eq. (4) for all {θk }K    k=1 ∈ Θ ,
                                                                                                     K
                                                        1
recovers the true posterior, for any valid choice of K. This result follows from the fact the optimal
classifier must learn the density ratio between the positive and negative distributions up to a constant
across Θ
                                  p(θ|xobs )/p− (θ) = c · qϕ (θ)/p− (θ),
                                         p(θ|xobs ) = c · qϕ (θ).
Due to the shared support, integrating both sides over the proposal support Θ gives
                                    Z                   Z
                                       p(θ|xobs ) = c ·    qϕ (θ),                                        (5)
                                        Θ                         Θ
                                                       c = 1.
Thus the optimal classifier recovers the true posterior
                                            p(θ|xobs ) = qϕ (θ).                                          (6)
   1
     Or equivalently, the optimal classifier minimizes E{θk }K ∼π(θ) [LSoftCVI ϕ; {θk }K

                                                                                       k=1 , y ], for which we
                                                             k=1
can view eq. (4) as a single sample Monte Carlo approximation.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Importantly, this suggests if qϕ (θ) or p(θ|xobs ) have non-zero regions outside the support of π(θ),
then p(θ|xobs ) = c · qϕ (θ) can be satisfied within Θ without recovering the true posterior, as the
integrals in eq. (5) will not both evaluate to one. This is a consequence of the incentive to learn the
density ratio (up to a constant) being localized to the sampled region. Ensuring π(θ), qϕ (θ) and
p(θ|xobs ) are supported on the same set Θ can be achieved by defining a variational distribution
supported on the same set as the posterior p(θ|xobs ), alongside using the variational distribution as
the proposal distribution π(θ) = qϕ (θ).
When the optimal classifier is achieved, we show in appendix A.1 that the gradient is zero for any
set {θk }K        K
         k=1 ∈ Θ , and consequently has zero variance. This is a generally desirable property that
is not present in many variational objectives, although specialized gradient estimators have been
developed which in some cases can address this issue (Roeder et al., 2017; Tucker et al., 2018). An
algorithm outlining the overall approach of SoftCVI is shown in algorithm 1.

 Algorithm 1: SoftCVI
   Inputs: p(θ, xobs ), π(θ), p− (θ), qϕ1 (θ), number of samples K ≥ 2, optimization steps
    N , learning rate η
   for i in 1 : N do
 1     Sample {θk }K k=1 ∼ π(θ)
 2     Compute soft labels y = softmax(z), where zk = log p(θ       k ,xobs )
                                                                  p− (θk )
 3     Update ϕi+1 = ϕi − η∇ϕ L(ϕi ; {θk }K   k=1 , y) using the cross-entropy loss, eq. (4)
   end


2.3   C HOICE OF THE NEGATIVE DISTRIBUTION

The choice of negative distribution is a well-known challenge in contrastive learning, with the op-
timal negative distribution often differing significantly from the positive distribution (Chehab et al.,
2022). In contrast to standard applications of contrastive estimation, in SoftCVI, the negative distri-
bution is never sampled, meaning the impact of the choice is limited to its influence on the objective’s
properties. To better understand this, we can rewrite the softmax cross-entropy objective from eq. (4)
by separating out the log term
                                             K                         K        K
                                             X              qϕ (θk ) X          X qϕ (θk′ )
            LSoftCVI (ϕ; {θk }K
                              k=1 , y) = −         yk log            +   yk log             ,
                                                            p− (θk )            ′
                                                                                  p− (θ ′ )
                                                                                       k
                                             k=1                      k=1           k =1
                                             K                             K
                                             X                             X qϕ (θk )
                                      =−           yk log qϕ (θk ) + log                    + const,   (7)
                                                                                 p− (θk )
                                             k=1                           k=1
where in the last line we remove the denominator from the first term into a constant as it is indepen-
                     PK
dent of ϕ, and use k=1 yk = 1. The first term encourages placing posterior mass on the samples
likely to be from the true posterior, and the second term penalizes the sum of the ratios. In addition
to appearing in the second term, the negative distribution choice also influences yk through eq. (2).
We focus on setting p− (θ) = π(θ)α , where α ∈ [0, 1] is a tempering hyperparameter which in-
terpolates between directly using the proposal distribution as the negative distribution when α = 1
and using an improper flat negative distribution when α = 0. Lower values of α tend to favor more
mass-covering solutions by increasing the relative penalization of samples in higher density regions
in qϕ (θ) through the second term of eq. (7). However, a too small choice for α can lead to problemat-
ically high variances of the log ratios zk = log[p(θk , xobs )/p− (θk )] and ẑk = log[qϕ (θk )/p− (θk )].
Particularly in high-dimensional problems, this can result in labels and predictions with very few
non-zero values, meaning few samples contribute significantly to the loss. In terms of eq. (7), the
high variance of ẑk leads to a failure to sufficiently penalize the ratios in lower density regions of
               PK
qϕ (θ), as log k=1 exp(ẑk ) is dominated by the few largest ratios. In practice, we empirically
show this leads to “leakage” of mass into regions of negligible posterior density (fig. 2), and a weak
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) (see appendix A.3).
As described in the introduction to section 2, we choose the proposal distribution to equal the vari-
ational distribution, meaning the choice above is equivalent to using p− (θ) = qϕ (θ)α . However,

                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


when computing the objective gradient, we treat p− (θ) as independent of ϕ, which practically
can be achieved by applying the stop-gradient operator present in automatic differentiation pack-
ages.2 In appendix A.7, we also consider parameterizing the negative distribution using p(θ, xobs )α ;
however, this choice introduces the problematic ratio qϕ (θ)/p(θ, xobs ), which leads to favoring of
mode-seeking solutions and poorly calibrated posteriors.

3     R ELATED WORK
3.1     VARIATIONAL INFERENCE

Given access to an unnormalized posterior density, p(θ, xobs ), variational inference allows optimiz-
ing a variational distribution qϕ (θ) to approximate the posterior. For certain model classes there exist
closed form solutions which can be exploited during optimization (e.g. Blei et al., 2017; Ghahramani
& Beal, 2000; Parisi, 1988). However, the lack of broad applicability of these methods hinders the
ability of practitioners to freely alter the model and variational family. As such, we instead focus on
methods which place minimal restrictions on the model form and variational family.

3.1.1    E VIDENCE LOWER BOUND
The most commonly used variational objective is to minimize the negative Evidence Lower Bound
(ELBO) or equivalently, minimizing the reverse KL divergence between the posterior approximation
and the true posterior
              DKL [qϕ (θ) ∥ p(θ|xobs )] = Eqϕ (θ) [log qϕ (θ) − log p(θ|xobs )] ,
                                                                                             (8)
                                        = Eqϕ (θ) [log qϕ (θ) − log p(θ, xobs )] + const.
As there is no general closed-form solution for the divergence, a Monte Carlo approximation is often
used (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
                              K
                          1 X
           LELBO (ϕ) =        [log qϕ (θk ) − log p(θk , xobs )] , where {θk }K
                                                                              k=1 ∼ qϕ (θ).             (9)
                          K
                             k=1
Although straightforward to apply, the reverse KL divergence heavily punishes placing mass in re-
gions with little mass in the true posterior leading to mode-seeking behavior and lighter tails than
p(θ|xobs ). In addition to underestimating uncertainty, the light tails may also lead to the approx-
imation performing poorly in downstream tasks, such as when acting as a proposal distribution in
importance sampling (Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2018; Gelman & Meng, 1998; Müller et al., 2019b;
Yao et al., 2018) or for reparameterizing MCMC (Hoffman et al., 2019).

3.1.2    S ELF - NORMALIZED IMPORTANCE SAMPLING FORWARD KL DIVERGENCE
In order to address the limitations of the ELBO, numerous alternative objectives have been proposed
that encourage more mass-covering behavior, such as the importance weighted ELBO (Burda et al.,
2015), the Rényi divergence, (Li & Turner, 2016), χ-divergence (Dieng et al., 2017), and methods
targeting the forward KL divergence (Jerfel et al., 2021; Naesseth et al., 2020). In this section,
we will focus on the Self-Normalized Importance Sampling Forward Kullback-Leibler (SNIS-fKL)
divergence estimator introduced by Jerfel et al. (2021). Specifically, a standard importance weighted
estimate of the forward KL divergence is given by

                                                                p(θ, xobs )
                  DKL [p(θ|xobs ) ∥ qϕ (θ)] = Eπ(θ) w(θ) log                  + const,           (10)
                                                                  qϕ (θ)
where w(θ) = p(θ|xobs )/π(θ) are the importance weights. Computing a set of self-normalized
weights with elements w̃(θ)k = PK p(θp(θ   k ,xobs )/π(θk )
                                                                  and using these alongside a Monte Carlo
                                     k′ =1     k′ ,xobs )/π(θk′ )
approximation of eq. (10), yields the objective
                                                      K
                                                      X                  p(θk , xobs )
                         LSNIS-fKL (ϕ; {θk }K
                                            k=1 ) =         w̃(θ)k log                 .               (11)
                                                                           qϕ (θk )
                                                      k=1
   2
     Without preventing gradient flow through p− (θ), the choice p− (θ) = π(θ) = qϕ (θ) leads to zero gradi-
ents as the parameterization of the classifier becomes qϕ (θ)/qϕ (θ).


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This approach introduces bias in the approximation of the forward KL vanishing with order O(1/K)
(Agapiou et al., 2017). Generally, the proposal is chosen to equal the variational distribution π(θ) =
qϕ (θ), and the proposal parameters are held constant under differentiation.

3.2   C OMPARISON OF S OFT CVI AND SNIS- F KL

In this section, we demonstrate that in the special case of choosing p− (θ) = π(θ) = qϕ (θ), both
SoftCVI and SNIS-fKL produce gradients that are equal in expectation, but the SoftCVI objective
naturally includes a control variate which ensures the variance of the gradient decreases to zero as
the variational distribution approaches the true posterior. We use this result to suggest an alternative,
lower-variance gradient estimator for the SNIS-fKL objective, exactly equivalent to optimizing the
SoftCVI objective with p− (θ) = π(θ) = qϕ (θ).
Noticing that from eq. (11), the numerator term does not depend on ϕ, we can equivalently write the
SNIS-fKL objective as
                                                      K
                                                      X
                     LSNIS-fKL (ϕ; {θk }K
                                        k=1 ) = −           w̃(θ)k log qϕ (θk ) + const.              (12)
                                                      k=1

In the special case under consideration, the self-normalized weights w̃(θ) from the SNIS-fKL ob-
jective, and the ground truth labels y from SoftCVI are computed identically. This allows rewriting
the SoftCVI objective from eq. (7) as the sum of the SNIS-fKL objective and the normalization term
                                                                          K
                                                                          X qϕ (θk )
            LSoftCVI (ϕ; {θk }K                          K
                              k=1 ) = LSNIS-fKL (ϕ; {θk }k=1 ) + log                       + const,   (13)
                                                                                p− (θk )
                                                                          k=1

where we show in appendix A.2 that when p− (θ) = qϕ (θ), the normalization term gradient is
                                     K                       K
                                     X qϕ (θk )           1 X
                            ∇ϕ log                    =       ∇ϕ log qϕ (θk ).                        (14)
                                           p− (θk )       K
                                     k=1                    k=1

Since Eπ(θ) [∇ϕ log qϕ (θ)] = Eqϕ (θ) [∇ϕ log qϕ (θ)] = 0, the inclusion or omission of the normal-
ization term does not change the gradient in expectation over sets of {θk }K k=1 , but it significantly
influences the variance. As shown in appendix A.1, the gradient variance for SoftCVI decreases to
zero as the variational distribution approaches the posterior. In contrast, this implies the variance
                                                         1
                                                           PK
of the SNIS-fKL objective approaches the variance of K        k=1 ∇ϕ log qϕ (θk ), which is positive,
scaling inversely with K.
In addition to providing a novel perspective of the SNIS-fKL objective as training an (unnormalized)
classifier, this result also implies a straightforward modification to form a lower-variance SNIS-fKL
gradient estimator
                                                                             K
                                                                         1 X
           ∇ϕ LLV (ϕ; {θk }K                             K
                           k=1 ) = ∇ϕ LSNIS-fKL (ϕ; {θk }k=1 ) +             ∇ϕ log qϕ (θk ),         (15)
                                                                         K
                                                                            k=1

which is exactly equivalent to optimizing the SoftCVI objective with p− (θ) = π(θ) = qϕ (θ). This
approach of lowering the variance of a gradient estimator by utilizing ∇ϕ log qϕ (θ) as a control vari-
ate has also been applied to other variational objectives, such as the sticking the landing estimator of
the ELBO (Roeder et al., 2017; Tucker et al., 2018). There is no guarantee that the gradient variance
will be lower in all instances. However, the variance provably reduces to zero as the variational dis-
tribution approaches the true posterior, which allows a reasonable SNR to be maintained even when
near convergence, which is likely beneficial for performance and stable convergence. We support
this claim with the empirical results in section 5, in addition to investigating the signal-to-noise ratio
of the objectives in appendix A.3.

3.3   C ONTRASTIVE LEARNING

Contrastive learning most commonly allows learning of distributions through the comparison of true
samples to a set of negative (noise or augmented) samples (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010). Generally,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and notably in contrast to the current work, applications of contrastive learning focus on problems
where the likelihood is unavailable, such as for fitting energy-based models (Gao et al., 2020; Gut-
mann & Hyvärinen, 2010; Gutmann et al., 2022; Rhodes & Gutmann, 2019; Rhodes et al., 2020) or
performing simulation-based inference (Durkan et al., 2020; Greenberg et al., 2019; Gutmann et al.,
2022; Hermans et al., 2020; Miller et al., 2022; Thomas et al., 2022). Probably the most widely
used objective function in contrastive learning is the InfoNCE loss, proposed by Oord et al. (2018).
                                                                               ∗
Given a set of samples {θk }Kk=1 , containing a single true sample with index k , and K − 1 negative
samples, the loss can be computed as
                                                             fϕ (θk∗ )
                            LInfoNCE (ϕ; {θk }K
                                              k=1 ) = − log PK            ,                           (16)
                                                             k=1 fϕ (θk )

where fϕ (θ) approximates the ratio between the positive and negative distributions (up to a con-
stant). This is commonly also presented with an additional sum (or expectation) over different sets
of {θk }Kk=1 . The InfoNCE loss can be derived from the softmax cross-entropy loss, eq. (4), by in-
putting a one-hot encoded vector of labels y with yk∗ = 1 and all other elements 0. This results in
only the k ∗ -th summation term being non-zero, recovering the InfoNCE loss.
In contrastive methods for simulation-based inference, parameters are sampled from a proposal dis-
tribution π(θ), and used to perform simulations. Learning is achieved through comparing positive
parameter-output pairs from  R p(x|θ)π(θ), to negative (mismatched) pairs drawn marginally from
π(x)π(θ), where π(x) = p(x|θ)π(θ)dθ. Similar to the current work, a normalized approxima-
tion to the posterior is often included in the classifier parameterization. Specifically, the classifier is
parameterized using the ratio between the approximate posterior and the prior qϕ (θ|x)/p(θ) and is
optimized using the InfoNCE objective (Durkan et al., 2019; Greenberg et al., 2019).
Adversarial methods which are closely related to contrastive learning are often used in conjunction
with variational inference (Huszár, 2017; Makhzani et al., 2015; Mescheder et al., 2017). A key idea
is to rewrite the reverse KL divergence from eq. (8) to include a density ratio, for example

                                                       qϕ (θ)
               DKL [qϕ (θ) ∥ p(θ|xobs )] = Eqϕ (θ) log        − log p(xobs |θ) + const.          (17)
                                                        p(θ)
The ratio is then substituted with an approximation, fψ (θ) ≈ qϕ (θ)/p(θ), trained using a separate
classification objective. This allows the ELBO to be optimized without computing the log density
log qϕ (θ), enabling the use of expressive implicit models for qϕ (θ). In contrast, SoftCVI directly
optimizes the variational distribution with a contrastive objective without a separate classification
model, though it does require the variational distribution to be explicitly defined.
Recently, there has been investigation of the use of soft (or ranked) labels in contrastive learning,
frequently using cross-entropy-like loss functions. In contrast to the current work, these methods
focus on improving performance in the standard context of contrastive learning, where evaluation
of the likelihood is infeasible. As such, the soft labels cannot be computed exactly, and instead are
generated using other methods, such as label smoothing (Hugger & Uhlmann, 2024) or by utilizing
a similarity metric such as cosine similarity between embeddings of positive and negative samples
(Feng & Patras, 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024).

4    E XPERIMENTS
We focus on Bayesian inference tasks for which reference posterior samples {θi∗ }N   ref
                                                                                   i=1 are available
to enable reliable assessment of performance. However, in appendices A.5 and A.6, we also consider
application of SoftCVI for training variational autoencoders and Bayesian neural networks, respec-
tively. We use p− (θ) = π(θ)α and focus results on two choices, α = 0.75 and α = 1. Performance
is compared to using the ELBO or the SNIS-fKL divergence (Jerfel et al., 2021). For each task
and objective, 50 independent runs were performed. Where possible (i.e. an analytical posterior is
available), different observations xobs were generated from the model for each run. For tasks where
the reference posterior is created through sampling methods we relied on reference posteriors pro-
vided by PosteriorDB (Magnusson et al., 2024) or SBI-Benchmark (Lueckmann et al., 2021) and for
each run sampled from the available observations if multiple are present. For all methods, K = 8
samples from qϕ (θ) were used during computation of the objectives, and 50,000 optimization steps
were performed with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Software. Our implementation and experiments made wide use of the python packages JAX (Brad-
bury et al., 2018), equinox (Kidger & Garcia, 2021), NumPyro (Phan et al., 2019), FlowJAX (Ward,
2024) and optax (DeepMind et al., 2020).

4.1   M ETRICS

Coverage probabilities. Posterior coverage probabilities have been widely used to assess the re-
liability of posteriors (e.g. Cannon et al., 2022; Cook et al., 2006; Hermans et al., 2021; Prangle
et al., 2014; Talts et al., 2018; Ward et al., 2022). Given a nominal frequency γ ∈ [0, 1], the met-
ric assesses the frequency at which true posterior samples fall within the 100γ% highest posterior
density region (credible region) of the approximate posterior. For a given γ, if the actual frequency
exceeds γ, the posterior is conservative for that coverage probability; if it is lower, then the posterior
is overconfident. A posterior is said to be well-calibrated if the actual frequency matches γ for any
choice of γ. A well-calibrated or somewhat conservative posterior is needed for drawing reliable
scientific conclusions, and as such is an important property to investigate. We estimate the actual
coverage frequency for a posterior estimate as
                                      Nref
                                  1 X
                                           1 θi∗ ∈ HDRqϕ (θ|xobs ) (γ)

                                                                                                     (18)
                                 Nref i=1

where 1 is the indicator function, and HDR represents the highest posterior density region, inferred
using the density quantile approach of Hyndman (1996).
Log probability of θ ∗ . Looking at the probability of either reference posterior samples or the
ground truth parameters in a posterior approximation is a common metric for assessing performance
(e.g. Greenberg et al., 2019; Lueckmann et al., 2021; Papamakarios & Murray, 2016). We compute
this independently for each posterior approximation as follows
                                               Nref
                                           1 X
                                                    log qϕ (θi∗ ).                                   (19)
                                          Nref i=1

This metric also approximates the negative forward KL divergence between the true and approxi-
mate posterior up to a constant, which is a quantity known to control error in importance sampling
(Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2018)
                −DKL [p(θ|xobs ) ∥ qϕ (θ)] = −Ep(θ|xobs ) [log p(θ|xobs ) − log qϕ (θ)],
                                                     Nref
                                                 1 X
                                            ≈             log qϕ (θi∗ ) + const,                     (20)
                                                Nref i=1

Posterior mean accuracy. A posterior that is overconfident but with the correct posterior mean
would perform poorly based on the aforementioned metrics, but can form good point estimates for
the parameters θ. To assess this, we choose to measure the accuracy using the negative L2 -norm of
the standardized difference in posterior means
                                         mean(θ ∗ ) − mean(θ)
                                     −                          ,                                    (21)
                                               std(θ ∗ )      2

where mean(θ ∗ ) and mean(θ) are the mean vectors of the reference and posterior approximation
samples respectively, and std(θ ∗ ) is the vector of standard deviations of the reference samples.

4.2   TASKS

A brief description of each model is given below. For a complete description, see appendix A.8.
Eight schools. A classic hierarchical Bayesian inference problem, where the aim is to infer the
treatment effects of a coaching program applied to eight schools (Gelman et al., 1995; Rubin, 1981).
The parameter set is θ = {µ, τ, m}, where µ is the average treatment effect across the schools, τ
is the standard deviation of the treatment effects across the schools and m is the eight-dimensional
vector of treatment effects for each school. For the posterior approximation qϕ (θ), we use a normal


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Eight                Linear
                                                   Schools              Regression                   SLCP                      GARCH



                    Actual - nominal
                                        0.00

                                       −0.15
 (a)
                                       −0.30

                                       −0.45
                                               0             1          0             1          0             1           0             1
                                                   Nominal                  Nominal                  Nominal                   Nominal
                            −22.325                                                          0
       Posterior mean Log prob. θ∗


                                                                   55                                               2.08
                            −22.350                                                       −10
                                                                                                                    2.00
 (b)                        −22.375                                54
                                                                                          −20
                                                                                                                    1.92
                            −22.400                                53
                                                                                          −30
                                                                                                                    1.84

                                                                 −0.3                      0.0
                                       −0.18                                                                       −0.35
          accuracy


                                                                 −0.6                     −1.5
                                       −0.24                                                                       −0.40
 (c)                                                             −0.9                     −3.0
                                                                                                                   −0.45
                                       −0.30
                                                                 −1.2                     −4.5
                                                                                                                   −0.50
                                       −0.36


                                        SoftCVI(α=0.75)                 SoftCVI(α=1)                 SNIS-fKL              ELBO

Figure 1: The posterior performance metrics (see section 4.1). a) The nominal coverage frequency
against the average difference between the nominal and actual coverage frequency. Well-calibrated
methods follow the black dotted line (y = 0), whereas conservative methods fall above, and over-
confident methods below. b) The average probability of the reference posterior samples in the ap-
proximate posterior. c) The accuracy of the approximate posterior mean, calculated as the negative
L2 -norm between the mean of the standardized reference and approximate posterior samples.


distribution for µ, a folded Student’s t distribution for τ (where folding is equivalent to taking an
absolute value transform), and a Student’s t distribution for m.
Linear regression. A Bayesian linear regression model with parameters θ = {β, µ}, where β ∈
R50 is the regression coefficients, and µ ∈ R is the bias parameter. The covariates X ∈ R(200×50)
are sampled from a standard normal distribution, with targets sampled from y ∼ N (Xβ + µ, 1).
The posterior approximation qϕ (θ) is implemented as a fully factorized normal distribution.
SLCP. The Simple Likelihood Complex Posterior (SLCP) task introduced in (Papamakarios et al.,
2019). This task parameterizes a multivariate normal distribution using a 5-dimensional vector θ.
Due to squaring in the parameterization, the posterior contains four symmetric modes. For the poste-
rior approximation qϕ (θ), we use a four layer masked autoregressive flow, with a rational quadratic
spline transformer (Durkan et al., 2019; Germain et al., 2015; Kingma et al., 2016; Papamakarios
et al., 2017).
GARCH(1,1). A Generalized Autoregressive Conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) model
(Bollerslev, 1986). GARCH models are used for modeling the changing volatility of time series
data by accounting for time-varying and autocorrelated variance in the error terms. The observa-
tion consists of a 200-dimensional time series x, where each element xt is drawn from a normal
distribution with mean µ and time-varying variance σt2 . The variance σt2 is defined recursively by
the update σt2 = α0 + α1 (xt−1 − µ)2 + β1 σt−1   2
                                                    , where α1 and β1 control the contribution from
the previous observation and previous variance term, respectively. To parameterize qϕ (θ), we use
a normal distribution for µ and a log normal distribution for α0 . For α1 and β1 we use uniform
distributions constrained to the prior support, transformed with a rational quadratic spline (Durkan
et al., 2019). To allow modeling of posterior dependencies, the distribution over β1 is parameterized
as a function of α0 and α1 using a neural network.


                                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     SoftCVI(α=0)      SoftCVI(α=0.75)      SoftCVI(α=1)          SNIS-fKL             ELBO

θ3


                                                  θ2

Figure 2: A 2-dimensional posterior marginal for a single run of the SLCP task, with the reference
posterior samples shown in green.


5    R ESULTS
Across all tasks and metrics considered, the SoftCVI derived objectives performed competitively
with the ELBO and SNIS-fKL objectives (fig. 1). Overall, SoftCVI using a negative distribution
π(θ)α with α = 0.75 outperformed the other methods, giving rise to better calibrated posteriors
and tending to place more mass on average on the reference posterior samples, indicating a lower
forward KL divergence to the true posterior.
A key comparison, is between SoftCVI with α = 1 and the SNIS-fKL objective, which give gradient
estimators that are equal in expectation (see section 3.2). With the exception of the eight schools
task, where both methods performed similarly, SoftCVI with α = 1 tended to place more mass on
the reference samples and yielded better calibrated posteriors. These results highlight the benefit of
the reduced gradient variance provided by SoftCVI when the variational distribution is sufficiently
close to the true posterior. Further, the performance discrepancy becomes more pronounced for a
smaller choice of K (see figs. 7 and 8 and in the appendix). This can be explained due to the variance
of the SNIS-fKL objective gradient scaling inversely with K, meaning the control variate naturally
included by the SoftCVI objective becomes more crucial. Both SoftCVI and SNIS-fKL tended to
place more mass on the reference samples when trained with a larger K, but this comes with an
increase in computational cost (fig. 7).
On the SLCP task, which yields complex posterior geometry with four symmetric modes, only the
SoftCVI objectives performed well. The ELBO objective often resulted in poor distribution of the
mass across the modes, sometimes missing modes entirely (fig. 2; see also fig. 9 in the appendix).
In contrast, SNIS-fKL, though less mode-seeking, frequently approximated the individual modes
poorly. This observation aligns with previous work suggesting the unreliability of existing mass-
covering objectives (Dhaka et al., 2021). To illustrate the impact of the choice of negative distribu-
tion, fig. 2 also shows a posterior trained with a flat negative distribution by setting α = 0. The flat
negative distribution does not sufficiently penalize placing mass in qϕ (θ) in regions of negligible
posterior density, leading to “leakage” of mass (see section 2.3).

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced SoftCVI, a novel framework for deriving variational objectives moti-
vated through contrastive learning. Our experiments across various Bayesian inference tasks indi-
cate that SoftCVI often outperforms other variational objectives, producing posterior approxima-
tions with better coverage properties and a lower forward KL divergence to the true posterior. The
performance difference is particularly notable for tasks with complex posterior geometries which
require flexible density estimators. SoftCVI bridges between variational inference and contrastive
estimation, which we hope will open up new avenues for further research. Both experimental and
theoretical work would be beneficial to further guide the choice of negative distribution. Further,
it would be interesting to explore different choices of classification objectives, or equivalently, dif-
ferent choices of divergences between the categorical labels and predictions. Finally, it could be
valuable to investigate how advances from classification and contrastive learning, such as label
smoothing (Müller et al., 2019a) and temperature scaling (Wang & Liu, 2021), could be adapted
to SoftCVI to enhance training stability and further control posterior calibration.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you to Song Liu and Michael Gutmann for providing valuable discussion on this work. Com-
putational facilities were provided by the Advanced Computing Research Centre, University of Bris-
tol - http://www.bristol.ac.uk/acrc/.

R EFERENCES
Sergios Agapiou, Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, Daniel Sanz-Alonso, and Andrew M Stuart. Importance
  sampling: Intrinsic dimension and computational cost. Statistical Science, pp. 405–431, 2017.
Rishabh Agarwal, Levi Melnick, Nicholas Frosst, Xuezhou Zhang, Ben Lengerich, Rich Caruana,
  and Geoffrey E Hinton. Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learning with neural nets.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:4699–4711, 2021.
Syed Mumtaz Ali and Samuel D Silvey. A general class of coefficients of divergence of one distri-
  bution from another. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 28(1):
  131–142, 1966.
Michael Betancourt and Mark Girolami. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for hierarchical models. Current
 trends in Bayesian methodology with applications, 79(30):2–4, 2015.
David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. Variational inference: A review for statisti-
  cians. Journal of the American statistical Association, 112(518):859–877, 2017.
Charles Blundell, Julien Cornebise, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Weight uncertainty in
  neural network. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1613–1622. PMLR, 2015.
Tim Bollerslev. Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Journal of econometrics,
  31(3):307–327, 1986.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.00519, 2015.
Patrick Cannon, Daniel Ward, and Sebastian M Schmon. Investigating the impact of model mis-
  specification in neural simulation-based inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01845, 2022.
Sourav Chatterjee and Persi Diaconis. The sample size required in importance sampling. The Annals
  of Applied Probability, 28(2):1099–1135, 2018.
Omar Chehab, Alexandre Gramfort, and Aapo Hyvärinen. The optimal noise in noise-contrastive
 learning is not what you think. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 307–316. PMLR,
 2022.
Samantha R Cook, Andrew Gelman, and Donald B Rubin. Validation of software for Bayesian
  models using posterior quantiles. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 15(3):675–
  692, 2006.
Imre Csiszár. On information-type measure of difference of probability distributions and indirect
  observations. Studia Sci. Math. Hungar., 2:299–318, 1967.
DeepMind, Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter
  Buchlovsky, David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu, Clau-
  dio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel,
  Shaobo Hou, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King, Markus Kunesch,
  Lena Martens, Hamza Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, George Papamakarios, John
  Quan, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Laurent Sartran, Rosalia Schneider, Eren
  Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Miloš Stanojević, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu
  Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http:
  //github.com/google-deepmind.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Akash Kumar Dhaka, Alejandro Catalina, Manushi Welandawe, Michael R Andersen, Jonathan
  Huggins, and Aki Vehtari. Challenges and opportunities in high dimensional variational inference.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:7787–7798, 2021.
Adji Bousso Dieng, Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, John Paisley, and David Blei. Variational
  inference via χ upper bound minimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural spline flows. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. On contrastive learning for likelihood-free
  inference. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2771–2781. PMLR, 2020.
Chen Feng and Ioannis Patras. Adaptive soft contrastive learning. In 2022 26th International
  Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 2721–2727. IEEE, 2022.
Ruiqi Gao, Erik Nijkamp, Diederik P Kingma, Zhen Xu, Andrew M Dai, and Ying Nian Wu. Flow
  contrastive estimation of energy-based models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7518–7528, 2020.
Andrew Gelman and Xiao-Li Meng. Simulating normalizing constants: From importance sampling
  to bridge sampling to path sampling. Statistical science, pp. 163–185, 1998.
Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian data analysis. Chap-
  man and Hall/CRC, 1995.
Mathieu Germain, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. Made: Masked autoencoder for
 distribution estimation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 881–889. PMLR,
 2015.
Zoubin Ghahramani and Matthew Beal. Propagation algorithms for variational Bayesian learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
Manuel Glöckler, Michael Deistler, and Jakob H Macke. Variational methods for simulation-based
 inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04176, 2022.
Maria Gorinova, Dave Moore, and Matthew Hoffman. Automatic reparameterisation of probabilistic
 programs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3648–3657. PMLR, 2020.
David Greenberg, Marcel Nonnenmacher, and Jakob Macke. Automatic posterior transformation
  for likelihood-free inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2404–2414.
  PMLR, 2019.
Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle
 for unnormalized statistical models. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on
 artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 297–304. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
 2010.
Michael U Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation of unnormalized statistical
 models, with applications to natural image statistics. Journal of machine learning research, 13
 (2), 2012.
Michael U Gutmann, Steven Kleinegesse, and Benjamin Rhodes. Statistical applications of con-
 trastive learning. Behaviormetrika, 49(2):277–301, 2022.
Trevor Hastie. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, 2009.
W. K. Hastings. Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications.
  Biometrika, 57(1):97–109, 1970.
Joeri Hermans, Volodimir Begy, and Gilles Louppe. Likelihood-free MCMC with amortized ap-
  proximate ratio estimators. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4239–4248.
  PMLR, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Joeri Hermans, Arnaud Delaunoy, François Rozet, Antoine Wehenkel, Volodimir Begy, and Gilles
  Louppe. A trust crisis in simulation-based inference? Your posterior approximations can be
  unfaithful. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06581, 2021.
Matthew Hoffman, Pavel Sountsov, Joshua V Dillon, Ian Langmore, Dustin Tran, and Srinivas
 Vasudevan. Neutra-lizing bad geometry in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo using neural transport. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1903.03704, 2019.
David T Hoffmann, Nadine Behrmann, Juergen Gall, Thomas Brox, and Mehdi Noroozi. Ranking
  info noise contrastive estimation: Boosting contrastive learning via ranked positives. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 897–905, 2022.
Johannes Hugger and Virginie Uhlmann. Noise contrastive estimation with soft targets for condi-
  tional models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14076, 2024.
Ferenc Huszár. Variational inference using implicit distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08235,
  2017.
Rob J Hyndman. Computing and graphing highest density regions. The American Statistician, 50
  (2):120–126, 1996.
Pavel Izmailov, Sharad Vikram, Matthew D Hoffman, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. What
  are Bayesian neural network posteriors really like? In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 4629–4640. PMLR, 2021.
Ghassen Jerfel, Serena Wang, Clara Wong-Fannjiang, Katherine A Heller, Yian Ma, and Michael I
  Jordan. Variational refinement for importance sampling using the forward Kullback-Leibler di-
  vergence. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1819–1829. PMLR, 2021.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction
 to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37:183–233, 1999.
Patrick Kidger and Cristian Garcia. Equinox: neural networks in JAX via callable PyTrees and
  filtered transformations. Differentiable Programming workshop at Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2021, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In Internation Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling. Im-
  proved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Yingzhen Li and Richard E Turner. Rényi divergence variational inference. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Jan Boelts, David Greenberg, Pedro Gonçalves, and Jakob Macke. Bench-
  marking simulation-based inference. In International conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 343–351. PMLR, 2021.
Måns Magnusson, Jakob Torgander, Paul-Christian Bürkner, Lu Zhang, Bob Carpenter, and Aki
  Vehtari. posteriordb: Testing, benchmarking and developing Bayesian inference algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.04967, 2024.
Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, Ian Goodfellow, and Brendan Frey. Adversarial
  autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05644, 2015.
Lars Mescheder, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Adversarial variational Bayes: Unifying
  variational autoencoders and generative adversarial networks. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2391–2400. PMLR, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W Rosenbluth, Marshall N Rosenbluth, Augusta H Teller, and Edward
  Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The journal of chemical
  physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 1953.
Benjamin K Miller, Christoph Weniger, and Patrick Forré. Contrastive neural ratio estimation. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3262–3278, 2022.
Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey E Hinton. When does label smoothing help? Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019a.
Thomas Müller, Brian McWilliams, Fabrice Rousselle, Markus Gross, and Jan Novák. Neural im-
  portance sampling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 38(5):1–19, 2019b.
Christian Naesseth, Fredrik Lindsten, and David Blei. Markovian score climbing: Variational in-
  ference with KL (p∥q). Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15499–15510,
  2020.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
George Papamakarios and Iain Murray. Fast ε-free inference of simulation models with Bayesian
  conditional density estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
George Papamakarios, Theo Pavlakou, and Iain Murray. Masked autoregressive flow for density
  estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
George Papamakarios, David Sterratt, and Iain Murray. Sequential neural likelihood: Fast
  likelihood-free inference with autoregressive flows. In The 22nd International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 837–848. PMLR, 2019.
Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, Gareth O Roberts, and Martin Sköld. A general framework for the
 parametrization of hierarchical models. Statistical Science, pp. 59–73, 2007.
Giorgio Parisi. Statistical Field Theory. Addison-Wesley, 1988.
Minsu Park, Seyeon Choi, Chanyeol Choi, Jun-Seong Kim, and Jy-yong Sohn. Improving multi-
 lingual alignment through soft contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16155, 2024.
Du Phan, Neeraj Pradhan, and Martin Jankowiak. Composable effects for flexible and accelerated
  probabilistic programming in NumPyro. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11554, 2019.
Dennis Prangle, Michael GB Blum, Gordana Popovic, and SA Sisson. Diagnostic tools for approx-
  imate Bayesian computation using the coverage property. Australian & New Zealand Journal of
  Statistics, 56(4):309–329, 2014.
Tom Rainforth, Adam Kosiorek, Tuan Anh Le, Chris Maddison, Maximilian Igl, Frank Wood, and
  Yee Whye Teh. Tighter variational bounds are not necessarily better. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 4277–4285. PMLR, 2018.
Benjamin Rhodes and Michael U Gutmann. Variational noise-contrastive estimation. In The 22nd
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2741–2750. PMLR, 2019.
Benjamin Rhodes, Kai Xu, and Michael U Gutmann. Telescoping density-ratio estimation. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 33:4905–4916, 2020.
Geoffrey Roeder, Yuhuai Wu, and David K Duvenaud. Sticking the landing: Simple, lower-variance
  gradient estimators for variational inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Donald B Rubin. Estimation in parallel randomized experiments. Journal of Educational Statistics,
  6(4):377–401, 1981.
Donald B Rubin. Using the SIR algorithm to simulate posterior distributions. In Bayesian statistics
  3. Proceedings of the third Valencia international meeting, 1-5 June 1987, pp. 395–402. Claren-
  don Press, 1988.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sean Talts, Michael Betancourt, Daniel Simpson, Aki Vehtari, and Andrew Gelman. Val-
  idating Bayesian inference algorithms with simulation-based calibration. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.06788, 2018.
Owen Thomas, Ritabrata Dutta, Jukka Corander, Samuel Kaski, and Michael U Gutmann.
 Likelihood-free inference by ratio estimation. Bayesian Analysis, 17(1):1–31, 2022.
George Tucker, Dieterich Lawson, Shixiang Gu, and Chris J Maddison. Doubly reparameterized
  gradient estimators for Monte Carlo objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04152, 2018.
Feng Wang and Huaping Liu. Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2495–2504, 2021.
Daniel Ward. FlowJAX: Distributions and normalizing flows in JAX, 2024. URL https://
  github.com/danielward27/flowjax. version 14.0.0.
Daniel Ward, Patrick Cannon, Mark Beaumont, Matteo Fasiolo, and Sebastian Schmon. Robust
  neural posterior estimation and statistical model criticism. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 35:33845–33859, 2022.
Jiayu Yao, Weiwei Pan, Soumya Ghosh, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Quality of uncertainty quantifica-
   tion for Bayesian neural network inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09686, 2019.
Yuling Yao, Aki Vehtari, Daniel Simpson, and Andrew Gelman. Yes, but did it work?: Evaluating
  variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5581–5590. PMLR,
  2018.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   Z ERO VARIANCE GRADIENT AT OPTIMUM WITH FINITE K

When the optimal classifier is reached, we can show that the gradient is zero (and hence has zero
variance), even for finite K. To avoid clashes with the parameters ϕ, we will use superscripts for
indices. We have the objective
                                           K
                                                                                !
                           k K
                                          X
                                               k            qϕ (θ k )/p− (θ k )
                  L(ϕ; {θ }k=1 , y) = −       y log PK                            .
                                                                      k′   − k′
                                          k=1            k′ =1 qϕ (θ )/p (θ )

          k
Letting ŷϕ replace the term inside the log

                                              K
                                              X
                                      =−            y k log ŷϕ
                                                              k
                                                                ,                              (22)
                                              k=1
                                              K
                                              X
                ∇L(ϕ; {θ k }K
                            k=1 , y) = −            y k ∇ log ŷϕ
                                                                k
                                                                  ,                            (23)
                                              k=1
                                              K             k
                                              X          ∇ŷϕ
                                      =−            yk      k
                                                                ,                              (24)
                                              k=1
                                                          ŷϕ

which due to optimality of the classifier we have y k = ŷϕ
                                                          k


                                              K
                                              X
                                                       k
                                      =−            ∇ŷϕ ,                                     (25)
                                              k=1

due to the properties of the softmax, the labels must sum to 1
                                               K
                                               X
                                                        k
                                      = −∇            ŷϕ = 0.                                 (26)
                                               k=1


A.2   S OFT CVI NORMALIZATION TERM GRADIENT

When p− (θ) = qϕ (θ), we claim in eq. (14) that the normalization term gradient can be written as
1
    PK
K      k=1 ∇ϕ log qϕ (θk ). Making use of the property of the logarithmic derivative, ∇x log f (x) =
∇x f (x)
  f (x) , we can show this as follows
                                                   hP                      i
                                                       K              −
                               XK
                                    qϕ (θk )   ∇ϕ      k=1 qϕ (θk )/p (θk )
                       ∇ϕ log                =    PK                         ,
                                    p− (θk )                       −
                                                     k=1 qϕ (θk )/p (θk )
                               k=1

where we treat p− (θk ) as constant with respect to ϕ (i.e., we apply stop-gradient), so
                                                    PK                      −
                                                         k=1 ∇ϕ [qϕ (θk )]/p (θk )
                                               =         PK                        ,
                                                                          −
                                                           k=1 qϕ (θk )/p (θk )

and using p− (θk ) = qϕ (θk ) (value-wise only, not in gradient flow), we get
                                                    PK
                                                         k=1 ∇ϕ [qϕ (θk )]/qϕ (θk )
                                               =         PK                           ,
                                                          k=1 qϕ (θk )/qϕ (θk )
                                                         K
                                                    1    X
                                               =                ∇ϕ log qϕ (θk ).               (27)
                                                    K
                                                         k=1


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3           G RADIENT SIGNAL - TO - NOISE RATIO

By evaluating an objective gradient over a set of random seeds (different sets of {θk }Kk=1 ), it is
possible to empirically inspect the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) ratio of the gradient for different
objectives. Following Rainforth et al. (2018), we compute the SNR as

                          SNR(∇ϕ L(ϕ)) = |E[∇ϕ L(ϕ)]| σ[∇ϕ L(ϕ)]
where σ[·] denotes the element-wise standard deviation for each parameter gradient. A low SNR
indicates that the gradient estimation is dominated by noise, making stochastic optimization chal-
lenging. However, it is important to recognize that whilst a high SNR is preferable, it does not alone
guarantee the objective itself is practically useful (or even sensible), for example it may be biased or
heavily favor mode-seeking solutions.
We consider a toy normal task from Glöckler et al. (2022), with the distinction that we vary the
dimensionality of the task d ∈ {1, 50} and the parameterization of variational distribution. The task
is defined through the model
                                           θ ∼ N (0, 4 · Id ),     x ∼ N (θ, Id ),
where the aim is to infer the mean vector θ, given an observation xobs = 1d , where 1d is the d-
dimensional vector of ones. The variational distribution is parameterized as a normal distribution,
with mean vector µ ∈ Rd and log standard deviations log σ ∈ Rd . When assessing p       the gradient
properties of µ, we hold log σ fixed at the closed form posterior solution, log σ = log( 4/5) · 1d .
Similarly, when assessing the gradient properties of log σ, we hold µ fixed at the true closed form
solution µ = 4/5 · 1d . The signal, noise and SNR for each objective are shown in fig. 3.
SoftCVI with α = 1, and the SNIS-fKL objective yield very similar signals, which results from the
two objectives producing the same gradients in expectation (section 3.2). However, the SNIS-fKL


                      d=1                        d = 50                         d=1                        d = 50
          1.5
                                     0.2                           1.0                        0.4
          1.0
 Signal


                                     0.1                           0.5                        0.2
          0.5


          0.0                        0.0                           0.0                        0.0

        0.75                                                        2
                                                                                              1.5
                                     1.0
        0.50
Noise


                                                                                              1.0
                                                                    1
                                     0.5
        0.25                                                                                  0.5

        0.00                         0.0                            0                         0.0


              2                      0.3                                                      0.3
                                                                   10
        SNR


                                     0.2                                                      0.2
              1                                                     5
                                     0.1                                                      0.1
              0                                                     0
              −2.5   0.0       2.5     −2.5      0.0    2.5              −2.5    0.0    2.5         −2.5     0.0    2.5
                           µ                        µ                           log σ                      log σ
                  SoftCVI(α=0)              SoftCVI(α=0.75)                 SoftCVI(α=1)               SNIS-fKL

Figure 3: The signal, noise and signal-to-noise ratio of the objective gradients on a toy normal task
of varying dimensionality. When d = 50, the gradient properties are computed parameter-wise and
averaged. The vertical dashed line shows the true parameter values from the closed form posterior
solution.


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


objective has positive noise when the variational distribution approaches the true posterior, meaning
the SNR degrades to zero. In contrast, for the SoftCVI objectives, the gradient noise approaches
zero (see appendix A.1), and a reasonable SNR is present as the variational distribution approaches
the true posterior.
When d = 50 the signal and consequently the SNR, deteriorates larger values of log σ, and lower
choices of α. In this case, both expanding the dimension of the problem, and decreasing the α value,
increases the variance of zk = log[p(θk , xobs )/p− (θk )] and ẑk = log[qϕ (θk )/p− (θk )]. This can
lead to degeneracy in the labels and predictions, meaning very few samples meaningfully contribute
to the loss function, reducing the SNR. In an extreme case, e.g. setting α = 0 and further expanding
the dimensionality of the problem, only a single label and prediction will be significantly non-
zero. In this regime, negligible signal would exist for a too large log σ parameter, as the variational
distribution, despite the incorrect log σ, would still result in the correct degenerate predicted labels.

A.4   A LTERNATIVE DIVERGENCES

We can interpret SoftCVI as defining two categorical distributions between which a divergence is
minimized: P , which is defined using the labels such that yk = P (k), and Qϕ , which is defined
using the predictions such that ŷk = Qϕ (k). In this work, we used the cross-entropy objective,
which is equivalent to minimizing the forward KL-divergence between the label distribution P and
the predicted distribution Qϕ :
                                           K
                                           X                     P (k)
                         DKL [P ∥ Qϕ ] =         P (k) log                    ,
                                                                 Qϕ (k)
                                           k=1
                                              K
                                              X
                                        =−          P (k) log (Qϕ (k)) + const,                     (28)
                                              k=1
                                              K
                                              X
                                        =−          yk log ŷk + const.
                                              k=1


Alternative divergences could be considered for use with SoftCVI. For example, we could explore
the general class of f -divergences (Ali & Silvey, 1966; Csiszár, 1967), which are defined as:
                                                 K
                                                 X                   P (k)
                               Df [P ∥ Qϕ ] =          Qϕ (k)f                        ,
                                                                     Qϕ (k)
                                                 k=1

where f is a convex function f : (0, ∞) → R, and f (1) = 0. Divergences that are more or less mass-
covering may be better suited to specific tasks. For example, for many generative modelling tasks
reliable uncertainty quantification is considered less critical, in which case a more mode-seeking
objective may be favourable. We leave this investigation for future research.

A.5   T RAINING OF MODEL PARAMETERS : VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODERS

SoftCVI sets up a classification problem which allows fitting the parameters of the variational dis-
tribution ϕ. However, in some contexts, the model may be defined as pψ (θ, xobs ), with ψ, being
a set of model parameters which we wish to optimize in some manner alongside ϕ. SoftCVI does
not directly provide a method for fitting such additional model parameters. One approach to resolve
this is to include an additional objective, that trains ψ to (approximately) maximize the marginal
likelihood.
              L(ϕ, ψ; {θk }K                            K                          K
                           k=1 , y) = LSoftCVI (ϕ; {θk }k=1 , y) + Lmodel (ψ; {θk }k=1 ).           (29)

where in the above formulation we reuse the proposal distribution samples {θk }K  k=1 already sam-
pled for the SoftCVI objective, and we assume the proposal distribution is equal to the variational
distribution. One could more generally consider alternating between optimizing the two objectives;
however, due to the disjoint parameter sets between the objectives, in addition to the invariance of
common optimizers such a Adam to diagonal rescaling of gradient elements (Kingma & Ba, 2014),


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we found adding the objectives to work well. In this section, we choose
                                                          K
                                                      1 X
                          Lmodel (ψ; {θk }K
                                          k=1 ) = −       log pψ (θk , xobs ),                      (30)
                                                      K
                                                          k=1

equivalent to training the model parameters ψ by maximizing the ELBO. As an example, we will
train a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014), where ψ includes the parameters of the
decoder in addition to the models prior parameters, and ϕ consists of the parameters of the encoder.
Both the encoder and decoder are parameterized as standard feed-forward networks. The manifolds
learned using either the ELBO or the modified SoftCVI objective from eq. (29) are shown in fig. 4,
showing qualitatively similar results. Whilst we do not investigate the performance, the SoftCVI
method of fitting does not utilize reparameterized gradients and as such is applicable to a broader
class of models.

A.6   BAYESIAN NEURAL ADDITIVE MODEL

Neural additive models enhance the interpretability of neural networks, using an additive model
structure (Agarwal et al., 2021). In the simplest case, for a dataset with C features, for an input
vector x = x1 , ..., xC , predictions are computed as
                             ŷ = β + f1 (x1 ) + f2 (x2 ) + · · · + fC (xC ),
where each fc is a neural network corresponding to a single input feature. In this section, we consider
a regression problem, in which we parameterize each fc using a Bayesian neural network (Blundell
et al., 2015). Bayesian neural networks have been suggested to reduce the risk of overfitting in
addition to providing a method for assessing prediction uncertainty using the inferred posterior pre-
dictive distribution. Here, we parameterize each fc using a single layer Bayesian neural network
with a width of either 50 or 100, with a Laplace(0, 1) prior on the neural network parameters. This
naturally leads to high dimensional posterior distributions (θ ∈ R1500 and θ ∈ R3000 for the task
considered, respectively). We use an independent Gaussian approximation to the posterior.
We consider a regression problem, with synthetic data generated using the nonlinear function
                        y = 0.1 · x31 + |x2 | − x3 + ϵ,       where ϵ ∼ N (0, 32 )
where x ∈ R10 is generated uniformly from the interval [−4, 4], and the last 7 dimensions are
nuisance features. We use 300 training data points, 150 validation data points and 1000 testing data
points for computing the metrics.
We assess performance using the average test set log-likelihood under the posterior predictive distri-
bution, and report the mean prediction interquartile range (IQR) across the test set and the associated


            SoftCVI(α=0)                    SoftCVI(α=1)                         ELBO


Figure 4: The manifolds learned by variational autoencoders on the MNIST dataset, trained using
either the ELBO or SoftCVI. To enable training of the model parameters, the SoftCVI objective was
                                                              1
                                                                PK
modified by adding the model component of the ELBO, − K            i=1 log pψ (θk , xobs ). In all cases,
the objectives were trained for 100,000 steps with a batch size of 1, and K = 8.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


prediction coverage (i.e. the average frequency with which the true underlying function value is in-
cluded within the predicted IQR). We note there are numerous challenges associated with assessing
performance for Bayesian neural networks. For example, high test log-likelihood or calibrated pre-
dictions is not necessarily indicative of a good posterior approximation (Yao et al., 2019). Further,
we use early stopping based on the validation log-likelihood, in addition to choosing the learning
rates with cross-validation, both of which will tend to bias results to favor models with higher test
log-likelihood, without consideration of the calibration of the posterior predictive distribution.
We train 10 networks initialized with different random seeds, and report the results in table 1. A plot
of the learned components for each method is shown in fig. 5.


   Method                            NN Width    Test Log-Likelihood     Prediction IQR       IQR Coverage
                                         50            -2.392 ± 0.005     0.648 ± 0.084       0.262 ± 0.042
   ELBO
                                         100           -2.392 ± 0.005     0.641 ± 0.065       0.264 ± 0.031
                                         50            -2.422 ± 0.007     0.695 ± 0.011       0.186 ± 0.008
   SNIS-fKL
                                         100           -2.421 ± 0.005     0.938 ± 0.010       0.256 ± 0.007
                                         50            -2.424 ± 0.007     0.743 ± 0.018       0.202 ± 0.009
   SoftCVI (α = 0.75)
                                         100           -2.423 ± 0.005     0.983 ± 0.017       0.271 ± 0.010
                                         50            -2.422 ± 0.007     0.701 ± 0.012       0.190 ± 0.009
   SoftCVI (α = 1)
                                         100           -2.423 ± 0.005     0.943 ± 0.012       0.260 ± 0.009

Table 1: Performance metrics for the Bayesian neural additive model. Note a model producing
calibrated predictions on the test set would yield an IQR coverage value of 0.5.


While all methods demonstrated comparable predictive performance, the ELBO achieved slightly
better results, evidenced by the highest test log-likelihood. Both SoftCVI (with α = 0.75 or α = 1)
and SNIS-fKL yielded similar results. Bayesian neural network posteriors are often complex and
highly multimodal (Izmailov et al., 2021). In this case, it is likely that SoftCVI does not show a
significant advantage over SNIS-fKL because the Gaussian posterior is heavily misspecified. As a
result, the approximate posterior may never become sufficiently close to the true posterior in order
to provide the variance reduction benefits associated with SoftCVI.


                               SoftCVI(α=0.75) SoftCVI(α=1)      SNIS-fKL         ELBO
                               5
                f1 (x1 )


                               0

                           −5

                                       x1            x1             x1              x1
                               4
                    f2 (x2 )


                               2

                               0
                                       x2            x2             x2              x2
                               5
                f3 (x3 )


                               0

                           −5
                                   −2.50.0 2.5   −2.50.0 2.5    −2.50.0 2.5     −2.50.0 2.5
                                       x3            x3             x3              x3

Figure 5: The means and 95% prediction intervals for the components of a Bayesian neural additive
model for each method. The true underlying components are shown with the dotted black lines. We
restrict to the first three dimensions, ignoring the nuisance variables.


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.7    A LTERNATIVE NEGATIVE DISTRIBUTION CHOICES


                                                        Eight                Linear
                                                       Schools              Regression                   SLCP                      GARCH


                         Actual - nominal
                                             0.0

                                            −0.2
       (a)
                                            −0.4

                                            −0.6
                                                   0             1          0             1          0             1           0             1
                                                       Nominal                  Nominal                  Nominal                   Nominal
                                                                                                 0
                Log prob. θ∗


                                                                                                                        2.00
                                 −22.36                              54.0                     −10
                                                                                                                        1.75
       (b)                       −22.40                                                       −20
                                                                     52.5                                               1.50
                                 −22.44                                                       −30
                                                                     51.0
             Posterior mean


                                                                     −0.3                      0.0                     −0.24
                                        −0.24
                accuracy


                                                                     −0.6                     −1.5                     −0.32
       (c)                              −0.32
                                                                     −0.9                                              −0.40
                                                                                              −3.0
                                        −0.40                        −1.2                                              −0.48
                                                                                              −4.5



                                            SoftCVI(α=0.75)                 SoftCVI(α=1)                 SNIS-fKL              ELBO


Figure 6: Additional metrics analogous to fig. 1, using p− (θ) = p(θ, xobs )α as the negative distri-
bution choice in the SoftCVI objectives.


The main results focus on parameterizing the negative distribution as a function of the proposal
distribution p− (θ) = π(θ)α . However, another possible choice is to use the unnormalized posterior
to parameterize the negative distribution, for example p− (θ) = p(θ, xobs )α . This choice, when
α = 1, implies equality between the assumed negative and positive distributions, meaning through
eq. (2) the ground truth labels become constant yk = k1 for k = 1, ..., K. Inputting these labels into
eq. (7) yields the objective

                                                                                K                        K
                                                                       1 X                    X qϕ (θk )
                               L(ϕ; {θk }K
                                         k=1 , y) = −                      log qϕ (θk ) + log            + const.                                (31)
                                                                       K                        p− (θk )
                                                                            k=1                          k=1


Assuming the proposal distribution is chosen to match the variational distribution, since
Eπ(θ) [∇ϕ log qϕ (θ)] = Eqϕ (θ) [∇ϕ log qϕ (θ)] = 0, the first term in eq. (7) has an expected gradient
of zero. In contrast to using the proposal distribution as the negative distribution, which results in the
normalization term which penalizes the ratios acting as a control variate, here, the first term instead
acts as a control variate, with the normalization term providing the signal by penalizing the ratio
qϕ (θ)/p(θ, xobs ) ∝ qϕ (θ)/p(θ|xobs ). As such this choice heavily penalizes qϕ (θ) ≫ p(θ|xobs ),
favoring overconfident posteriors. We report in fig. 6 the metrics, using p− (θ) = p(θ, xobs )α , with
α = 0.75 and α = 1.

A.8    TASKS

For all tasks, where possible, we make use of reparameterizations to reduce the dependencies be-
tween the parameters θ in the model, and to ensure variables are reasonably scaled, which is gen-
erally considered to improve performance (Betancourt & Girolami, 2015; Gorinova et al., 2020;
Papaspiliopoulos et al., 2007). Below, we describe the models used and the source of the reference
posterior samples.


                                                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E IGHT SCHOOLS .
A classic hierarchical inference model (Gelman et al., 1995; Rubin, 1981), aiming to infer the treat-
ment effects of a training program applied to eight schools. The parameter set is θ = {µ, τ, m},
where µ is the average treatment effect across the schools, τ is the standard deviation of the treat-
ment effects across the schools and m is the treatment effects for each school. The model is given
by
                                   µ ∼ N (0, 52 ),
                                   τ ∼ HalfCauchy(0, 52 ),
                                  mi ∼ N (µ, τ 2 ),     i = 1, ..., 8,
                                  xi ∼ N (mi , σi2 ),    i = 1, ..., 8,
        2
where σ is treated as known, estimated using the standard errors in the data. We use the reference
posterior samples available from PosteriorDB, which are sampled using MCMC (Magnusson et al.,
2024).

L INEAR REGRESSION .
A linear regression model, defined as
                              βi ∼ N (0, 1), i = 1, ..., 50,
                               µ ∼ N (0, 1),
                              xi ∼ N (Xβ + µ, 1), j = 1, ..., 200,
For each run of the task, we sampled a dataset X ∈ R200×50 from a standard normal distribution,
and drew reference posterior samples from the analytical posterior solution.

S IMPLE L IKELIHOOD C OMPLEX P OSTERIOR
The SLCP task was introduced by Papamakarios et al. (2019), and is designed to be a challenging
inference problem with a multimodal posterior. The data is a set of four samples from a two-
dimensional multivariate Gaussian likelihood function. The likelihood is parameterized using θ
using squaring which introduces a complex multimodal structure (see fig. 2). Specifically, the model
is defined as
                                θi ∼ Uniform(−3, 3), i = 1, ..., 5                              (32)
                                xi ∼ N (θ1:2 , Σ), j = 1, ..., 4,                               (33)
where the covariance matrix Σ is
                      s21

                              p · s1 · s2
            Σ=                              , where s1 = θ32 , s2 = θ42 and p = tanh(θ5 )
                  p · s1 · s2     s22
Despite being used extensively in the simulation-based inference (SBI) literature, this task has a
tractable likelihood so can be used in the current work. The reference posterior is from the SBI
Benchmark python package (Lueckmann et al., 2021), and was inferred using sampling/importance
resampling using the analytical likelihood function (Rubin, 1988).

GARCH
The GARCH model is a widely used statistical model for analyzing time series data with time-
varying volatility (Bollerslev, 1986). It extends the basic autoregressive framework by allowing the
conditional variance of the observations to depend on both past observations (controlled via the α1
parameter) and variances (controlled by the β1 parameter). GARCH and similar models are often
used for modeling financial data, where autocorrelated variances are common. The priors are defined
as
                                  µ ∼ ImproperUniform(−∞, ∞)
                                 α0 ∼ ImproperUniform(0, ∞)
                                 α1 ∼ Uniform(0, 1)
                                 β1 ∼ Uniform(0, 1 − α1 ),


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Where ImproperUniform represents an improper flat prior over the specified region. For t =
1, . . . , 200, the variance evolves recursively through the update
                                 σt2 = α0 + α1 (xt−1 − µ)2 + β1 σt−1
                                                                 2


and the likelihood is given by
                                            xt ∼ N (µ, σt2 )
At initialization, y0 is set to the first observation element, and σ02 = 0.25. For this task, a reference
posterior is available in PosteriorDB, sampled using MCMC (Magnusson et al., 2024).


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.9   A DDITIONAL FIGURES

                                                          Eight                                              Linear
                                                         Schools                   GARCH                    Regression                        SLCP
                           −22.325                                      2.1

            Log prob. θ∗
                                                                                                      54                         −5
                           −22.350                                      2.0

                           −22.375                                                                                              −10
                                                                        1.9                           52

                           −22.400
                                                                        1.8
                                                                                                      50                        −15
                                                         2     4    6              2        4    6           2        4     6            2        4   6

                                                                                                                                1250
                           Run time / s


                                              500                                                    160
                                                                        380
                                                                                                                                1000
                                              400                       360                          155                         750

                                              300                       340                                                      500
                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                 250
                                                         2     4    6              2        4    6           2        4     6            2        4   6
                                                         log2 (K)                  log2 (K)                      log2 (K)                 log2 (K)

                                                     SoftCVI(α=0.75)                   SoftCVI(α=1)                SNIS-fKL             ELBO


Figure 7: Average log-probability of the reference posterior samples as a function of K (ranging
from 2 to 64), along with the associated run times (measured on a CPU with 8GB RAM, including
compilation time). The poor performance of SLCP for higher values of K was due to increased
mode-seeking behavior. Some results for SNIS-fKL are truncated on the axes to improve visualiza-
tion of other methods. Note that the run times will be dependent on the architecture of the variational
distribution. For example, the ELBO showed significantly slower run times for the SLCP task due
to the cost of computing reparameterization gradients for a masked autoregressive flow. However,
using an inverse autoregressive flow (Kingma et al., 2016) would likely mitigate this issue.


                                                              Eight                     Linear
                                                             Schools                   Regression                     SLCP                        GARCH
                               Actual - nominal


                                                   0.0

                                                  −0.3
      (a)
                                                  −0.6

                                                  −0.9
                                                         0              1              0              1           0               1           0             1
                                                             Nominal                       Nominal                    Nominal                     Nominal
                                                                                                             0
                Log prob. θ∗


                                                                              54                                                          0
                                 −22.375
                                                                                                           −25
                                                                              51                                                        −6
      (b)                        −22.400
                                                                                                           −50                         −12
                                                                              48
                                 −22.425
                                                                              45                           −75                         −18
               Posterior mean


                                                                                                             0                         −0.3
                                                                            −0.6
                                              −0.24
                  accuracy


                                                                                                           −4                          −0.6
                                                                            −1.2
      (c)                                     −0.30
                                                                                                                                       −0.9
                                                                            −1.8                           −8
                                              −0.36                                                                                    −1.2
                                                                            −2.4
                                                                                                           −12


                                                  SoftCVI(α=0.75)                      SoftCVI(α=1)                   SNIS-fKL                ELBO


Figure 8: Additional metrics analogous to fig. 1, using K = 2, instead of K = 8 samples when
approximating the objectives. The SNIS-fKL objective performance degrades substantially when K
is small.


                                                                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     SoftCVI(α=0)      SoftCVI(α=0.75)     SoftCVI(α=1)         SNIS-fKL             ELBO
θ3


                                                 θ2
Figure 9: The multimodal 2-dimensional posterior marginals for the first six runs of the SLCP task
for each method, with the reference posterior samples shown in green.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Eight Schools                                    Linear Regression                                                      GARCH


−5       0                  5         10             0.9         1.0         1.1         1.2         1.3
                       µ                                                     µ


 0.0    2.5           5.0       7.5        10.0            0.0         0.1         0.2         0.3
                        τ                                                    β1
                                                                                                                    4.8           5.0         5.2         5.4
                                                                                                                                        µ
          0                     10                        0.2      0.3           0.4       0.5         0.6
                      m1                                                     β2


              0                  10                0.2     0.3          0.4         0.5         0.6
                      m2                                                     β3


              0                  10                −1.0     −0.9        −0.8        −0.7        −0.6                        1                 2                3
                      m3                                                     β4                                                         α0


              0                  10                      1.9       2.0             2.1         2.2
                      m4                                                     β5


              0                      10                    −0.2                     0.0
                      m5                                                     β6
                                                                                                             0.2          0.4         0.6          0.8    1.0
                                                                                                                                        α1
                  0                  10                  −1.2 −1.1 −1.0 −0.9
                      m6                                                     β7


          0                     10                −1.8            −1.6                   −1.4
                      m7                                                     β8


              0                  10               −1.6             −1.4                   −1.2                0.0               0.2          0.4         0.6
                      m8                                                     β9                                                         β1

          True                   SoftCVI(α=0.75)                        SoftCVI(α=1)                           SNIS-fKL                       ELBO

Figure 10: The distribution of the posterior marginals for a single run of the eight schools, linear
regression and GARCH(1,1) tasks. For the linear regression task, we restrict the plot to the first 10
parameters of the model.


                                                                         26
