Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S UPER C ORRECT: A DVANCING S MALL LLM R EASON -
ING WITH T HOUGHT T EMPLATE D ISTILLATION AND
S ELF -C ORRECTION
 Ling Yang1∗ , Zhaochen Yu1∗, Tianjun Zhang4 , Minkai Xu5 , Joseph E. Gonzalez4
 Bin Cui1† , Shuicheng Yan2,3†
 1
   Peking University, 2 Skywork AI, 3 National University of Singapore,
 4
   UC Berkeley, 5 Stanford University
 Project: https://github.com/YangLing0818/SuperCorrect-llm



                                                A BSTRACT
            Large language models (LLMs) like GPT-4, DeepSeek-R1, and ReasonFlux have
            shown significant improvements in various reasoning tasks. However, smaller LLMs
            still struggle with complex mathematical reasoning because they fail to effectively
            identify and correct reasoning errors. Recent reflection-based methods aim to ad-
            dress these issues by enabling self-reflection and self-correction, but they still face
            challenges in independently detecting errors in their reasoning steps. To overcome
            these limitations, we propose S UPER C ORRECT, a novel two-stage framework that
            uses a large teacher model to supervise and correct both the reasoning and reflec-
            tion processes of a smaller student model. In the first stage, we extract hierarchical
            high-level and detailed thought templates from the teacher model to guide the student
            model in eliciting more fine-grained reasoning thoughts. In the second stage, we in-
            troduce cross-model collaborative direct preference optimization (DPO) to enhance
            the self-correction abilities of the student model by following the teacher’s correction
            traces during training. This cross-model DPO approach teaches the student model
            to effectively locate and resolve erroneous thoughts with error-driven insights from
            the teacher model, breaking the bottleneck of its thoughts and acquiring new skills
            and knowledge to tackle challenging problems. Extensive experiments consistently
            demonstrate our superiority over previous methods. Notably, our S UPER C ORRECT-
            7B model significantly surpasses powerful DeepSeekMath-7B by 7.8%/5.3% and
            Qwen2.5-Math-7B by 15.1%/6.3% on MATH/GSM8K benchmarks, achieving new
            SOTA performance among all 7B models.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Anil et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Du et al.,
2022; Jiang et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023a;b), such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023), DeepSeek-R1
(Guo et al., 2025), and ReasonFlux (Yang et al., 2025), have demonstrated significant improvements in
various reasoning tasks. However, despite being pre-trained on large-scale mathematical datasets using
diverse techniques, smaller models like Llama-3-8B (Dubey et al., 2024) and Qwen2.5-Math-7B (Yang
et al., 2024a) continue to struggle with complex mathematical reasoning tasks.
Existing works aim to enhance the mathematical performance of LLMs through various approaches. We
categorize these methods into two types: traditional fine-tuning optimization and reflection-based
optimization. Traditional fine-tuning methods mainly focus on the exploration in training techniques
like Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Roziere et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), and
LLM-alignment strategies like Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Achiam et al.,
2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a;b) and alternative methods like Direct Preference Optimiza-
tion (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024). Although these methods have shown remarkable progress across a
wide range of language tasks, their optimization objectives only focus on direct answers or simple rea-
soning rationales. Consequently, they struggle to locate the errors in the reasoning process and fail to
revise the flawed reasoning logic of language models.
    ∗
        Equal Contribution.    yangling0818@163.com
    †
        Corresponding authors.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recent reflection-based methods attempt to address the shortcomings of fine-tuning methods and lever-
age the pre-designed prompts or general rules to instruct language models for self-reflection and self-
correction during reasoning process (Shinn et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024). Some methods (Li et al.,
2023; 2024c) further employ LLMs to synthesize rule-based datasets for enhancing their self-correction
abilities in training stage. However, as mentioned in Tyen et al. (2024), LLMs still struggle to inde-
pendently identify errors in their reasoning steps. Without accurate error identifications, self-correction
becomes more challenging. In complex mathematical reasoning, even when mistake locations are pro-
vided, LLMs often remain biased or misled by their previous reasoning context. Thus it remains difficult
for language models to clarify the causes of reasoning errors within a single LLM.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel two-stage framework, namely S UPER C ORRECT, uti-
lizing a large teacher model’s thoughts to supervise and correct both the reasoning and reflection pro-
cesses of a smaller student model. As depicted in Figure 1, in the first stage, we extract hierarchical
thought template from the teacher LLM to guide the student model in generating more fine-grained rea-
soning thoughts. The template contains a high-level thought providing a summarized and generalized
solution for similar problems, and a detailed solution offering a detailed explanation of the critical rea-
soning steps. Compare to previous thought format such as CoT (Wei et al., 2022) and BoT (Yang et al.,
2024b; 2025), our hierarchical thought templates offer deeper and more informative reasoning insights
for later error corrections. In second stage, we propose cross-model collaborative DPO to optimize the
student model and enhance its self-correction abilities by following the teacher’s cross-model correction
traces during training. Specifically, instead of merely simulating correct answers or preferred reason-
ing process, we instruct teacher LLM to identify and correct the error parts in student’s thoughts. This
cross-model correction trace is then used to guide the student model in performing better self-correction,
enabling it to avoid and rectify specific errors. The critical insight of our cross-model DPO approach is
enabling student language models to break the bottleneck of its thoughts and acquiring new error-driven
insights and knowledge from teacher’s correction traces.
Furthermore, we construct a high-quality fine-tuning dataset equipped with designed hierarchical
thought templates containing 100k samples, and a pair-wise preference dataset for thought-level cor-
rection optimization containing 10k samples, which consists of: 1) a math problem, 2) prior reasoning
steps in our pre-designed format, 3) the step with chosen analysis and corrective guidance, generated
by teacher LLMs based on the ground truth solution 4) the step with rejected analysis and correction
guidance, generated by student LLMs without access to the ground truth solution.
We summarize our contribution as follows: (i) We propose a novel two-stage fine-tuning method S U -
PER C ORRECT for improving both reasoning accuracy and self-correction ability for LLMs. (ii) We
propose hierarchical thought based fine-tuning to enable small-sized LLMs to produce more accurate
and fine-grained reasoning thoughts. (iii) We propose cross-model collaborative DPO, which innova-
tively leverage SOTA LLMs to locate and correct the specific error thoughts in the reasoning process of
smaller student LLMs, thus advancing their self-correction ability and breaking their thought bottleneck.
(iv) We construct two high-quality datasets and develop three powerful reasoning LLMs S UPER C OR -
RECT -Qwen/DeepSeek/Llama-7B, achieving 70.2% accuracy on the MATH dataset and 89.5% on
the GSM8K dataset, setting new SOTA performance among all 7B models.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback for Large Language Models To improve the per-
formance and reliability of LLMs, RLHF methods like Christiano et al. (2017) and Ouyang et al. (2022)
are introduced for LLM alignment. This method is more demanding in dataset because it requires pair-
wise annotated data to train a reward model thus reflecting human preferences. And then train the policy
model using reinforcement learning to maximize the estimated reward. Although this method proves
to be effective, due to its reliance on the quality of reward model, this process is complex and compu-
tationally intensive. To simplify this process, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.,
2024) was proposed which directly uses pair-wise data for optimization. By defining the preference
loss as a function of the policy, DPO can optimize the policy using straightforward training techniques,
avoiding the complexities of reinforcement learning. However, current methods only show limited im-
provements in mathematical reasoning due to the design of optimization unit. Works like Step-DPO(Lai
et al., 2024) establish a more fine-grained reward unit by considering each intermediate reasoning step
as a basic unit. However, they fail to clarify error causes and provide explicit guidance for correcting
errors. In this paper, we specifically design a cross-model teacher-student collaborative thought-based
reward, which takes each correction step as a basic optimization unit.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Reasoning Thought
        Data                 Student LLM                                      Student LLM                             Student LLM
                                             Rea                                              Self-Correction Trace
                                                son
                                                    in   gT                                                                 DPO/RLHF
                                                              hou
                      Supervise                                     ght

                                                                                                                                Paired
      Teacher      Extract                                                     Teacher                                        Correction
                                                                                                                                Traces
        LLM                                                                      LLM
                  Hierarchical Thought Template                                             Cross-model Correction Trace

    Stage-1 SFT with Hierarchical Thought Template                                 Stage-2 Cross-model Collaborative DPO
                                                          SuperCorrect

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed two-stage framework S UPER C ORRECT. In the first stage, we extract
hierarchical thought template from teacher LLM to supervise student LLM for producing more specific
thoughts. In the second stage, we collect a dataset of paired self- and cross-correction traces for cross-
model collaborative DPO.
Reasoning with Self-Correction/Reflection Self-correction for reasoning has shown promise in im-
proving LLM outputs in terms of style and quality. Previous works (Li et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2024;
Madaan et al., 2024; Saunders et al., 2022; Miao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a) focus on the con-
cept of self-correction, i.e. having an LLM correct its own outputs. However, as mentioned in Huang
et al. (2023), while self-correction may prove effective for improving model outputs in terms of style
and quality, when it comes to reasoning tasks, LLMs struggle to identify and fix errors without external
feedback. For example, Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024) and RCI (Kim et al., 2024) both use ground truth
correctness as a signal to halt the self-correction loop. Moreover, some attempts to self-correct logical
or reasoning errors can sometimes turn correct answers into incorrect ones, resulting in worse overall
performances (Huang et al., 2023). While previous works typically present self-correction as a process
conducted within a specific LLM, our method leverage large-sized LLMs to explicitly identify the errors
and gain correction insights from the errors. With this corss-model reward, we can revise the weak-
nesses exposed by small-sized LLMs during reasoning tasks through fine-tuning and correction-based
preference optimization.
Thought Expansion for Mathematical Reasoning Thought expansion for reasoning mainly focus on
pre-designed reasoning structure or template, which leverage prompting techniques to enhance mathe-
matical reasoning capabilities of LLMs. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022) and its
variants (Kojima et al., 2022; Press et al., 2023; Arora et al., 2022), such as Least-to-Most (Zhou et al.,
2022), Decomposed Prompting (Khot et al., 2022), and Auto-CoT (Zhang et al., 2022)—prompt LLMs
to break down complex questions into simpler subtasks and systematically solve them before summa-
rizing a final answer. Innovations like Tree-of-Thought (Yao et al., 2024) and Graph-of-Thought (Besta
et al., 2024), have further complex this field by exploring dynamic, non-linear reasoning pathways to
expand heuristic capabilities of LLMs (Chen et al., 2023b; Ning et al., 2023). Other methods like PoT
(Chen et al., 2022), PAL (Gao et al., 2023b) and (Gou et al., 2023) attempt to utilize external tools
such as code to avoid hallucination of LLMs in the mathematical reasoning process. However, they suf-
fer from increased resource demands and greater time complexity, depend on manual prompt crafting,
and are often tailored to specific task types. Recent BoT (Yang et al., 2024b) propose a task-agnostic
paradigm with meta buffer to efficiently solve the problems based on accumulated thought templates.
However, it is a training-free framework which may not essentially boost the reasoning ability of LLMs.
To further improve the internal reasoning ability of LLMs, Quiet-STaR (Zelikman et al., 2024) uses
RLHF-based self-teaching with LLMs’ self-generated thoughts to improve reasoning in normal tasks
and simple math problems. For more complex problems that are beyond the students’ capabilities, this
think-before-reasoning pattern may not work well. In this paper, we utilize a new cross-model paradigm
to enable LLMs to boost both reasoning and self-correction abilities from external model feedbacks,
thereby breaking the bottleneck of original thoughts of LLMs and broadening the model’s capability to
address a wider range of issues.
3   P RELIMINARY
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017) is an effective approach for enhancing the robustness, factuality, and
safety of LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022). RLHF consists of three training phases: 1) supervised fine-tuning


                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(SFT); 2) reward model training, and 3) policy model fine-tuning. SFT Phase: RLHF typically begins
by fine-tuning a pre-trained LM with supervised learning on high-quality data for the downstream task(s)
of interest (dialogue, summarization, etc.), to obtain a model πsf t . Reward Modelling Phase:given any
text, the reward model will assign a scalar reward value to the last token, and the larger the reward value,
the better the sample. Following Stiennon et al. (2020), training reward models often involves utilizing
a dataset comprised of paired comparisons between two responses generated for the same input. The
modeling loss for each pair of preferred and dis-preferred samples is:
                                  L(ψ) = log σ(r(x, y + ) − r(x, y − )),                                (1)
where σ is the sigmoid function. r represents the reward model with parameters ψ, and r(x, y) is the
a single scalar predicted reward for input prompt x and response y. However, this method is often
considered complex due to the complex training pipeline. RL Fine-Tuning Phase: During the RL
phase, the learned reward function is used to provide feedback to the language model. Following prior
works (Tutor; Jaques et al., 2020), the optimization is formulated as

                   max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) rϕ (x, y) − βDKL πθ (y | x) || πref (y | x) ,              (2)
                    πθ

where β is a parameter controlling the deviation from the base reference policy πref , namely the initial
SFT model πsf t . In practice, the language model policy πθ is also initialized to πsf t . Due to the
discrete nature of language generation, this objective is not differentiable and is typically optimized with
reinforcement learning. The standard approach (Ziegler et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al.,
2022) has been to construct the reward function as metioned in Equation (1), and maximize using PPO
Schulman et al. (2017).
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) As an competitive alternative for traditional RLHF method,
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024) was introduced to directly leverage pair-wise preference to optimize the
policy model with an equivalent optimization objective. Specifically, given an input prompt x, and a
preference data pair (y + , y − ), DPO aims to maximize the probability of the preferred output y + and
minimize that of the undesirable output y − . The optimization objective is formulated as:
                                                          πθ (y + |x)           πθ (y − |x)
             LDP O (θ) = −E(x,y+ ,y− )∼D [log σ(β log                  − β log               )],        (3)
                                                         πref (y + |x)         πref (y − |x)
where D is the pair-wise preference dataset, σ is the sigmoid function, πθ (·|x) is the policy model to be
optimized, πref (·|x) is the reference model kept unchanged during training, and the hyperparameter β
controls the distance from the reference model.
4   M ETHOD
4.1 S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING WITH H IERARCHICAL T HOUGHT T EMPLATE
Constructing Hierarchical Thought Templates from Teacher LLMs The traditional instruction-
response datasets for training LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022) mainly focus on the correctness of the re-
sponse, leading LLMs to merely simulate the provided solution and the answer, while ignoring the
importance of the intermediate reasoning thought. Recent work such as BoT (Yang et al., 2024b) uti-
lizes a high-level reasoning guideline (thought template) to enable LLMs to efficiently solve similar
problems in a training-free manner. However, for complex and diverse mathematical reasoning tasks,
we find that using only a high-level thought template is insufficient, especially for small-sized LLMs. To
empower small LLMs to tackle complex reasoning tasks, we specifically design a hierarchical thought
template extracted from large teacher LLMs for transfer to small student LLMs. This new hierarchical
thought template comprises both a high-level thought and a detailed solution. The former provides a
summarized and generalized solution for similar problems, while the latter offers a detailed explanation
of the critical reasoning steps.
Based on this hierarchical thought template, we can propose a new fine-tuning objective that aims to
incorporate human-like hierarchical problem-solving thought structures into the model reasoning and
explicitly produce hierarchical thought during reasoning process. We first collect a set D = {(x, ŷ, ŝ)}
of mathematical problems x with ground-truth answers ŷ and solution ŝ. For each problem x ∈ D,
we first utilize our pre-defined prompt denoted as Ptea , as shown in the below text box, to extract
hierarchical thought templates from teacher LLMs (e.g., SOTA LLMs like o1-preview/o1-mini). For
more details about our prompt, we present all of our prompts in Appendix A.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                             Problematic Solution Example                                                                                             Self-Correction
                                                                                                                 <Step 1>
                                                                                                                                                                    ……
   Input problem:                                                                                                </Step 1>
                 !
   Let 𝑓 𝑥 =         Find the largest x which is not in the domain of g(x)=f(f(x)).                                                                                 ……
               "#$%                                                                                              <Step 4>
   Solution:                                                                                                                                                   1          1      𝑥 − 2.5
                                                                                                                                               𝑔 𝑥 =                 =         =
   ## Step 1:                                                                                                                                                1         1 − 5𝑥    1 − 5𝑥
                                                                                                                                                                  −5
                                                                                                                                                          𝑥 − 2.5      𝑥 − 2.5
   Identify the function f(x) and its domain                                                                     <Evaluate>
                            !                                                                                    This step is correct.         Error overlooked
   The function 𝑓 𝑥 = "#$% is defined for all real numbers except when the denominator is zero, i.e.,2𝑥 −        </Evaluate>
   5 ≠ 0.                                                                                                        </Step 4>
                                                                                                                                                                  ……
   ## Step 2:                                                                                                    <Step 7>
   Solve for the values of x that make the denominator of f(x) zero                                              The largest $x$ that is not in the domain of $g(x)$ is the larger of the two values found in steps 5
                                                                                                                                      !
                                    %                                                                            and 6, which is 𝑥 = "                Hallucination
   Solving 2𝑥 − 5 ≠ 0 gives 𝑥 ≠
                                    "                                                                            <Cause>
   ## Step 3:                                                                                                    This step is incorrect because it considers the value that makes the denominator of f(x) zero,
   Substitute f(x) into g(x) to get the expression for g(x)                                                      which is not relevant to the domain of g(x).
                                                                                                                 <Correction>
                                                             1               1                                   This step should be rephrased to consider the values that make the denominator of g(x) zero,
                                   𝑔 𝑥 =𝑓 𝑓 𝑥 =𝑓                    =
                                                          2𝑥 − 5            1                                                  #                                                   #
                                                                                                                 which is 𝑥 = ! The largest x that is not in the domain of g(x) is !
                                                                      2           −5
                                                                         2𝑥 − 5                                  </Step 7>
   ## Step 4: (Error Reasoning Step)                                                                                                           Misled and biased by itself
    Simplify the expression for g(x)
                                                    1             1       𝑥 − 2.5                                                            Cross-model Correction
                                       𝑔 𝑥 =                =          =
                                                  1            1 − 5𝑥     1 − 5𝑥                                 <Step 1>
                                                       −5
                                               𝑥 − 2.5         𝑥 − 2.5                                                                                              ……
   ## Step 5:                                                                                                    </Step 1>
                                                                                                                                                                    ……
   Identify the values of x that make the denominator of g(x) zero                                               <Step 4>
                                                                        !
   The denominator of g(x) is zero when 1-5x = 0, which gives 𝑥 =                                                Simplify the expression for g(x) .
                                                                        %                                                                             1                 1            𝑥 − 2.5
                                                                                                                                         𝑔 𝑥 =                =                 =
   ## Step 6:                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                         −5
                                                                                                                                                                  1 − 5 𝑥 − 2.5   1 − 5 𝑥 − 2.5            Error located
   Identify the values of x that make the denominator of f(x) zero, which are also in the domain of g(x)                                         𝑥 − 2.5             𝑥 − 2.5
                                                                                                                 <Cause>
                                                                    %                                                                                                                      𝟏      𝟏&𝟓𝒙
   The values of $x$ that make the denominator of f(x) zero are 𝑥 = "                                            The simplification in the original reasoning incorrectly reduced
                                                                                                                                                                                  𝒙&𝟐.𝟓
                                                                                                                                                                                        − 𝟓 to
                                                                                                                                                                                               𝒙&𝟐.𝟓
                                                                                                                                                                                                     The correct
                                                                                                                 simplification should account for distributing the negative sign properly.
   ## Step 7:                                                                                                    </Cause>
   Determine the largest x that is not in the domain of g(x)
   The largest $x$ that is not in the domain of $g(x)$ is the larger of the two values found in steps 5          <Correction>
                       %                                                                                                         𝟏              𝟏             𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓         𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓     𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓
   and 6, which is 𝑥 =                                                                                               𝒈 𝒙 =              =                =                =               =
                                                                                                                               𝟏          𝟏 − 𝟓 𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓   𝟏 − 𝟓 𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓   𝟏 − 𝟓𝒙 + 𝟏𝟐. 𝟓 𝟏𝟑. 𝟓 − 𝟓𝒙
                        "                                                                                                            −𝟓
                                                                                                                            𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓         𝒙 − 𝟐. 𝟓
                                   %                                                                             </Correction>
   Therefore, the final answer is:
                                   "                                                                             </Step 4>
                                                                                                                                                            ……                  Accurate Correction
                                                                                                                 <Answer>
                                                                                                                                                                     "*
                                                                                                                                                                     #+
                                                                                                                 </Answer>
                                                                                                                                                                                    Correct Answer



Figure 2: An illustrative comparison between self-correction and our cross-model correction. Cross-
model correction can enable more precise error localization and thought correction.


   Prompt for Extracting Hierarchical Thought Template
   Transform the solution of the following math problem into a step-by-step XML format, each step
   should be enclosed within tags like ⟨Step1⟩ ⟨/Step1⟩. For each step enclosed within the tags, de-
   termine if this step is challenging and tricky, if so, add detailed explanation and analysis enclosed
   within ⟨Key⟩ ⟨/Key⟩ in this step, as helpful annotations to make the student better understand this
   step correctly thus mastering the solution. After all the reasoning steps, summarize the common
   solution and reasoning steps to help him generalize to similar problems within ⟨Generalized⟩
   ⟨/Generalized⟩. Finally present the final answer enclosed within ⟨Answer⟩ ⟨/Answer⟩.

Then we can obtain the high-quality fine-tuning dataset Dsf t as:


                                             Dsf t = πtea (Ptea , x, ŝ) = {x, stea , Ttea , ytea |x ∈ D},                                                                                                                 (4)

where stea is the formalized solution steps, Ttea is the hierarchical thought for the solution, and ytea
is the final answer extracted from stea . We provide an example of our hierarchical thought template in
Appendix A. For normal and easy steps, we provide brief explanation and direct solution, as for tricky
and difficult reasoning steps, we provide a detailed solution and in-depth explanation within ⟨Key⟩
which will help student LLMs to better grasp the insight within the detailed thought. Furthermore, we
provide a high-level thought within ⟨Generalized⟩ as a generalized guidance which helps to efficiently
solve similar problems.
Thought-based Supervised Fine-tuning After curating our thought-based dataset Dsf t , our opti-
mization objective is to make student LLMs π reasoning with hierarchical thought and have a more
comprehensive understanding for each problem-solving process, which can be formulated as:

                                                                                   X
                                  Lsft = argmax                                                             log π((Ttea , stea )|(Pstu , x)).                                                                              (5)
                                                                 (Pstu ,x,Ttea ,stea )∈Dsf t


Starting from the base student LLM π, Lsft maximizes the likelihood of response (Ttea , stea ) given
prompt Pstu and input problem x, where Pstu denotes the pre-defined prompt as Ptea . After the fine-
tuning process, we greatly enhance the reasoning ability of base student LLMs by learning the hierarchi-
cal thought from SOTA reasoning LLMs and enable the student LLMs to produce similar hierarchical
thought along with final answer. Then, we obtain fine-tuned student LLMs πref that could be used for
cross-model collaborative dpo in Section 4.2.


                                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2   C ROSS - MODEL C OLLABORATIVE DPO
Boosting DPO with Thought Correction While DPO proves to be effective in some areas (e.g., chat,
style, etc.), its optimization objective is less effective for complex mathematical reasoning tasks. As
noted in Lai et al. (2024), the issue arises because errors in solving complex mathematical problems
often occur at the most challenging steps (e.g., complicated calculations, tricky transformations). This
may lead to wrong optimization during training, as correct previous steps are also rejected. Furthermore,
it is challenging for a single LLM to detect and correct its own errors (Tyen et al., 2024). This is akin
to students struggling to gain insights from their own incorrect solutions. The root of the error lies
in flawed reasoning, making it inefficient to merely imitate the correct solution without addressing the
underlying thought-level mistakes. To address this, we have carefully designed novel and fine-grained
optimization objectives that prioritize thought-level correction over traditional instance-level preference.
Specifically, we first accurately locate the error step and then use the correction trace of this error step
as the optimization unit. This approach prioritizes cross-model correction traces from teacher LLMs
πtea over self-correction traces from student LLMs πref , thereby enhancing the error detection and
self-correction abilities of student LLMs.
Collecting Error Thoughts and Corrections To achieve thought-level correction, we need to col-
lect a dataset containing fine-grained paired data of self- and cross-correction traces. Specifically,
we utilize the fine-tuned student LLM πref to conduct thought-based reasoning on our sampled test
dataset denoted as Dtest = {xtest , ŷtest , ŝtest }, and we obtain the test results denoted as πsf t (xtest ) =
{xtest , stest , Ttest , ytest |xtest ∈ Dtest }. After filtering out erroneous problem-solution pairs that satisfy
ytest ̸= ytest
            ˆ and finally obtain the erroneous dataset:
                        Derr = {xtest , ŷtest , ŝtest , serr , Terr , yerr |xtest ∈ Dtest },                (6)
here serr is the error solution and Terr is the corresponding error thought, yerr represents the error
answer extracted from serr . Given that each erroneous solution is explicitly presented as a sequence
of reasoning steps serr = s1 , s2 , . . . , sn , we proceed to verify the correctness of each reasoning step
until we find the first error and record its step number k. Here we utilize current powerful models (e.g.,
gpt-4o, o1-mini) in mathematical reasoning to function as an experienced teacher model πtea . To obtain
the corresponding error steps and cause analysis, we design a prompt Pc to instruct πtea to search for
the logic flaws and errors in the provided reasoning steps. After searching serr and evaluating each
reasoning steps, we could locate each error steps and annotate each error step with error cause analysis
ai and correction guidance ci . Thus we could obtain an annotated dataset of pair-wise self- and cross-
corrections:
                                                                    − −
                          Dcorr = {(x, {si }k−1         + +
                                                i=0 , (ak , ck ), (ak , ck ), )|x ∈ Derr },              (7)
where k denotes the first error step. Here (a+       +
                                                k , ck ) is chosen as the corrected step with analysis from
                     − −
teacher model, (ak , ck ) is chosen as the rejected correction step and cause analysis from the student
model, utilizing the same correction prompt as the teacher. To further ensure the quality of our dataset,
we additionally propose an inspector LLM to conduct iterative evaluation which verifies the accuracy
of the correction trace by comparing it against the input problem and the ground-truth solution. If
issues are detected, the problematic parts are sent back to the teacher LLMs for revision. This iterative
checking process continues until no errors remain, with a maximum of three iterations allowed. In our
implementation, we apply inspector LLM both in the curation process of HSFT dataset and pair-wise
self-and corrections dataset. For more detail, please refer to Appendix D, we also make detailed analysis
of the dataset quality in Appendix D.2.
Improving Self-correction Ability with Cross-model Correction In the second stage of our method,
our proposed cross-model collaborative DPO leverages cross-model correction from teacher LLMs to
enhance the error detection and self-correction ability of student LLMs. As noted in Equation (7), the
previous k − 1 correct reasoning steps {si }k−1i=0 are combined with input problem x, our cross-model
collaborative DPO aims to maximize the probability of the teacher LLM’s correction and analysis of the
error step (a+     +
              k , ck ), while minimizing the probability of the student LLM’s self-correction and analysis
   − −
(ak , ck ). The optimization objective of our cross-model collaborative DPO can be formulated as:
LCross-DPO (θ) =
                                            πθ ((a+    +
                                                                                 πθ ((a−    −

                                                  k , ck )|x; s1∼k−1 )                 k , ck )|x; s1∼k−1 )
− E(x,s1∼k−1 ,(a+ ,c+ ))∼Dcorr log σ β log                              − β log                                 .
                k   k                      πref ((a+    +
                                                   k , ck )|x; s1∼k−1 )         πref ((a−    −
                                                                                        k , ck )|x; s1∼k−1 )
                                                                                                       (8)


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By prioritizing cross-model correction over self-correction, as illustrated in Figure 2, our method helps
student model to accurately locate the erroneous steps of the mathematical reasoning process and ef-
fectively conduct self-correction. Furthermore, this process also helps the student LLMs to rectify its
original flawed thoughts and avoid specific errors thus improving the reasoning ability and mitigate
hallucination problems.
Table 1: Quantitative comparison. Models are evaluated with chain-of-thought reasoning using open-
source evaluation framework (Gao et al., 2023a) † . ”general” denotes whether the model is for general
tasks or designed for specific tasks. ”open” denotes open-source or not.
   Model                                                    size general open MATH (%) GSM8K (%)
   GPT-3.5-Turbo                                             -      !          %   42.5    92.0
   Gemini-1.5-Pro (Reid et al., 2024)                        -      !          %   67.7    90.8
   Claude-3-Sonnet                                           -      !          %   71.1    96.4
   GPT-4-1106 (Achiam et al., 2023)                          -      !          %   64.3    91.4
   GPT-4-Turbo-0409 (Achiam et al., 2023)                    -      !          %   73.4    93.7
   GPT-4o-0806                                               -      !          %   76.6    95.8
   Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Touvron et al., 2023a)    8B                !          !   30.0    79.6
   Qwen2-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)         7B                !          !   49.6    82.3
   Llama-3-70B-Instruct (Touvron et al., 2023a)   70B               !          !   50.4    93.0
   DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Instruct (Zhu et al., 2024) 236B               %          !   75.7    94.9
   Code-Llama-7B (Roziere et al., 2023)                    7B       %          !   13.0    25.2
   MAmooTH-CoT (Yue et al., 2023)                          7B       %          !   10.4    50.5
   WizardMath (Luo et al., 2023)                           7B       %          !   10.7    54.9
   MetaMath (Yu et al., 2023)                              7B       %          !   19.8    66.5
   MetaMath-Mistral-7B (Yu et al., 2023)                   7B       %          !   28.2    77.7
   MathScale-Mistral Tang et al. (2024)                    7B       %          !   35.2    74.8
   InternLM-Math-7B (Ying et al., 2024)                    7B       %          !   34.6    78.1
   Xwin-Math-Mistral-7B (Li et al., 2024a)                 7B       %          !   43.7    89.2
   MAmmoTH2-7B-Plus (Yue et al., 2024)                     7B       %          !   45.0    84.7
   MathGenieLM-Mistral (Lu et al., 2024)                   7B       %          !   45.1    80.5
   InternLM-Math-20B (Ying et al., 2024)                   20B      %          !   37.7    82.6
   MathGenieLM-InternLM2 (Lu et al., 2024)                 20B      %          !   55.7    87.7
   Meta-Llama3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) 8B                %          !   51.9    84.5
   S UPER C ORRECT-Llama-8B (Ours)                8B                %          !   58.2    89.7
   DeepSeekMath-7B-Instruct(Shao et al., 2024)              7B      %          !   46.8    82.9
   S UPER C ORRECT-DeepSeek-7B (Ours)                       7B      %          !   54.6    88.2
   Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a)            7B      %          !   55.1    83.2
   S UPER C ORRECT-Qwen-7B (Ours)                           7B      %          !   70.2    89.5
     †
         lm-evaluation: https://github.com/EleutherAI/lm-evaluation-harness.
5 E XPERIMENTS
5.1 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Base Models, Datasets and Evaluations We apply S UPER C ORRECT to different base models
to demonstrate its generalization ability and achieve new SOTA results, including recent powerful
Qwen2.5-Math-7B (Yang et al., 2024a), Meta-Llama3.1-8B (Dubey et al., 2024), DeepSeek-Math-
7B (Liu et al., 2024), these models have been recognized to be reasoning-efficient with smaller size and
strong reasoning ability especially in mathematical problems. In the SFT stage, we use mathematical
problems from the training set of Math (Hendrycks et al., 2021) which consists of 7500 challenging com-
petition mathematics problems, and training set of GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) consists of 7473 high
quality linguistically diverse grade school math word problems. Furthermore, we additionally translated
670 challenging math problems from GaoKao Bench (Zhang et al., 2023a) which is based on Chinese
2010-2022 GAOKAO examinations. To further enrich the diversity of our dataset, we sampled some


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Comparison between different models and our S UPER C ORRECT. Here we chose S UPER C OR -
RECT -Qwen-7B as our model. The differences of the accuracy has been marked by arrows with different
colors, red means accuracy decreased, and green means accuracy improved.
challenging problems from NuminaMath (Li et al., 2024b) and MetaMath(Yu et al., 2023). To align
with our hierarchical thought reasoning process, we leverage SOTA LLMs o1-mini/gpt-4o-mini to cre-
ate hierarchical thought based on the ground truth solution as mentioned in Section 4.1, and establish a
hierarchical thought based dataset. In the Cross-model DPO stage, we collect 20k incorrect reasoning
results from three different SFT models and processed as described in Section 4.2. For evaluation, we
use the test set from MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) datasets, and test
chain-of-thought reasoning accuracy utilizing open-source evaluation framework (Gao et al., 2023a).
Implementation Details We conduct our experiments on 8 NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB GPUs. Here
we denote our hierarchical thought based supervised fine-tuning as HSFT for simplicity. Initially, we
utilize the 100K HSFT data for hierarchical thought supervised fine-tuning on the base models to obtain
our HSFT models. We train all of our models for 4 epochs, with training batch size set to 8 and gradient
accumulation steps set to 16. The learning rate is set to 2e5 and we use AdamW optimizer along with
the cosine learning rate scheduler. The warmup ratio is set to 0.02 and we use flash-attention (Dao et al.,
2022) to save GPU memory. Subsequently, we perform Cross-model DPO based on the HSFT models.
For Cross-model DPO, we train for 8 epochs, with a global batch size of 128 and a learning rate of
1 × 10−6 . And we use the AdamW optimizer along with cosine learning rate scheduler, and the warmup
ratio is set to 0.05.
Table 2: Accuracy comparison between different methods, here we choose Qwen2.5-Math-Instruct as
Base model denoted as Base and our Cross-model DPO is denoted as Cross-DPO. Here we separately
compare our first HSFT stage with traditional SFT method and Cross-DPO stage with Reflexion(Shinn
et al., 2024). We show the improved accuracy in green compare to previous methods. We provide
quantitative results with more base LLMs (i.e., Llama3.1 and DeepSeek-Math) in Table 7 of Appendix E.
    Model        Base   Base + SFT    Base + HSFT        Base-HSFT + Reflexion   Base-HSFT + Cross-DPO
  MATH (%)       55.1      57.4        62.4 (+5.0)               63.1                  70.2 (+7.1)
    Model        Base   Base + SFT    Base + HSFT        Base-HSFT + Reflexion   Base-HSFT + Cross-DPO
  GSM8K (%)      83.2      84.3        87.2 (+2.9)               86.8                  89.5 (+2.7)
5.2   M AIN R ESULTS
Enhanced Reasoning Accuracy As shown in Table 1, our method achieves new SOTA performance
among all 7B models, significantly surpassing powerful DeepSeekMath-7B by 7.8% and Qwen2.5-
Math-7B by 15.1% on MATH benchmark. This promising results demonstrates our superiority and
effectiveness in handling complicated reasoning tasks. Notably, we can achieve better results than larger-
sized models such as Llama3-70B-Instruct (Touvron et al., 2023a) in GSM8K and MATH, and achieve
accuracy comparable to GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini with our best model S UPER C ORRECT-Qwen-7B. We


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Improvement comparison between different topics. Here we chose Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct
and our S UPER C ORRECT-Qwen-7B to show the improvement in performance of different mathematical
problem Types. The part in green is the improved part of our S UPER C ORRECT, and the part in black is
the original reasoning accuracy of Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct.
attribute this improvement in reasoning accuracy in two folds: 1) The first HSFT stage that equips stu-
dent LLMs with a deeper and fine-grained reasoning process. Compare to conventional CoT reasoning
process, it helps the student LLMs to think more carefully thus improving the reasoning consistency and
reduce hallucinations issues on the problems that the student LLMs already mastered. 2) The second
cross-model DPO stage that leverages the error-driven insights from teacher LLM to help student LLMs
break the bottleneck of their thoughts thus making it possible to deal with the problems that the student
LLMs in acquiring the skills and knowledge to tackle problems they were previously unable to solve.
We also present some detailed examples of hierarchical reasoning in Appendix F from different datasets,
please check them to have a comprehensive understanding of our S UPER C ORRECT.
Improved Self-Correction Ability Here we also show the improved self-correction ability of our
S UPER C ORRECT as shown in Figure 3. After initial reasoning stage, we let all the LLMs to verify the
reasoning process and detect the logic flaws and errors within each reasoning step, and try to correct
them. As a result of self-correction, our S UPER C ORRECT further increase the accuracy by 5∼6%,
while other LLMs are ineffective to increase the accuracy, and some LLMs even decrease the original
accuracy. Because our Cross-model DPO helps the LLMs to accurately locate the errors and logic flaws
within each steps by learning teacher’s correction traces, and use a fine-grained analysis and correction
to help LLMs better correct them. After the Cross-model DPO process, the LLMs are not only able
to consistently solve problems within its capabilities, but they are also able to solve wider range of
problems with error-driven insights gained from teacher LLMs. We provide more quantitative analysis
in Table 6 on how far cross-model DPO brings the student model and the teacher model closer to each
other. We also provide some self-correction examples from different datasets, for more detail, please
check Appendix G.
Ablation Study We conduct ablation study of our S UPER C ORRECT and put results in Table 2. As
we can see, the improvement of traditional SFT is limited compare to our HSFT, which falls behind
by 5% in accuracy. Based on our HSFT models, we further apply some self-correction methods such
as Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024) to compare with our Cross-DPO. From the results, we can find that
our method wins again with lead of 7% in accuracy compare to Reflexion. These promising results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our HSFT and cross-model DPO. Here we take an illustrative example
in Table 3 of Appendix B for better understanding of our effective hierarchical thought reasoning. The
CoT prompting method shows misunderstanding of ”empty set” as it fails to account for the fact that
the 512 sets already include the empty set. Equipped with our hierarchical thought-based reasoning
(denoted as HT in Appendix A), we can see that the model realizes that the 512 sets include empty set.
However, it fails to correctly recall the fact that the problem requires to include the empty set in the final


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                       Higher
                                                                       Mean

                                                                        Lower
                                                                       Variance


Figure 5: Quantitative analysis on reasoning stability. The higher mean value denotes higher average
accuracy rate, and lower variance denotes higher reasoning stability.

answer, which is caused by hallucination issue. Finally, our HSFT LLMs could correctly resolve the
problem with accurate understanding of empty set and avoid the hallucination issue.

SupperCorrect Breaks Thought Bottleneck The problems within MATH dataset encompass a wide
range of seven topics including algebra, counting & probability, intermediate algebra, number theory,
geometry, prealgebra and precalculus. During our experiments, we observe that the accuracy for each
topics are quiet different. For most LLMs, they tend to show better performance on algebra and preal-
gebra, but for other topics, it always show degradation in accuracy because they may have some thought
bottleneck on those topics. As shown in Figure 4, our S UPER C ORRECT improves the reasoning perfor-
mance on all topics. It is noted that for the topics which are originally difficult for LLMs, it shows a
more significant improvement compare to topics that the models are already mastered. This is because
we utilize the error-driven insights during the Cross-model DPO stage to break the original thought bot-
tleneck of LLMs, thus enlightening them with new techniques and tricks to solve the problems that they
used have no idea to solve. The results further proves that our S UPER C ORRECT could help to break the
original thought bottleneck thus significantly improve the reasoning ability of LLMs, and narrowing the
performance gap for different topics. More detail reasoning and self-correction results can be found in
Appendix F. and Appendix G.

SuperCorrect Achieves Better Reasoning Stability The test set of MATH dataset consists of 5000
problems in 5 different difficulty levels. To further evaluate the reasoning stability of our method, we
additionally sample 300 problems of level-5 (hardest) from MATH test dataset. We conduct a quanti-
tative analysis by repeating the experiment 256 times and compute the mean and variance of accuracy
as shown in Figure 5. We can observe that, compare to the base model, our S UPER C ORRECT helps
to achieve higher mean value of accuracy rate. Moreover, our S UPER C ORRECT significantly reduce
the variance of accuracy distribution of multiple reasoning times. These phenomenons demonstrate our
S UPER C ORRECT can effectively improve both accuracy and stability for difficult reasoning problems.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose S UPER C ORRECT, a novel two-stage framework that significantly improve both
reasoning and reflection processes of language models. In S UPER C ORRECT, We propose hierarchical
thought-based fine-tuning to enable LLMs to produce more fine-grained reasoning thoughts and intro-
duce cross-model collaborative DPO to enhance the self-correction abilities of the student LLMS by fol-
lowing the teacher’s correction traces. Extensive experiments consistently demonstrate our superiority
over previous methods, surpasses powerful DeepSeekMath-7B by 5.3%∼7.8% and Qwen2.5-Math-7B
by 6.3%∼15.1% on MATH and GSM8K benchmarks. For future work, we will generalize this new
framework to larger models and more complex datasets.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (U23B2048, U22B2037), Bei-
jing Municipal Science and Technology Project (Z231100010323002), research grant No. SH2024JK29
and High-performance Computing Platform of Peking University and in part by NUS Start-up Grant
A-0010106-00-00.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak
  Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Simran Arora, Avanika Narayan, Mayee F Chen, Laurel Orr, Neel Guha, Kush Bhatia, Ines Chami, and
  Christopher Re. Ask me anything: A simple strategy for prompting language models. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.

Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi,
 Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph of thoughts:
 Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 17682–17690, 2024.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot
  learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Pinzhen Chen, Zhicheng Guo, Barry Haddow, and Kenneth Heafield. Iterative translation refinement
  with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03856, 2023a.

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompt-
 ing: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2211.12588, 2022.

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting:
 Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on Machine
 Learning Research, 2023b.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep rein-
  forcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
  Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
  Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with io-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  16344–16359, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengxiao Du, Yujie Qian, Xiao Liu, Ming Ding, Jiezhong Qiu, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Glm:
  General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling. In Proceedings of the 60th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 320–
  335, 2022.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Let-
  man, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

L Gao, J Tow, B Abbasi, S Biderman, S Black, A DiPofi, C Foster, L Golding, J Hsu, A Le Noac’h,
  et al. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation, 12 2023. URL https://zenodo.
  org/records/10256836, 7, 2023a.

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023b.

Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yujiu Yang, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen,
  et al. Tora: A tool-integrated reasoning agent for mathematical problem solving. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.17452, 2023.

Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shi-
  rong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.

Lihua Guo, Dawu Chen, and Kui Jia. Knowledge transferred adaptive filter pruning for cnn compression
  and acceleration. Science China. Information Sciences, 65(12):229101, 2022.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.

Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
   and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2310.01798, 2023.

Natasha Jaques, Judy Hanwen Shen, Asma Ghandeharioun, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah
  Jones, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Human-centric dialog training via offline reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05848, 2020.

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford,
  Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. Mixtral of
  experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.

Sarika R Khope and Susan Elias. Critical correlation of predictors for an efficient risk prediction frame-
  work of icu patient using correlation and transformation of mimic-iii dataset. Data Science and
  Engineering, 7(1):71–86, 2022.

Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish
  Sabharwal. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large lan-
  guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:22199–
  22213, 2022.

Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Senqiao Yang, Xiangru Peng, and Jiaya Jia. Step-dpo: Step-wise
  preference optimization for long-chain reasoning of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18629, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chen Li, Weiqi Wang, Jingcheng Hu, Yixuan Wei, Nanning Zheng, Han Hu, Zheng Zhang, and
  Houwen Peng. Common 7b language models already possess strong math capabilities. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.04706, 2024a.
Jia Li, Edward Beeching, Lewis Tunstall, Ben Lipkin, Roman Soletskyi, Shengyi Huang, Kashif Rasul,
   Longhui Yu, Albert Q Jiang, Ziju Shen, et al. Numinamath: The largest public dataset in ai4maths
   with 860k pairs of competition math problems and solutions. 2024b.
Ming Li, Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Shwai He, and Tianyi Zhou. Reflection-tuning: Recycling data
 for better instruction-tuning. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Instruction Tuning and Instruction Fol-
 lowing, 2023.
Ming Li, Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Shwai He, Jiuxiang Gu, and Tianyi Zhou. Selective reflection-
 tuning: Student-selected data recycling for llm instruction-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10110,
 2024c.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bin Wang, Bingxuan Wang, Bo Liu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Dengr, Chong
  Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, et al. Deepseek-v2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-
  experts language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04434, 2024.
Zimu Lu, Aojun Zhou, Houxing Ren, Ke Wang, Weikang Shi, Junting Pan, Mingjie Zhan, and Hong-
  sheng Li. Mathgenie: Generating synthetic data with question back-translation for enhancing mathe-
  matical reasoning of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16352, 2024.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qingwei
  Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning for large
  language models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09583, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
 Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-
 feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Ning Miao, Yee Whye Teh, and Tom Rainforth. Selfcheck: Using llms to zero-shot check their own
  step-by-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00436, 2023.
Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Zixuan Zhou, Zifu Wang, Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. Skeleton-of-thought:
  Large language models can do parallel decoding. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring and
  narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 5687–5711, 2023.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
 Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gemini
 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi,
  Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan Leike.
 Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yu Wu,
  and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Zhengyang Tang, Xingxing Zhang, Benyou Wan, and Furu Wei. Mathscale: Scaling instruction tuning
  for mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02884, 2024.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and ef-
  ficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and
  fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Sequence Tutor. Conservative fine-tuning of sequence generation models with kl-control natasha jaques,
  shixiang gu, dzmitry bahdanau, josé miguel hernández-lobato, richard e. Turner, Douglas Eck arXiv
  (2016-11-09) https://arxiv. org/abs/1611.02796 v9.
Gladys Tyen, Hassan Mansoor, Victor Cărbune, Yuanzhu Peter Chen, and Tony Mak. Llms cannot find
  reasoning errors, but can correct them given the error location. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 13894–13908, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yuemei Xu, Han Cao, Wanze Du, and Wenqing Wang. A survey of cross-lingual sentiment analysis:
  Methodologies, models and evaluations. Data Science and Engineering, 7(3):279–299, 2022.
An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng Liu, Jianhong
  Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2. 5-math technical report: Toward mathematical expert
  model via self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12122, 2024a.
Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Shiyi Cao, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and
  Bin Cui. Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024b.
Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Bin Cui, and Mengdi Wang. Reasonflux: Hierarchical llm reasoning via
  scaling thought templates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06772, 2025.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Huaiyuan Ying, Shuo Zhang, Linyang Li, Zhejian Zhou, Yunfan Shao, Zhaoye Fei, Yichuan Ma, Jiawei
  Hong, Kuikun Liu, Ziyi Wang, et al. Internlm-math: Open math large language models toward
  verifiable reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06332, 2024.
Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James T Kwok, Zhenguo
  Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions for large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12284, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen.
  Mammoth: Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.05653, 2023.
Xiang Yue, Tuney Zheng, Ge Zhang, and Wenhu Chen. Mammoth2: Scaling instructions from the web.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03548, 2024.
Eric Zelikman, Georges Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah D Goodman.
  Quiet-star: Language models can teach themselves to think before speaking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.09629, 2024.
Xiaotian Zhang, Chunyang Li, Yi Zong, Zhengyu Ying, Liang He, and Xipeng Qiu. Evaluating the
  performance of large language models on gaokao benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12474,
  2023a.
Zhao Zhang, Yong Zhang, Da Guo, Shuang Zhao, and Xiaolin Zhu. Communication-efficient feder-
  ated continual learning for distributed learning system with non-iid data. Science China Information
  Sciences, 66(2):122102, 2023b.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in large
  language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
  Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning
  in large language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Qihao Zhu, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Dejian Yang, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Y Wu, Yukun Li, Huazuo
  Gao, Shirong Ma, et al. Deepseek-coder-v2: Breaking the barrier of closed-source models in code
  intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11931, 2024.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-
  tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A DDITIONAL P ROMPTING D ETAILS AND E XAMPLE


    Hierarchical Thought Template

    ⟨Step 1⟩
                                                         ......
    ⟨/Step 1⟩
                                                         ......
    ⟨Step 4⟩ Calculate the Number of Ways to Roll Exactly 2 Sixes
    ⟨Key⟩
    ♠Starting point of detailed solution♠:
    Understanding Combinations and Independent Events
    The most challenging step is determining the number of ways to roll exactly two sixes. This involves two
    key concepts:
    1. Combinations ( 52 ): This represents the number of ways to choose which two out of the five rolls will

       be sixes.
    2. Independent Choices for Remaining Rolls (53 ): For the other three rolls that are not sixes, each has 5
       possible outcomes (1 through 5).
    By combining these, the total number of ways to get exactly two sixes is:
                                                     !
                                                    5
                                                         × 53
                                                    2

    ♠End point of detailed solution♠:
    ⟨/Key⟩
    ⟨/Step 4⟩
    ⟨Step 5⟩
                                                         ......
    ⟨/Step 5⟩
    ⟨Step 6⟩ Calculate the Probability
    The probability of getting at most two sixes in five rolls is the ratio of the number of favorable outcomes to
    the total number of possible outcomes:
                                      5
                                          × 55 + 51 × 54 + 52 × 53

                                      0                                        625
                                                                            =
                                                      65                       648
    ⟨/Step 6⟩
    ⟨Generalized⟩
    ♢ Starting point of high-level thought
    Generalizing to Similar Problems
    When dealing with probabilities of obtaining a certain number of specific outcomes in multiple trials (like
    rolling a die several times), follow these steps:
    1. Identify Total Outcomes: Calculate the total number of possible outcomes using nk .
    2. Determine Favorable Outcomes: For each desired number of specific outcomes (e.g., exactly r sixes),
       use combinations and multiply by the number of ways the remaining trials can occur.
    3. Sum Relevant Cases: If the problem asks for ”at most” or ”at least,” sum the favorable outcomes
       accordingly.
    4. Compute Probability: Divide the total favorable outcomes by the total possible outcomes.
    This approach is based on the binomial probability formula, which is widely applicable in scenarios with
    independent trials.
    ♢ End point of high-level thought
    ⟨/Generalized⟩
    ⟨Answer⟩ The probability of rolling a six in at most 2 of the 5 rolls is 625
                                                                             648 . ⟨/Answer⟩


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Prompt for Extracting Hierarchical Thought Template
    Transform the solution of the following math problem into a step-by-step XML format, each
    step should be enclosed within tags like ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩. For each step enclosed within
    the tags, determine if this step is challenging and tricky, if so, add detailed explanation and
    analysis enclosed within ⟨Key⟩⟨/Key⟩ in this step, as helpful annotations to make the student
    better understand this step correctly thus mastering the solution. After all the reasoning
    steps, summarize the common solution and reasoning steps to help him generalize to similar
    problems within ⟨Generalized⟩⟨/Generalized⟩. Finally present the final answer enclosed
    within⟨Answer⟩⟨/Answer⟩.


    Hierarchical Thought-based Reasoning Prompt (HT):
    Solve the following math problem in a step-by-step XML format, each step should be en-
    closed within tags like ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩. For each step enclosed within the tags, determine
    if this step is challenging and tricky, if so, add detailed explanation and analysis enclosed
    within⟨Key⟩⟨/Key⟩ in this step, as helpful annotations to help you thinking and remind your-
    self how to conduct reasoning correctly. After all the reasoning steps, summarize the common
    solution and reasoning steps to help you and your classmates who are not good at math gener-
    alize to similar problems within ⟨Generalized⟩⟨/Generalized⟩. Finally present the final answer
    within ⟨Answer⟩⟨/Answer⟩.

    Grounded Correction Trace Prompt:
    First transform the Reasoning steps to be Checked into our required XML format as follow:
    for each step, the steps should be within corresponding tags like ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩, and next
    based on the problem and reference solution, evaluate each steps and find the fundamental
    logic flaws and errors in the given reasoning steps, if error detected, using ⟨Cause⟩⟨/Cause⟩ to
    give a Refined and Concise explanation for the error cause within the corresponding Step tags
    along with ⟨Correction⟩⟨/Correction⟩ to correct the error step and output correct step. And
    finally, present the correct final answer within ⟨Answer⟩⟨/Answer⟩. Output All the transformed
    reasoning steps from ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩.


    Correction Trace Prompt:
    First transform the Reasoning steps to be Checked into our required XML format as follow:
    for each step, the steps should be within corresponding tags like ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩, and next
    based on the problem, evaluate each steps and find the fundamental logic flaws and errors
    in the given reasoning steps, if error detected, using ⟨Cause⟩⟨/Cause⟩ to give a Refined
    and Concise explanation for the error cause within the corresponding Step tags along with
    ⟨Correction⟩⟨/Correction⟩ to correct the error step and output correct step. And finally, present
    the correct final answer within ⟨Answer⟩⟨/Answer⟩. Output All the transformed reasoning steps
    from ⟨Step1⟩⟨/Step1⟩.


As shown above, we present our meticulously designed prompt template used in our experiments along
with an example of our hierarchical thought template. The prompt for extracting hierarchical thought
template is designed for teacher LLMs to transform the original solution into hierarchical thought tem-
plate. And for hierarchical thought-based reasoning prompt denoted as HT, we utilize this prompt dur-
ing the HSFT process and the evaluation process. Grounded correction trace prompt is also designed
for teacher LLMs to locate and find the error-driven insight from the erroneous reasoning process. And
finally, the correction trace prompt is used during our Cross-DPO stage, and further evaluation for self-
correction.

B    D ETAILED Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a detailed comparison for error-prone reasoning steps and reasoning results
between three different methods, including CoT prompting, our first-stage HSFT models and our S U -
PER C ORRECT .


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Qualitative comparison between error-prone steps for different methods. Here we use different
colors to represents different parts of reasoning. We denote the erroneous reasoning steps in purple,
the error cause in red, correct reasoning steps that show improvement in black and the summary for
improvement in green.

    Problem              How many subsets of the set of divisors of 72 contain only composite num-
                         bers? For example, {8,9} and {4,8,12} are two such sets. Include the
                         empty set in your count. (The error-prone parts within the problem)
    CoT                  ## Step 4: Account for the empty set. We need to include the empty set in
                         our count, so we add 1 to the total number of subsets.
                         (Error Cause: Ignore the fact that empty set has already been counted)
                         ## Step 5: Calculate the final answer. The total number of subsets of the
                         composite numbers is 29 + 1 = 512 + 1 = 513. %
                         (Error Cause: Repeatedly counted empty set)
    HSFT                 ⟨Step4⟩
                         ...... which is 29 = 512.
                         However, this includes the empty set, which is not a subset of the set of
                         composite numbers.
                         (Improvement:Notice the empty set is included within the 512 subsets)
                         ⟨/Step4⟩
                         ⟨Step5⟩
                         We need to subtract 1 from 512 to exclude the empty set. Therefore, the
                         total number of subsets of the set of composite numbers is 512 − 1 = 511.
                         %
                         ⟨/Step5⟩
                         (Error Cause: Hallucination issue makes LLMs forget the fact that it is
                         required to count empty set in the problem.)
    S UPER C ORRECT
                         ⟨Step6⟩
                         Calculate the number of subsets containing only composite numbers.
                         ⟨Key⟩
                         The number of subsets of a set with n elements is 2n . Here, with 9 com-
                         posite divisors, the number of subsets is 29 = 512. This includes the empty
                         set, which is required by the problem statement. !
                         ⟨Key⟩
                         ⟨/Step6⟩
                         Improvement: 1. Successfully notice the empty set is included within 512
                         subset 2. Mitigate the influence of hallucination issue


C    C OMPARISON B ETWEEN S TEP -DPO AND C ROSS - MODEL DPO



We conduct qualitative analysis between Step-DPO and our Cross-model DPO. We choose Qwen2.5-
Math-Instruct as base model, and we apply Step-DPO on the base model to compare the results. It should
be noted that Step-DPO utilize CoT style prompt, for fair comparison, we choose the most suitable
prompting method for each model. As shown in Table 4, based on the previous unsolved problems, Step-
DPO could locate the error reasoning steps and make corrections (e.g. further identify another multiples
of 7), but it but struggles to fully correct them. Compare to Step-DPO, our method could not only locate
the erroneous steps, but also conduct accurate self-correction thus solving previous unsolvable problems.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 4: Qualitative comparison between Step-DPO and Cross-model DPO.

  Problem              How many of the following numbers are factors of 34 or multiples of 7?
                       Numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 14, 17, 29, 56, 91
  Base Model           ### Step 1: Factors of 34 The prime factorization of 34 is:
                                                       34 = 2 × 17
                       The factors of 34 are:
                                                       1, 2, 17, 34
                       ......
                       ### Step 4: Identify multiples of 7 from the list From the provided list, the
                       multiples of 7 are: - 14 (since 7 × 2 = 14)
                       (Error Cause: Ignore the fact that 56,91 is also multiples of 7)
                       ......
                       ### Step 7: Count the unique numbers The unique numbers that are either
                       factors of 34 or multiples of 7 are: - 1, 2, 14, 17
                       Thus, the total count is:
                        4 %
  Step-DPO             ...... ### Step 2: Identify Multiples of 7 The multiples of 7 are the numbers
                       that can be expressed as 7 × k, where k is an integer. Among the given
                       numbers, the multiples of 7 are: - 14 = 7 × 2 - 91 = 7 × 13
                       Thus, the multiples of 7 from the list are:
                                                          14, 91
                       (Error Cause: Still unable to fully recognize all the multiples of 7, missing
                       56 here)
                       ### Step 3: Combine the Results Now, we combine the factors of 34 and
                       the multiples of 7, ensuring not to double-count any numbers. The unique
                       numbers that are either factors of 34 or multiples of 7 are: - Factors of 34:
                       1, 2, 17 - Multiples of 7: 14, 91
                       Combining these, we have:
                                                      1, 2, 14, 17, 91
                       ### Conclusion Counting the unique numbers, we find that there are:
                        5 %

  Cross-model DPO
                       ......
                       ⟨Step2⟩
                       Identify the multiples of 7 from the given list.
                       ⟨Key⟩
                       Multiples of 7 are numbers that can be expressed as 7 multiplied by an
                       integer. It’s important to check each number’s divisibility by 7 to determine
                       if it qualifies.
                       Numbers in the list: 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 14, 17, 29, 56, 91
                       Multiples of 7: 14, 56, 91
                       (Self-Correction: Correctly identifies all the multiples of 7)
                       ⟨/Step2⟩
                       ⟨Step4⟩
                       Count the total number of unique numbers identified.
                       ⟨Key⟩
                       Counting accurately ensures the final answer reflects the correct quantity of
                       numbers that meet the criteria.
                       Total numbers: 6
                       ⟨/Step4⟩
                       ......
                       ⟨Answer⟩ 6 ⟨/Answer⟩ ✓



                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     Q UALITY E VALUATION FOR T EACHER LLM G ENERATED C ONTENT
D.1    E VALUATION OF I NSPECTOR LLM

We discuss the effectiveness of inspector LLM which further ensures the quality of the generated content
of Teacher LLMs. As shown in Table 5, we compare the correctness of correction traces generated by
three different teacher LLMs across three datasets. The application of the Inspector LLM significantly
improves the quality of the final correction traces compared to direct generation. Notably, for LLMs
with advanced capabilities that already produce high-quality outputs, it still shows clear improvements.
These results demonstrate that the Inspector LLM markedly enhances the accuracy of correction traces,
especially for datasets where initial performance was lower.


Table 5: Quantitative analysis of inspector LLM regarding the correctness of correction traces on various
datasets.
    Model/Dataset                                                   GSM8K MATH GaoKao
    Teacher LLM (GPT-4o-mini)                                        100%        92.4%       89.6%
    Teacher LLM (GPT-4o-mini) + Inspector LLM (o1-preview)           100%        98.8%       96.2%
    Teacher LLM (GPT-4o)                                             100%        94.4%       91.3%
    Teacher LLM (GPT-4o) + Inspector LLM (o1-preview)                100%        99.2%       97.5%
    Teacher LLM (o1-mini)                                            100%        98.2%       94.8%
    Teacher LLM (o1-mini) + Inspector LLM (o1-preview)               100%        99.6%       98.7%


D.2    A NALYSIS ON THE Q UALITY OF D IRECT G ENERATION

Based on the results in Table 5, the experimental results without the Inspector LLM demonstrate that our
directly generated correction traces are already of high quality. We attribute this to our design approach,
as outlined below:

       • 1. Leveraging Frontier Teacher LLMs: To ensure the quality of content generated by the
         teacher LLM, we utilize state-of-the-art LLMs, specifically o1-mini, as the teacher LLM. These
         models are capable of identifying logical flaws and errors, and they generate high-quality anal-
         ysis and corrections, as evidenced by the quantitative results.
       • 2. Grounding Correction Traces with Ground-Truth Context: To ensure the accuracy of the
         correction traces generated by the teacher LLM, as demonstrated in Appendix A, the prompts
         for generating analysis (ai ) and correction (ci ) are based on the input question along with
         the ground-truth solution. This approach grounds the correction trace with the ground-truth
         solution as context, thereby ensuring the accuracy of the generated content.

E     M ORE A BLATION S TUDIES
Further Analysis on Cross-model DPO We first sample 500 erroneous solutions from our dataset,
and we use o1-mini to conduct correction trace on the dataset as the ground truth to measure the model
alignment (Xu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b; Khope & Elias, 2022; Guo et al., 2022). We conduct our
experiments on three different models after HSFT stage, as shown in Table 6. We additionally introduce
two metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of our Cross-model DPO: (1) Locate correctness: representing
whether the model correctly finds the error steps. (2) Correction accuracy: representing whether the
model accurately corrects the error steps. We utilize o1-preview as a judger to compare each correction
trace generated by the models after Cross-model DPO with the ground truth. From the results, our
cross-model DPO shows significant improvements across all models, demonstrating its effectiveness.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 6: Quantitative analysis on the effectiveness of our Our Cross-model DPO.
    Model/Metric                                     Locate correctness Correction accuracy
    Meta-Llama-3.1 + HSFT                                    0.31                  0.08
    Meta-Llama-3.1 + HSFT + Cross-model DPO                  0.49                  0.27
    DeepSeek + HSFT                                          0.23                  0.07
    DeepSeek + HSFT + Cross-model DPO                        0.42                  0.23
    Qwen2.5-Math + HSFT                                      0.43                  0.12
    Qwen2.5-Math + HSFT+ Cross-model DPO                     0.67                  0.46


Ablation Study with More Base LLMs As shown in Table 7. The result shows that our SuperCorrect
can generalize to different LLM architectures, and consistently achieves better performance in both
HSFT stage and Cross-model DPO stage, further validating our effectiveness.


Table 7: Ablation study with more base LLMs on MATH and GSM8K. Base1: Llama3.1, Base2:
DeepSeek-Math. For simplicity, we denoted Base1-HSFT as B1-HSFT and Base2-HSFT as B2-HSFT.
 Model          Base1 Base1+SFT Base1+HSFT B1-HSFT+Reflexion B1-HSFT+Cross-DPO
 MATH (%)        51.9       53.7           55.4             56.7                 58.2
 GSM8K (%)       84.5       86.2           87.2             86.8                 89.7
 Model          Base2 Base2+SFT Base2+HSFT B2-HSFT+Reflexion B2-HSFT+Cross-DPO
 MATH (%)        46.8       49.2           50.9             51.2                 54.6
 GSM8K (%)       82.9       84.5           85.7             85.8                 88.2



Ablation Study on Prompt Style To further evaluate the effectiveness of our meticulously designed
hierarchical thought template, we additionally conduct quantitative experiments to show the impact of
prompt styles and our hierarchical prompt design. Here we use five prompt styles: 1) CoT 2) CoT + Hi-
erarchical Prompt (without generalization step) 3) CoT + Hierarchical Prompt (with generalization step)
4) Our hierarchical prompt (Not in XML) 5) Our hierarchical prompt (XML). We additionally curated
four datasets based on the same 100k math problems with the first four prompt styles. We then trained
Qwen2.5-Math-Instruct, Llama3.1-8B-Instruct and DeepSeek-Math-7B on these dataset with the same
training settings and evaluate the accuracy on Math dataset. As shown in Table 8, the experimental re-
sults indicate that hierarchical reasoning significantly improves model accuracy compared to using CoT
as a baseline. Additionally, changing the prompt style (e.g., to XML format) has a small impact on the
final accuracy, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our hierarchical reasoning design. Although
adding generalization steps helps the model better summarize tasks and thereby enhances its perfor-
mance, our experimental results indicate that the primary contribution to performance improvements in
the HSFT stage comes from the hierarchical reasoning style we designed.


Table 8: Ablation study with different prompt styles. H denotes with hierarchical reasoning style and
Gen denotes with generalization step. N denotes not with and W denotes with.
 Models                 CoT CoT+H(NGen) CoT+H(WGen) Ours(NXML) Ours(WXML)
 Qwen2.5-Math-7B        57.4          59.7              60.8              61.8              62.4
 Llama3.1-8B            52.6          53.3              53.6              53.7              54.1
 DeepSeek-Math-7B 46.8                49.6              50.2              50.6              51.6



F R ESULTS OF H IERARCHICAL T HOUGHT- BASED R EASONING
In this section, we show more detailed hierarchical reasoning process produced by S UPER C ORRECT-
Qwen-7b on three datasets, including GaoKao, MATH, GSM8K. For each dataset, we present two sam-
ples for demonstration. To better present the hierarchical thought during the reasoning process, we
denote detailed thought within each step in black, the high-level generalized thought in purple.


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   I GaoKao problem:
   Given the function
                                                     x + 1, x ≤ 0
                                       f (x) =
                                                     2x ,   x>0
   what is the range of values of x that satisfies f (x) + f x − 21 > 1?



   Solution Description:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Determine the value of f (x) based on the value of x.
   ⟨key⟩
   If x ≤ 0, then f (x) = x + 1. If x > 0, then f (x) = 2x .
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Determine the value of f x − 21 based on the value of x.


   ⟨key⟩
   If x − 12 ≤ 0 (i.e., x ≤ 12 ), then f x − 12 = x − 12 + 1 = x + 12 . If x − 21 > 0 (i.e., x > 12 ),

                           1
   then f x − 12 = 2x− 2 .


   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Analyze the inequality f (x) + f x − 12 > 1 in different intervals of x.


   ⟨key⟩
   This crucial step involves breaking down different cases based on the value of x to apply the
   correct piecewise definitions of the function.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Combine the solutions from all cases.
   ⟨key⟩
   We find ranges from each case to generate a comprehensive final solution, ensuring we encom-
   pass all possible intervals of x.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩
   ⟨Generalized⟩
   To solve inequalities involving piecewise functions, follow these common steps:
   1. Identify the different cases based on the definitions of the piecewise function.
   2. Evaluate the function expressions for each case, including any shifted or transformed in-
   puts.
   3. Set up and solve the inequality within each interval determined by the cases.
   4. Combine all valid solutions from each case to form the complete solution set.
   This systematic approach ensures accurate and comprehensive solutions to similar problems in-
   volving piecewise-defined functions and inequalities.
    ⟨/Generalized⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   x > − 14
   ⟨/Answer:⟩


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   II GaoKao Problem:
   The secondary product rate of a certain product is 0.02. If you randomly select one from this
   product, it has been placed back into the pool 100 times. Let X represent the number of sec-
   ondary products collected, then D(X) = ?

   Solution Description:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Identify the probability of selecting a secondary product.
   ⟨key⟩
   Understanding the probability p is crucial as it forms the basis for calculating the variance.
   In this case, the secondary product rate is given as 0.02, which means there’s a 2% chance of
   selecting a secondary product each time.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩

   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Determine the number of trials.
   ⟨key⟩
   Recognizing the number of trials n is essential. Here, the product has been placed back into the
   pool 100 times, indicating that each selection is independent and the total number of trials is
   100.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩

   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Calculate the expected value E(X) of the number of secondary products collected.
   ⟨key⟩
   The expected value E(X) for a binomial distribution is calculated using the formula
   E(X) = n × p. Substituting the given values:

                                      E(X) = 100 × 0.02 = 2
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩

   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Calculate the variance D(X) of the number of secondary products collected.
   ⟨key⟩
   The variance D(X) for a binomial distribution is given by D(X) = n × p × (1 − p). Plugging
   in the values:

                  D(X) = 100 × 0.02 × (1 − 0.02) = 100 × 0.02 × 0.98 = 1.96
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩

   ⟨Generalized:⟩
   To solve similar problems involving the number of successes in a fixed number of independent
   trials with a constant probability of success:
   1. Identify the probability of success p and the number of trials n.
   2. Calculate the expected value E(X) = n × p.
   3. Determine the variance D(X) = n × p × (1 − p).
   This approach uses the properties of the binomial distribution, which is applicable when each
   trial has two possible outcomes (success or failure) and the probability of success remains
   constant.
   ⟨/Generalized:⟩

   ⟨Answer:⟩
   The variance D(X) of the number of secondary products collected is 1.96.
   ⟨/Answer:⟩

                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   III MATH Problem:
   What is the tens digit in the sum
                                       7! + 8! + 9! + · · · + 2006!?

   Solution Description:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Identify the problem: We need to find the tens digit in the sum 7! + 8! + 9! + · · · + 2006!.
   ⟨key⟩
   Understanding the problem is crucial. We are looking for a specific digit in a large sum, which
   means we need to focus on the contributions of each factorial to the tens place.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Recognize that for n ≥ 10, n! is divisible by 100.
   ⟨key⟩
   This is a key insight because it means that 10!, 11!, 12!, . . . , 2006! do not affect the tens digit of
   the sum. Only the factorials from 7! to 9! will influence the tens digit.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Calculate 7!, 8!, and 9!:
                                7! = 5040,     8! = 40320,      9! = 362880
   ⟨key⟩
   Calculating factorials can be tedious, but it’s essential to ensure accuracy. Each factorial con-
   tributes to the overall sum, and we need their last two digits to determine the tens digit of the
   total sum.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Extract the last two digits of each factorial:
               7! ≡ 40 (mod 100),          8! ≡ 20    (mod 100),       9! ≡ 80   (mod 100)
   ⟨key⟩
   Finding the last two digits involves taking the factorial modulo 100. This simplifies the problem
   by focusing only on the relevant digits that affect the tens place.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩
   ⟨Step 5:⟩
   Sum the last two digits:
                                          40 + 20 + 80 = 140
   ⟨key⟩
   Adding the last two digits together gives us the intermediate sum. It’s important to keep track of
   the total to determine the final tens digit.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 5:⟩
   ⟨Step 6:⟩
   Determine the tens digit of the sum 140:
                                               Tens digit = 4
   ⟨key⟩
   The tens digit is the second digit from the right in a number. Here, it’s clear that the tens digit of
   140 is 4, which is the answer we seek.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 6:⟩
   ⟨Generalized:⟩
   To solve similar problems, follow these steps: 1. Identify the range of factorials and determine
   which ones affect the desired digit. 2. Calculate the relevant factorials and extract the necessary
   digits. 3. Sum these digits and focus on the 24specific place value required (e.g., tens, hundreds).
   4. Extract the desired digit from the final sum.
    ⟨Generalized:⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   IV MATH Problem:
   In how many ways can the letters of the word ”COPYRIGHT” be arranged?

   Solution Description:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Identify the total number of letters in the word ”COPYRIGHT”.
   ⟨key⟩
   The word ”COPYRIGHT” consists of 9 letters. It’s important to count all letters accurately to
   determine the total arrangements.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Determine if any letters are repeated in the word.
   ⟨key⟩
   In ”COPYRIGHT”, all letters are unique. Understanding whether letters are repeated is crucial
   because repeated letters reduce the number of unique arrangements.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Apply the formula for permutations of unique objects.
   ⟨key⟩
   Since all letters are unique, the number of arrangements is calculated using the factorial of the
   total number of letters: 9!.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Calculate 9! to find the total number of arrangements.
   ⟨key⟩
   9! = 9 × 8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 362, 880. This step involves multiplying a series of
   numbers, which can be calculated step-by-step to avoid errors.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩
   ⟨Generalized:⟩
   To determine the number of arrangements of letters in a word, first count the total number of
   letters. If all letters are unique, use the factorial of the total count. If there are repeated letters,
   adjust the formula by dividing by the factorial of the count of each repeated letter.
    ⟨/Generalized:⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   The letters of the word ”COPYRIGHT” can be arranged in 362,880 different ways.
   ⟨/Answer:⟩


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   V GSM8K Problem:
   Carlos is planting a lemon tree. The tree will cost $90 to plant. Each year it will grow 7 lemons,
   which he can sell for $1.5 each. It costs $3 a year to water and feed the tree. How many years
   will it take before he starts earning money on the lemon tree?

   Solution Description:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Calculate the revenue earned from selling lemons each year.
   ⟨key⟩
   7 lemons * $1.5 per lemon = $10.5.
   This step involves multiplying the number of lemons produced by the price per lemon. Under-
   stand the importance of identifying fixed production numbers (in this case, 7 lemons) and their
   respective market price ($1.5). The multiplication here gives us the total income from the lemons
   before accounting for expenses.
    ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Calculate the net earnings after deducting annual costs for watering and feeding the tree.
   ⟨key⟩
   $10.5 - $3 = $7.5.
   This step is about understanding how to subtract fixed expenses from total revenue to find net
   income. It’s crucial to separate income from costs to ascertain true profit. The $3 cost for water-
   ing and feeding is constant each year, impacting the net returns from the lemon sales.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Determine how many years it takes to cover the initial cost of planting the tree.
   ⟨key⟩
   $90 / $7.5 = 12.
   In this step, you’re figuring out how long it takes to break even on the initial investment of $90.
   This involves dividing the total investment by the annual net earnings. Remember that this result
   indicates the breakeven year, but does not count the year in which the profits actually start.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Identify the year when he starts earning profit from the lemon tree.
   ⟨key⟩
   12 (years to break even) + 1 = 13.
   This final calculation shifts the perspective from a breakeven analysis to profitability. Since he
   reaches the breakeven point at the end of year 12, he only begins to profit in year 13. This step
   emphasizes the importance of understanding financial timelines in cash flow analysis.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩
   ⟨Generalized:⟩
   The solution involves calculating total income from sales, subtracting operating costs to find
   net earnings, and determining the break-even point by dividing the initial investment by annual
   net earnings. Finally, knowing when profit occurs adds critical insight into business investment
   analysis. For similar problems, follow these steps: identify revenues, calculate net profits, find
   break-even time, and ascertain the timeline for profitability.
   ⟨/Generalized⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   13
   ⟨/Answer⟩


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    VI GSM8K Problem:
    Tommy is fundraising for his charity by selling brownies for $3 a slice and cheesecakes for $4 a
    slice. If Tommy sells 43 brownies and 23 slices of cheesecake, how much money does Tommy
    raise?

    Solution Description:
    ⟨Step 1:⟩
    Calculate the total money raised from selling brownies.
    ⟨key⟩
    To find the total money raised from brownies, we multiply the number of brownies sold by the
    price per brownie. This is a straightforward multiplication problem.
    Here, Tommy sold 43 brownies at $3 each.
    The calculation is: 43 × 3 = 129.
    Understanding multiplication is crucial as it forms the basis for calculating total revenue from
    sales.
    ⟨/key⟩
    ⟨/Step 1:⟩
    ⟨Step 2:⟩
    Calculate the total money raised from selling cheesecakes.
    ⟨key⟩
    Similar to the previous step, we need to multiply the number of cheesecakes sold by the price
    per cheesecake.
    Tommy sold 23 slices of cheesecake at $4 each.
    The calculation is: 23 × 4 = 92.
    This step reinforces the concept of multiplication and helps in understanding how to calculate
    total sales from different products.
    ⟨/key⟩
    ⟨/Step 2:⟩
    ⟨Step 3:⟩
    Add the total money raised from both brownies and cheesecakes.
    ⟨key⟩
    Now, we need to combine the total amounts raised from both products to find the overall total.
    This involves simple addition: 129 (from brownies) + 92 (from cheesecakes) = 221.
    This step is important as it teaches how to aggregate totals from different sources, a common
    task in finance and fundraising.
     ⟨/key⟩
    ⟨/Step 3:⟩
    ⟨Generalized⟩
    To calculate the total funds raised from selling different items, follow these common steps:
    1. Identify the number of items sold for each product.
    2. Determine the price per item for each product.
    3. Calculate the total revenue for each product by multiplying the number of items sold by the
    price per item.
    4. Sum all individual revenues to find the overall total funds raised.
    This systematic approach ensures accurate calculation of total revenue from multiple sources,
    which is essential in various financial and fundraising scenarios.
     ⟨/Generalized⟩
    ⟨Answer:⟩
    Tommy raises $221.
    ⟨/Answer⟩



G    I MPROVED S ELF -C ORRECTION R ESULTS

In this section, we select three different self-correction results each from different datasets including
MATH, GaoKao, and GSM8K. It should be noted that we split the incorrect reasoning steps with error
cause analysis and teacher correction into two parts for better presentation. We denote the error cause in


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


brown and we denoted the origianl error answer in red, and the correction along with correct answer are
denoted in green.


   I GSM8K Problem:
   Carlos is planting a lemon tree. The tree will cost $90 to plant. Each year it will grow 7 lemons,
   which he can sell for $1.5 each. It costs $3 a year to water and feed the tree. How many years
   will it take before he starts earning money on the lemon tree?

   Correct reasoning process before error steps:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Calculate the total revenue from selling lemons each year.
   ⟨key⟩
   To find the total revenue from selling lemons, multiply the number of lemons by the price per
   lemon. Here, Carlos sells 7 lemons at $1.5 each. This step is straightforward but crucial as it
   sets the foundation for understanding the income generated from the lemon tree.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Total Revenue = 7 lemons * $1.5 per lemon = $10.5
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Calculate the total cost of feeding and watering the tree each year.
   ⟨key⟩
   This step involves identifying the annual costs of maintaining the lemon tree. The cost of feeding
   and watering is $3 per year. Understanding this cost helps in determining the net profit after
   accounting for all expenses.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Total Cost = $3
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Calculate the net profit per year.
   ⟨key⟩
   Net profit is calculated by subtracting the total costs from the total revenue. This step shows how
   much money Carlos earns each year after all expenses are accounted for.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Net Profit = Total Revenue - Total Cost = $10.5 - $3 = $7.5
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Identify the initial cost of planting the tree.
   ⟨key⟩
   The initial cost of planting the tree is a one-time expense of $90. This represents the initial
   investment that needs to be recovered through profits over multiple years.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Initial Cost = $90
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩



                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   I Self-Correction For GSM8K Problem:
   Theses steps below are incorrect in the original reasoning steps

   ⟨Step 5:⟩
   Calculate the number of years it will take to break even.
   ⟨key⟩
   This step involves dividing the initial investment by the annual net profit to find out how many
   years it will take for the net profit to cover the initial cost.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Years to Break Even = Initial Cost / Net Profit = $90 / $7.5 = 12 years
   ⟨cause⟩
   While this calculation correctly determines that Carlos will break even after 12 years, it does not
   answer the question of when he starts earning money. The break-even point occurs at the end of
   the 12th year, meaning he hasn’t earned a profit yet within those 12 years.
   ⟨/cause⟩
    ⟨/Step 5:⟩ ⟨Step 6:⟩
   Determine when Carlos starts earning money from the lemon tree.
   ⟨key⟩
   Since Carlos breaks even at the end of year 12, he will start earning profit from year 13 onwards.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Year when profit starts = Years to Break Even + 1 = 12 + 1 = 13 years
   ⟨correction⟩
   Therefore, Carlos will start earning money on the lemon tree in 13 years, not 12 years.
   ⟨/correction⟩
   ⟨/Step 6:⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   13
   ⟨/Answer:⟩


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   II MATH Problem:
   How many different bracelets have 3 identical orange beads, 3 identical black beads, and 1 teal
   bead, if rotating or flipping a bracelet does not change it?

   Correct reasoning process before error steps:
   ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Identify the total number of beads and their types.
   ⟨key⟩
   Understanding the composition of the bracelet is crucial. Here, we have 3 identical orange beads,
   3 identical black beads, and 1 teal bead, making a total of 7 beads.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
   Calculate the total number of arrangements without considering rotations or reflections.
   ⟨key⟩
   Since the orange and black beads are identical within their groups, we use the formula for per-
   mutations of a multiset:
                                                   7!
                                                           .
                                              3! × 3! × 1!
   This accounts for the indistinguishability of the identical beads.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Total Arrangements =
                                                7!
                                                      = 140.
                                             3! × 3!
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩
   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Apply Burnside’s Lemma to account for rotational and reflectional symmetries.
   ⟨key⟩
   Burnside’s Lemma is essential in counting distinct arrangements when symmetries (like rotations
   and reflections) are considered. It requires evaluating the number of arrangements fixed by each
   symmetry operation and averaging over the total number of symmetries.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Determine the number of arrangements fixed by each rotation.
   ⟨key⟩
   - Identity rotation (0°): All 140 arrangements are fixed.
                                              ◦
   - Nontrivial rotations (rotations by 360 7 and its multiples): No arrangement is fixed because
   rotating the bracelet changes the positions of the beads, and with the given bead counts, it’s
   impossible to have a configuration that looks the same after such rotations.
   ⟨/key⟩
   Number of fixed arrangements under rotations:
   - Identity rotation: 140
   - Other rotations: 0
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩


                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   II Self-Correction For MATH Problem:
   Theses steps below are incorrect in original reasoning steps.

   ⟨Step 5:⟩
   Determine the number of arrangements fixed by each reflection.
   ⟨key⟩
   For reflections, each reflection fixes one bead (the center of reflection) and swaps the remaining
   beads in pairs. To have an arrangement fixed under reflection, the colors of the beads in each
   swapped pair must be the same.
   ⟨/key⟩
   ⟨cause⟩
   With 3 orange beads and 3 black beads (both odd counts), it’s impossible to pair all beads of the
   same color. Each pair requires 2 beads of the same color, so we need even counts of each color.
   Therefore, no arrangements are fixed under reflections because the color counts do not allow for
   all swapped pairs to be identical in color.
   ⟨/cause⟩
   Number of fixed arrangements under reflections: 0
   ⟨/Step 5:⟩
   ⟨Step 6:⟩
   Apply Burnside’s Lemma to find the number of distinct bracelets. The original error answer is
   20
   ⟨key⟩
   According to Burnside’s Lemma, the number of distinct arrangements is the average number of
   arrangements fixed by each symmetry operation. The total number of symmetries in a bracelet
   with 7 beads is 14 (7 rotations and 7 reflections).
   ⟨/key⟩
   Calculation:
                                                 Total fixed arrangements       140
                Number of distinct bracelets =                               =      = 10.
                                                  Number of symmetries           14

   ⟨correction⟩
   Therefore, the correct number of different bracelets is **10**, not 20. The error in the original
   calculation was assuming that there were arrangements fixed under reflections, but due to the
   odd counts of identical beads, no such fixed arrangements exist.
   ⟨/correction⟩
   ⟨/Step 6:⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   There are 10 different bracelets.
   ⟨/Answer:⟩


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   III GaoKao Problem:
   Set point O as the origin, the vertical line x = a, and the two branches of the hyperbola C :
   x2    y2
   a2 − b2 = 1 (where a > 0 and b > 0) intersect at points D and E. If the area of quadrilateral
   ODE is 8, then the minimum value of the distance between the two branches of C is ( )
   A. 4
   B. 8
   C. 16
   D. 32

   Correct reasoning process before error steps: ⟨Step 1:⟩
   Set point O as the origin and the vertical line x = a.
   ⟨/Step 1:⟩
   ⟨Step 2:⟩
                                                     2    2
   Identify the two branches of the hyperbola C : xa2 − yb2 = 1, where a > 0 and b > 0.
   ⟨/Step 2:⟩


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   III Self-Correction For GaoKao Problem:
   Theses steps below are incorrect in original reasoning steps.

   ⟨Step 3:⟩
   Determine the points D and E where the vertical line x = a intersects the hyperbola C.
   ⟨cause⟩
   Substituting x = a into the hyperbola equation yields y = 0, resulting in only one intersection
   point (a, 0). The assumption that there are two distinct points D(a, b) and E(a, −b) is incorrect.
   ⟨/cause⟩
   ⟨correction⟩
   Substitute x = a into the hyperbola equation:
                     a2  y2           y2        y2
                      2
                        − 2 = 1 =⇒ 1 − 2 = 1 =⇒ 2 = 0 =⇒ y = 0
                     a   b            b         b
   Therefore, the vertical line x = a intersects the hyperbola C only at the point D(a, 0). Point E
   does not exist as there is only one intersection point.
   ⟨/correction⟩
   ⟨/Step 3:⟩
   ⟨Step 4:⟩
   Calculate the area of quadrilateral ODE.
   ⟨cause⟩
   Since there is only one intersection point D(a, 0), the quadrilateral ODE does not exist. The
   area calculation based on non-existent points E(a, b) and A(a, −b) is invalid.
   ⟨/cause⟩
   ⟨correction⟩
   Reevaluate the problem statement. If the vertical line x = a intersects the hyperbola at only one
   point D(a, 0), the area calculation of quadrilateral ODE is not applicable. It is likely that there
   is a misunderstanding in the problem setup.
   ⟨/correction⟩
   ⟨/Step 4:⟩
   ⟨Step 5:⟩
   Find the minimum value of the distance between the two branches of the hyperbola. The original
   error answer is A = 4
   ⟨cause⟩
   The reasoning that the distance between the two branches is 2a is incorrect. Additionally, the
   approach to minimize 2a under the condition ab = 4 does not align with the correct geometric
   interpretation of the hyperbola.
   ⟨/cause⟩
   ⟨correction⟩
   The distance between the two branches of the hyperbola C is determined by the minimum ver-
   tical distance between corresponding points on the branches. To find this, consider the closest
   points on each branch:
                                             Distance = 2b.
   Given that the area condition was misapplied, we refer to the correct relationship from the Refer-
   ence Solution where the minimum distance is found using optimization techniques. The correct
   minimum distance of the hyperbola C is 8.
   ⟨/correction⟩
   ⟨/Step 5:⟩
   ⟨Answer:⟩
   The minimum value of the distance of the hyperbola C is 8.
   ⟨/Answer:⟩ !


                                                 33
