Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I TERATIVE L ABEL R EFINEMENT M ATTERS M ORE THAN
P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION UNDER W EAK S UPERVISION
 Yaowen Ye ∗                          Cassidy Laidlaw ∗          Jacob Steinhardt
 The University of Hong Kong          University of California, Berkeley
 elwin@connect.hku.hk                 {cassidy_laidlaw, jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu



                                               A BSTRACT

             Language model (LM) post-training relies on two stages of human supervision:
             task demonstrations for supervised finetuning (SFT), followed by preference com-
             parisons for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). As LMs be-
             come more capable, the tasks they are given become harder to supervise. Will
             post-training remain effective under unreliable supervision? To test this, we sim-
             ulate unreliable demonstrations and comparison feedback using small LMs and
             time-constrained humans. We find that in the presence of unreliable supervision,
             SFT still retains some effectiveness, but DPO (a common RLHF algorithm) fails
             to improve the model beyond SFT. To address this, we propose iterative label
             refinement (ILR) as an alternative to RLHF. ILR improves the SFT data by us-
             ing comparison feedback to decide whether human demonstrations should be
             replaced by model-generated alternatives, then retrains the model via SFT on
             the updated data. SFT+ILR outperforms SFT+DPO on several tasks with unre-
             liable supervision (math, coding, and safe instruction-following). Our findings
             suggest that as LMs are used for complex tasks where human supervision is un-
             reliable, RLHF may no longer be the best use of human comparison feedback;
             instead, it is better to direct feedback towards improving the training data rather
             than continually training the model. Our code and data are available at https:
             //github.com/helloelwin/iterative-label-refinement.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Language models (LMs) learn rich knowledge when pretrained on internet-scale corpora (Achiam
et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024). To elicit their full capabilities and align them to human values,
they are typically post-trained with two types of human supervision: task demonstrations for the
initial supervised finetuning (SFT) stage, followed by preference comparisons used in reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022) via algorithms like
proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) or direct preference optimization (DPO)
(Rafailov et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024).
As LMs continue to advance, they are trained to solve complex tasks that are difficult for humans to
supervise (Amodei et al., 2016; Leike & Sutskever, 2023; Wen et al., 2024). For example, humans
are often imperfect at coding, producing bugs that models like Github Copilot learn to imitate (Asare
et al., 2023). Similarly, industrial-level ChatGPT training data rated as “flawless” has recently been
found to contain flaws (McAleese et al., 2024). As task complexity increases, human supervision may
become even less reliable. Thus, it is imperative to understand how both stages of current post-training
pipelines (SFT + RLHF) perform under unreliable supervision.
Studying this is difficult because tasks where human supervision is unreliable are by nature difficult
to obtain ground truth for. Ideally, we want tasks with known ground truth where we can also collect
human-like unreliable data. We employ two approaches to simulate this unreliable supervision. First,
we use smaller LMs that often make mistakes, in line with Burns et al. (2023) and Dubois et al.
(2024). Second, we recruit human workers to label data under time constraints. For either of these two
types, we can use it to simulate either unreliable demonstrations or unreliable comparisons (e.g. for
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Typical Post-Training Pipeline                                                                          reliable SFT data +   unreliable SFT data +   unreliable SFT data +
                                                             replace                                     reliable feedback     reliable feedback       unreliable feedback

                                        model
                                        model’s               A>B
                                      response A
                       SFT           response    A                                        DPO
   unreliable                                                             sorted
                                                                         unreliable
   SFT data
 demonstrations                                                        demonstrations
                                        model
                                        model’s
                                                                        responses
                                      response A
                                     response    B


 Iterative Label Refinement

                                                       model
                                                       model’s         A>B
                                                     response A
                               SFT                   response
                  unreliable                                                           refined
                                                                                      unreliable
               SFT data
             demonstrations                                                         demonstrations
                                                                                        SFT data
                                                   unreliable
                                                   SFT data
                                                 demonstration



                                             replace

                                                      (a)                                                                               (b)
Figure 1: (a) In contrast to RLHF, which iteratively updates the SFT model, ILR directs comparison feedback
towards improving the SFT dataset. (b) With reliable supervision, DPO effectively improves the SFT model
and ILR is unnecessary. However, DPO becomes less effective with unreliable demonstrations and breaks down
completely when comparison feedback is also unreliable. In contrast, ILR consistently improves on the initial
SFT model with unreliable supervision, even in the most extreme case.

DPO). We thus simulate post-training by running SFT on unreliable demonstrations followed by
DPO on unreliable comparisons.
We first find that SFT with unreliable demonstrations performs adequately, in that the learned SFT
model is more reliable than the demonstrations themselves, a phenomenon termed weak-to-strong
generalization (W2SG) that has been previously observed by Burns et al. (2023) in classification
tasks. However, since these models inevitably learn to imitate errors in their unreliable training data,
the resulting performance is still far from their full capability when trained on ground truth. Thus,
ideally, the subsequent DPO stage should improve these SFT models.
Unfortunately, we find DPO breaks down under unreliable supervision. With unreliable demonstra-
tions and comparisons, DPO offers little to no performance improvement on top of SFT (Figure 1b).
Our experiments suggest that this may be due to the tendency of DPO to overoptimize, similar to
what is observed in Gao et al. (2023). To prevent overoptimization, DPO implicitly penalizes KL
divergence from the SFT model, and we find that a large penalty is necessary when feedback is
unreliable. However, this large penalty prevents the large changes in the model that are necessary to
correct the errors learned from the unreliable demonstrations during SFT (Section 4.1).
To address this, we propose iterative label refinement (ILR). In contrast to RLHF, which iteratively
updates the SFT model, ILR updates the SFT dataset using the same type of comparison feedback.
Specifically, ILR uses this feedback to compare a demonstration in the SFT dataset with an alternative
one written by the SFT model; if the model-written demonstration is chosen, it replaces the original
demonstration in the SFT data. This improves the SFT data by replacing low-quality or incorrect
demonstrations with better model-written ones. Thus, when a new SFT model is trained on the updated
dataset, it should perform better than the original SFT model, facilitating further improvements to the
dataset via additional rounds of ILR (Figure 1a). Unlike DPO, we find that updating the SFT data via
ILR leads to significant improvements from one round to the next (Figure 1b).
SFT+ILR improves over SFT+DPO on several tasks (math, coding, and safe instruction following) in
our LM-based simulation. These results are further confirmed by our human study, where we recruit
workers to provide demonstrations and comparison feedback under time constraints for the Alpaca
(Taori et al., 2023) instruction-following task. In this setting with more realistic human errors, ILR
continues to improve the initial unreliable human demonstrations and outperforms DPO.
In summary, our findings suggest that preference-based post-training like RLHF may no longer be the
best use of comparison feedback as we train LMs to solve complex tasks where human supervision
is unreliable. Instead, it is better to direct human feedback towards fixing errors in the unreliable
training data rather than continually training the model.

2        R ELATED W ORK
Scalable oversight and weak-to-strong generalization. Scalable oversight aims to develop methods
to supervise AI systems on tasks that are difficult for humans (Amodei et al., 2016; Bowman et al.,


                                                                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022). The primary focus in scalable oversight has been on designing human-AI collaboration
mechanisms that enhance humans’ ability to evaluate AI outputs more accurately (Christiano et al.,
2018; Irving et al., 2018; Michael et al., 2023; Khan et al., 2024; Kenton et al., 2024) and with less
cognitive burden (Saunders et al., 2022; McAleese et al., 2024; Kirchner et al., 2024). In contrast,
recent work on W2SG (Burns et al., 2023) explores a complementary direction that develops learning
algorithms to make models generalize correctly from weak supervision as if they were trained on
higher-quality supervision or even ground truth. The SFT stage in our LM-based simulation employs
a similar setting as the setup used for studying W2SG in Burns et al. (2023) but extended to text
generation tasks; Burns et al. (2023) only consider classification tasks.
Language model post-training. Pretrained language models (PLMs) possess a rich understanding
of language but require post-training to align their behavior with human preferences. This gener-
ally involves supervised finetuning (SFT) (Wei et al., 2021) on human-written demonstrations and
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). RLHF
is typically done by algorithms like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), which uses an explicit reward
model, or DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024) and its variants (Liu et al., 2023; Azar et al.,
2024), which uses an implicit reward model. Recent work has also investigated the impact of noisy
preference data on RLHF (Chowdhury et al., 2024; Fisch et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024), while our
work addresses a more challenging case where both SFT data and preference data are unreliable.
Learning with imperfect supervision. Research in weakly-supervised learning has focused on
training models with noisy data (Reed et al., 2014; Rolnick et al., 2017; Song et al., 2022). Many
works study classification with random label flips, proposing methods like data filtering and robust
losses (Zhou, 2018; Frénay & Verleysen, 2013), while some also consider noise in structured
prediction tasks like parsing and word alignment (Ganchev, 2010). Our setting differs as we study
unreliable supervision from LMs or time-constrained humans for complex text-generation tasks. In
this setting, errors tend to be systematic—arising from reasoning failures or social biases—rather than
random, and so may not be well-addressed by traditional methods. Our cross-labeling framework
shares conceptual similarities with co-training (Blum & Mitchell, 1998; Zhou et al., 2005) and
co-teaching (Han et al., 2018), although these methods primarily focus on classification settings and
rely on model confidence scores.

3    P ROBLEM D EFINITION : P OST-T RAINING W ITH U NRELIABLE S UPERVISION
Training LMs to be useful assistants involves two stages: pre-training and post-training. During
pre-training, the LM is trained to autoregressively predict a large corpus of text, typically taken from
the internet and books (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). Afterwards, the pretrained language
model (PLM) has acquired knowledge and skills from its pre-training data, but cannot yet be easily
used for realistic applications. To elicit the PLM’s capabilities for some class of tasks, post-training
techniques are used (Wei et al., 2021; Dubey et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). We
denote an LM as a conditional distribution p(y | x) over responses y given a prompt x.
Standard post-training pipeline. Post-training a PLM typically involves two stages. In the initial
SFT stage, a PLM is trained on human-written task demonstrations. That is, given an SFT dataset
DSFT = (XSFT , YP SFT ) of prompts XSFT and human-written responses YSFT , the PLM is trained to
minimize |D1SFT | (x,y)∈(XSFT ,YSFT ) − log p(y | x). We call the result of this stage the SFT model,
which has typically learned the correct input/output format for the given task and has partially elicited
the PLM’s capabilities.
Subsequently, to further improve performance, the SFT model undergoes RLHF via algorithms like
PPO (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Schulman et al., 2017), DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024; Dubey
et al., 2024), or related methods. In this stage, a new dataset is constructed using a set of prompts
x ∈ XRLHF and response pairs y, y ′ sampled from the SFT model. Each prompt and pair of responses
are shown to a human annotator that picks the response they prefer, creating a dataset of triples
(x, y+ , y− ) ∈ DRLHF , where y+ is preferred to y− . This dataset is used for preference optimization
via methods like PPO, which trains a reward model from DRLHF for online RL, or DPO, which uses
an implicit reward model. In this work, we focus on DPO due to its computational efficiency and
stability. We call the output of the this stage the SFT+DPO model.
Simulating unreliable human supervision To study how current post-training pipelines perform
under unreliable supervision, we need tasks with known ground truth so that we can evaluate


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance, along with realistic forms of unreliable supervision. We employ two approaches to
simulate unreliable supervision: small language models (Section 4 and 5) and time-constrained
humans (Section 6). Most of our experiments focus on the small-LM case, in line with Burns et al.
(2023) and Dubois et al. (2024), and we then verify the results on our instruction-following dataset
using time-constrained human annotators.
For both forms of supervision, we need to simulate both unreliable demonstrations and unreliable
comparisons. For humans, we do this simply by querying them. For small LMs, we follow the
procedure below (more details in Appendix B):
    1. Unreliable task demonstrations: We finetune a small PLM p̃ on ground-truth demonstrations
       and use it to generate responses for a held-out set of prompts as unreliable demonstrations.
    2. Unreliable comparison feedback: We finetune a classification model q̃ to select the better
       response when given two responses y1 , y2 and a prompt x, where q̃(y1 ≻ y2 | x) denotes the
       probability that y1 is preferred to y2 . Note that q̃ is based on the same PLM as p̃ but with an
       additional classification head. Each element of q̃’s training data consists of a prompt and two
       responses: one response is from the ground-truth demonstrations used to train p̃ and the other
       is a lower-quality output generated by intermediate checkpoints of p̃. q̃ is trained to choose the
       ground truth using a standard binary classification loss.
SFT+DPO with unreliable supervision. We start by finetuning a larger PLM on an unreliable
SFT dataset D  eSFT = (X , Y)e to obtain an initial SFT model pb , where Ye is a set of unreliable
                                                                    SFT
demonstrations given by p̃ or time-constrained humans. We then perform K rounds of DPO training.
In each round k, we: sample completions y1 , y2 from the current SFT+DPO model pb k−1        SFT+DPO for
each prompt x ∈ X (where pb 0SFT+DPO ≡ pb SFT ); collect unreliable comparisons using either q̃ or
time-constrained humans to construct an unreliable preference dataset D    e k ; and, use this to train
                                                                             RLHF
pb k−1
   SFT+DPO via DPO,  resulting in p
                                  b k
                                    SFT+DPO . The final model after K  rounds is denoted as pb K
                                                                                               SFT+DPO or
simply pb SFT+DPO . Further implementation and hyperparameter details can be found in Appendix C.

3.1    TASKS AND M ODELS

Datasets. We test SFT+DPO with unreliable feedback on three text generation tasks: mathematical
problem-solving using GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), SQL code generation with BIRD (Li et al.,
2024), and safe instruction following with SaferPaca (Bianchi et al., 2023), which is a mix of the
Alpaca dataset (Taori et al., 2023) and refusal demonstrations to unsafe instructions. All datasets are
formatted as question-answer pairs following the same template.
Models. We use three open-source PLMs of varying sizes in our experiments: Gemma 2B (Team
et al., 2024), Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023), and Meta Llama 3 70B (Dubey et al., 2024). Our
LM-simulated experiments include four settings that use a smaller model to supervise a larger model.
In our simulation with time-constrained humans, we only experiment with the largest 70B model.
Evaluation metrics. Each dataset requires a specific approach to evaluate model outputs and deter-
mine performance. For GSM8K, we parse the numerical answer following “####” at the end of each
response and compute exact match accuracy by comparing it with the ground truth. For BIRD, we
measure execution accuracy by running the generated code on corresponding test databases, following
Li et al. (2024). For SaferPaca, we follow Li et al. (2023) and use GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) to compute
win rate against reference answers.
Further implementation details on datasets, evaluation metrics, model architectures, training and
inference configurations are provided in Appendix A, B, and C.

4     DPO I S I NEFFECTIVE WITH U NRELIABLE S UPERVISION
In this section, we present results of SFT+DPO under LM-simulated unreliable supervision. We
find that SFT still retains some effectiveness, but DPO fails to improve the SFT model. We further
show that the failure of DPO appears to be caused by its tendency to overoptimize given unreliable
comparison feedback, which motivates our alternative approach introduced in the next section.
SFT shows limited robustness to unreliable demonstrations. We first investigate the effectiveness
of SFT under LM-simulated unreliable supervision. When finetuned on D
                                                                    eSFT with unreliable demon-


                                                    4
               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                              Unreliable Supervisor (p)                 SFT w/ Unreliable Demonstrations (pSFT)                                                               SFT w/ Ground-Truth Demonstrations (pSFT)

                                            0.60           GSM8K (2B 7B)                        0.90   GSM8K (7B 70B)                                  0.60                                  BIRD (2B 70B)                             0.80   SaferPaca (2B 7B)
                                            0.55                                                0.85                                                   0.55                                                                            0.75
                                            0.50                                                0.80                                                   0.50                                                                            0.70
                                            0.45                                                0.75                                                   0.45                                                                            0.65
      Accuracy


                                                                                     Accuracy


                                                                                                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Win Rate
                                            0.40                                                0.70                                                   0.40                                                                            0.60
                                            0.35                                                0.65                                                   0.35                                                                            0.55
                                            0.30                                                0.60                                                   0.30                                                                            0.50
                                            0.25                                                0.55                                                   0.25                                                                            0.45
                                            0.20                                                0.50                                                   0.20                                                                            0.40


               Figure 2: Models finetuned on unreliable demonstrations generated by a smaller supervisor model show higher
               accuracy than the supervisor, demonstrating SFT’s robustness to unreliable supervision. However, SFT models’
               full capability is only partially recovered with unreliable demonstrations. A → B denotes using demonstrations
               generated by the model with size A to finetune the model with size B.

                                                                Effect of KL Regularization (GSM8K 2B 7B)                                                                                           Accuracy Increase vs. KL Divergence (GSM8K 2B 7B)
                                            10.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                             =0.3      =0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                    5.0%
Relative Accuracy Increase after 4 Rounds


                                                                                                                                         Relative Accuracy Increase After 1 Round
                                             7.5%
                                                                                                                                                                                    4.0%         =3
                                             5.0%                                                                                                                                   3.0%
                                             2.5%                                                                                                                                   2.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0%         =3                             ILR w/ oracle comparisons
                                             0.0%                                                                                                                                                                               DPO w/ oracle comparisons ( = 3)
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0%                                        DPO w/ oracle comparisons ( = 0.3)
                                             2.5%                                                                                                                                                     =0.3                      DPO w/ oracle comparisons ( = 0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0%                                        ILR w/ unreliable comparisons
                                                                                             Oracle feedback                                                                                                                    DPO w/ unreliable comparisons ( = 3)
                                             5.0%                                                                                                                                   2.0%                                        DPO w/ unreliable comparisons ( = 0.3)
                                                                                             50% oracle + 50% unreliable feedback                                                                            =0.03
                                                                                             Unreliable feedback                                                                                                                DPO w/ unreliable comparisons ( = 0.03)
                                             7.5%                                                                                                                                   3.0%
                                                    10 1                                10 0                                  101                                                          0.0          0.5           1.0         1.5           2.0         2.5
                                                                          (Coefficient of KL Regularization)                                                                                                           KL Divergence from pSFT

             (a) DPO effectively improves SFT models with ora-                                                                                        (b) Strong regularization in DPO limits useful model
             cle comparisons, especially with weak regularization.                                                                                    updates, while small regularization leads to overop-
             However, with unreliable feedback, improvements are                                                                                      timization of unreliable feedback. In contrast, ILR
             limited to a narrow range of regularization strengths                                                                                    facilitates large model updates, allowing for faster im-
             because weak regularization causes overoptimization.                                                                                     provement and efficient use of comparison feedback.

               Figure 3: DPO struggles to avoid overoptimization of noisy preferences while also updating the initial suboptimal
               SFT model sufficiently to improve performance.


               strations generated by p̃, the larger model pb SFT consistently outperforms p̃ across all tasks, showing
               SFT’s robustness to imperfect demonstrations (Figure 2).
            However, models finetuned on unreliable demonstrations inevitably learn to imitate errors in them.
            When applying SFT to the same PLM using ground-truth demonstrations, which we denote pSFT , we
            find that it significantly outperforms pb SFT (Figure 2). This shows that SFT on unreliable demonstra-
            tions only partially recovers a model’s full capability, leaving a large performance gap between pSFT
            and pb SFT . Thus, ideally, the subsequent DPO stage should further improve upon pb SFT .
             DPO does not improve over SFT with unreliable comparisons. Contrary to DPO’s past success
             (Rafailov et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), we find that it consistently fails to improve performance
             over SFT when both demonstrations and comparison feedback are unreliable (Figure 4). That is,
             when we further finetune pb SFT via multiple rounds of DPO on comparison feedback given by q̃, the
             resultant model pb SFT+DPO shows little to no performance gain (or performance even declines).
             To investigate the degree to which this is due to the unreliable comparison feedback versus the
             unreliable SFT data, we run DPO in two other settings on the GSM8K task. In the first, we initialize
             training with pb SFT but use an oracle evaluator for preference comparisons that always selects the
             better answer by comparing model outputs to ground truth. In the second, we again use the oracle
             evaluator, but start from an SFT model trained on a filtered subset of D
                                                                                    eSFT that only contains correct
             demonstrations. As shown in Figure 1b, DPO with the oracle evaluator does manage to improve over
             the starting SFT model in both cases. These results reveal that DPO’s effectiveness heavily relies on
             high-quality supervision.


                                                                                                                                    5
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        GSM8K (2B 7B)                                GSM8K (7B 70B)                               BIRD (2B 70B)                                SaferPaca (2B 7B)
                                                                     SFT+ILR                           0.44       SFT+ILR                           0.67        SFT+ILR
           0.385        SFT+ILR                           0.72
                        SFT+DPO                                      SFT+DPO                           0.43       SFT+DPO                                       SFT+DPO
                                                                                                                                                    0.66
           0.380                                          0.71                                         0.42                                         0.65
           0.375                                          0.70                                         0.41                                         0.64


                                               Accuracy


                                                                                            Accuracy


                                                                                                                                         Win Rate
Accuracy

           0.370                                          0.69                                         0.40                                         0.63
           0.365
                                                          0.68                                         0.39                                         0.62
           0.360
                                                          0.67                                         0.38                                         0.61
           0.355                                                                                                                                    0.60
                                                          0.66                                         0.37
           0.350                                                                                                                                    0.59
                                                                                                       0.36
                   0       2           4   6                     0      2           4   6                     0      2           4   6                     0       2           4   6
                               Round                                        Round                                        Round                                         Round



  Figure 4: ILR consistently provides more improvements for the SFT model than DPO in four settings with
  LM-simulated unreliable demonstrations and comparison feedback. Round 0 represents accuracy of pb SFT .

   4.1                 DPO WITH U NRELIABLE F EEDBACK E XHIBITS OVEROPTIMIZATION

  We hypothesize that DPO’s failure under unreliable supervision stems from the problem of overopti-
  mization that preference-based learning methods often suffer from (Gao et al., 2023). Optimizing an
  explicit reward function (with PPO) or an implicit one (with DPO) based on preference feedback can
  initially lead to an increase in performance but eventually causes a decline as the reward function
  diverges from the true objective. To combat this, both PPO and DPO regularize based on the KL
  divergence between the initial and updated policies.
  We find that the optimal amount of regularization for DPO, which is controlled by the hyperparameter
  β, depends strongly on the reliability of comparison feedback. This dependency creates a critical
  trade-off: stronger regularization is needed to prevent overoptimization with unreliable feedback,
  but this constrains DPO’s ability to improve upon the suboptimal SFT model. To demonstrate this,
  we measure DPO’s relative improvement over SFT under varying feedback quality levels and KL
  regularization strengths (Figure 3). Full results for each training epoch are presented in Figure 8.
  With unreliable comparison feedback, DPO is especially prone to overoptimization and needs
  very strong regularization. In Figure 3a, we consider three levels of feedback quality: unreliable
  feedback from q̃, mixed feedback (50% q̃, 50% oracle), and pure oracle feedback. With oracle
  feedback, smaller β values consistently yield better performance. However, as feedback quality
  decreases, smaller β values lead to worse performance while only a suitably large β enables positive
  improvements. This suggests that preference optimization under unreliable feedback needs heavy
  regularization to prevent overoptimization.
  Strong regularization limits useful model updates during DPO training. Figure 3b demonstrates
  that larger divergence correlates with higher accuracy increases in the case of oracle feedback (colored
  circles in upper left). This indicates that setting small β to allow substantial model updates is crucial
  for improving upon the initial suboptimal SFT model. However, with unreliable feedback, this is not
  possible: as we observed above, using insufficient regularization with unreliable comparisons leads to
  overoptimization.
  These two observations suggest a tension between preventing overoptimization from unreliable com-
  parison feedback and making large enough model updates. Since SFT on unreliable demonstrations
  produces a model pb SFT that is suboptimal, we need large updates to pb SFT to recover performance
  close to pSFT . However, with unreliable comparison feedback, we need significant regularization (i.e.,
  large β) for DPO, which prevents the large updates that are needed. Given these issues, we seek an
  alternative algorithm that better leverages comparison feedback to improve over the SFT model.

   5               I TERATIVE L ABEL R EFINEMENT
  To overcome the limitations of preference optimization discussed in Section 4.1, our method needs
  to be robust to unreliable comparisons while still allowing large updates from the SFT model. To
  achieve this, we propose iterative label refinement (ILR). In contrast to RLHF methods, which
  iteratively update the SFT model, ILR focuses on improving the unreliable demonstrations in the
  initial SFT dataset. It uses comparison feedback to decide whether the initial SFT data should be
  replaced by model-generated alternatives, and then retrains the model from scratch via SFT on the


                                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


new data (Figure 1a). As we will show, ILR avoids the regularization dilemma discussed in Section
4.1 that impedes DPO with unreliable feedback. In ILR, retraining the model from scratch at each
iteration allows for large changes to the SFT model but avoids overoptimization. We introduce the
detailed methodology of ILR in Section 5.1, and demonstrate that it outperforms DPO both in the
LM-simulated setting (Section 5.2) and with time-constrained humans (Section 6).

5.1   M ETHODOLOGY

ILR consists of several iterations; during each iteration, the SFT dataset is improved by replacing
some of the demonstrations. The first step of each iteration is to gather proposed demonstrations
that may replace unreliable demonstrations in the current SFT data. These proposals are generated
using models trained via SFT on the current dataset. We showed in Section 4 that SFT models often
outperform their unreliable training data. Thus, by replacing some of the existing dataset with the
improved output of the SFT model, the overall quality and accuracy of the dataset should increase.
However, our findings in Section 4 only show that SFT models outperform their training data on
held-out prompts; if an SFT model is tested on a train prompt, it is likely to output responses that
contain mistakes imitated or memorized from the training data. Thus, if we use a model trained on the
entire current SFT dataset to generate proposals, those proposed responses are less likely to improve
over the current responses in the dataset. To ensure that the proposed replacements are generated on
held-out prompts, we implement ILR by training two SFT models on different halves of the SFT
data; then, these models cross-label the half they were not trained on. This makes it more likely the
model-generated responses are different and better than the existing responses, enabling improvement
of the dataset.
Once proposal responses are generated, we selectively update the SFT dataset with them by leveraging
comparison feedback. We ask the annotator (i.e., the small LM q̃ or time-constrained humans) to
compare an existing response in D eSFT with a model-generated proposal for the same prompt. If the
proposal is preferred by the annotator, it replaces the original response. After these comparisons are
complete, a new SFT model is trained on the updated dataset. As long as the annotator chooses better
responses more than half the time, the overall accuracy of the SFT data will increase, enabling the
new SFT model to outperform the initial one.
Formally, each iteration of ILR consists of the following steps:

 1. Data splitting: We start with a dataset of task demonstrations Dk = (X , Ỹk ), where k is the
    current iteration and D0 ≡ D  eSFT . The dataset Dk is evenly split into two disjoint subsets,
    Dk = (X , Yk ) and Dk = (X 2 , Yk2 ).
      1       1   1       2

 2. Model training: Two models, pb 1SFT and pb 2SFT , are finetuned on Dk1 and Dk2 respectively.
 3. Cross-labeling: Each model generates label proposals for the subset it wasn’t trained on, i.e., we
    sample Zk2 ∼ pb 1SFT (· | X 2 ) and Zk1 ∼ pb 2SFT (· | X 1 ).
 4. Proposal evaluation: The unreliable supervisor provides comparison feedback on the new
    proposal zi and original label ỹi for a prompt xi to decide which of them is preferred; this
    feedback determines whether ỹi should be replaced by zi .
 5. Label updating: Based on the comparisons in step 4, we form an updated dataset Dk+1 =
    (X , Yek+1 ), where each element of Yek+1 is either the accepted new proposal or the retained
    original label. We control the label refinement speed by setting a hyperparameter α ∈ (0, 1],
    allowing at most α|X | labels to be updated in each iteration. When more than α|X | proposals
    are accepted in step 4, we choose the ones with higher evaluation confidence, determined by
    either q̃’s log probability or human annotators’ self-reported confidence. In all experiments we
    set α = 0.15. Further analysis of α is presented in Appendix E.3.

At the end of each iteration, we finetune a new model starting from the base PLM of pb SFT using the
entire refined dataset DK , resulting in the SFT+ILR model pb kSFT+ILR . This process is repeated for K
iterations and the final model is pb K
                                     SFT+ILR .

In the LM-simulated setting, we only consider proposals that are sufficiently different from the
original labels during step 4. We determine a proposal is different enough if it has a different final


                                                   7
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           0.65                    GSM8K (2B 7B)                                                                      GSM8K (2B 7B) w/ Oracle Feedback
                   Ground Truth SFT Model (fstrong)       Improvements 0.15                                0.65   Ground Truth SFT Model (fstrong)       Improvements
           0.60    SFT Labels                                                                                     SFT Labels                                            0.4
                                                                                                           0.60
                                                                       0.10
           0.55                                                                                            0.55                                                         0.3


                                                                              Improvement


                                                                                                                                                                              Improvement
           0.50                                                        0.05                                0.50
Accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
           0.45                                                                                            0.45
                                                                       0.00                                                                                             0.1
           0.40                                                                                            0.40
                                                                        0.05                                                                                            0.0
           0.35                                                                                            0.35

           0.30                                                         0.10                               0.30                                                          0.1
                   0       1        2       3         4   5     6                                                 0       1        2        3        4   5      6
                                          Round                                                                                           Round
                                            (a)                                                                                            (b)

  Figure 5: SFT label accuracy increases across rounds during ILR. With high-quality feedback, ILR can lead to
  labels that approach or even surpass the accuracy of the model trained on ground truth (pSFT ).

  answer (GSM8K), different execution result (BIRD), or large embedding distance (SaferPaca). We
  present the pseudo-code (Algorithm 1) and more implementation details of ILR in Appendix C.

   5.2            LM- SIMULATED E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

  SFT+ILR leverages unreliable supervision better than SFT+DPO. We compare SFT+ILR and
  SFT+DPO across four settings with LM-simulated unreliable demonstrations and comparison feed-
  back (further validation using time-constrained human data is presented in Section 6). As shown in
  Figure 4, SFT+ILR consistently outperforms SFT+DPO in all scenarios under unreliable supervision.
  In GSM8K, ILR shows more significant improvements as model size increases from 7B to 70B,
  suggesting that it benefits from model scaling and may remain effective for future models that are
  even more capable.
  Comparison feedback is effective for improving demonstration quality. ILR relies on refining
  SFT data using comparison feedback, which is often easier to obtain than high-quality demonstrations,
  especially for complex tasks that humans struggle with. Figure 5a shows that unreliable comparison
  feedback guides this refinement process effectively: the accuracy of the SFT data steadily increases
  with more rounds of ILR. As suggested, this is likely because evaluation of AI output is typically
  easier than the demonstration of an ideal output (Leike et al., 2018), allowing even imperfect feedback
  to contribute to meaningful improvements in the SFT data. With reliable feedback (Figure 5b), the
  SFT demonstrations can be improved even further, approaching or even surpassing the accuracy of
  the model pb SFT trained on ground truth. This highlights ILR’s potential when combined with other
  scalable oversight techniques that enhance humans’ evaluation capability.
  ILR enables larger model updates and more efficient use of comparison feedback. As illustrated
  in Figure 3b, models trained with ILR exhibit significantly higher KL divergence from the initial SFT
  model compared to those trained with DPO even after a single round. Moreover, when comparison
  feedback is reliable while SFT data is not, ILR shows much higher efficiency than DPO, using the
  same amount of feedback to enable larger improvement over the initial SFT model. These can be
  attributed to ILR’s direct modification of the unreliable SFT data, which fundamentally alters models’
  training dynamics during SFT. By doing so, ILR allows each subsequent model to learn from new
  data independently and from scratch, without inheriting the errors of previous models, unlike the
  continual preference-based training seen in DPO.
  Supervision for refinement is necessary. Since the SFT models can generate proposal responses
  that are more accurate than their training data, it appears that one can simply replace the initial SFT
  data with new proposals without using any comparison feedback. To understand the importance of
  comparison feedback in ILR’s refinement process, we compare it to a naive approach that directly
  replaces an α fraction of the original labels with new proposals in each round. As shown in Figure 9
  (Appendix E.2), this naive method leads to performance degradation, showing that supervision in the
  refinement process, even if unreliable, is necessary. It could be that training on model outputs without
  any curation leads to model collapse, a phenomenon observed when training generative models with
  synthetic data (Shumailov et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024; Gerstgrasser et al., 2024).


                                                                                            8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Distribution of Answer Word Counts                                     Choose AI vs. Choose Human                    0.50       Comparing ILR and DPO
            100                                               GPT-4 Answers               1.0
                                                              Human Answers
                                                              Mean                                                                                0.48
             80                                               Median                      0.8

                                                                                          0.6


                                                                              Frequency
                                                                                                                                                  0.46
             60
Frequency


                                                                                                                                       Accuracy
                                                                                          0.4
             40                                                                                                                                   0.44
                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                       SFT+ILR
                                                                                                                                                  0.42                 SFT+DPO ( =0.01)
             20                                                                           0.0                                                                          SFT+DPO ( =0.1)
                                                                                                        Round 1        Round 2                                         SFT+DPO ( =0.5)
                                                                                                    Strongly Human     Weakly AI                                       SFT+DPO ( =1)
              0                                                                                     Moderately Human   Moderately AI              0.40
                   0         100          200           300         400                             Weakly Human       Strongly AI                       0             1               2
                                         Word Count                                                                                                                  Round

                                         (a)                                                                  (b)                                                 (c)
 Figure 6: (a) Distribution of word count of human written demonstrations compared to GPT4-generated answers
 collected by (Peng et al., 2023). (b) In both ILR rounds, participants are at least moderately confident in choosing
 newly proposed labels over original human demonstrations 20% of the time, but they tend to update less in later
 rounds. Participants also show higher overall confidence when choosing human demonstrations. These suggest
 that W2SG is not effective enough to consistently produce better outputs or that AI outputs are becoming more
 complex for time-constrained participants to evaluate. (In the second round, we only count preference pairs with
 at least one human-written label when calculating the frequencies) (c) ILR enables more improvements on top of
 the initial SFT model, while DPO plateaus similar to what is observed in LM-simulated settings.


                  Question                                           Human Demonstration                                                    Chosen AI output

                  Below is an instruction                           A random forest is a                                                   A random forest is a ma-
                  that describes a task...                          forest, usually in nature,                                             chine learning method
                  Instruction: Explain the                          that is not accounted for                                              for predication or clas-
                  concept of random for-                            with maps or other docu-                                               sification using multiple
                  est.                                              mentation.                                                             decision trees...


 Figure 7: Example of lable refinement in ILR: When instructed to explain "random forest," an inaccurate human
 demonstration misinterpreted it as a natural forest. Human workers then chose to replace this with a more
 accurate model-generated explanation, improving the SFT dataset quality.


 6                T IME - CONSTRAINED H UMAN S TUDY

To validate our findings from LM-simulated settings, we conduct a human study where we recruit
workers through CloudResearch Connect1 to provide both task demonstrations and comparison
feedback for an instruction-following task. Although the task is not beyond human capability, we
impose time constraints to create annotator noise and obtain unreliable data; this simulates the
challenges that may arise as humans supervise AI on complex tasks that are difficult for humans
themselves.
Task and data collection. For simplicity, we focus on the Alpaca instruction-following dataset
(Taori et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023) without unsafe instructions. We evaluate models using the
complete test set of AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) and GPT-4o as a judge, similar to evaluation in our
SaferPaca setting. We collect human demonstrations for 1,000 randomly sampled instructions, with
workers instructed to spend 1-2 minutes to write each response. Each worker is assigned 15 questions,
plus 3 attention checks used to filter out low-quality responses. As shown in Figure 6a, human
demonstrations are generally shorter than GPT-4-generated responses, suggesting suboptimal quality
due to time constraints. For the comparison feedback used in DPO and ILR, we instruct workers to
spend 30 seconds to 1 minute per question, with 50 questions assigned per worker and 3 additional
questions for quality checks. We collect 1,000 comparisons for each algorithm in each round and
conduct two rounds of both DPO (β = 0.1) and ILR (α = 0.1). We also use the comparison data
collected for DPO with β = 0.1 to run DPO with several other β values. More details of our human
study setup are provided in Appendix D.

              1
                  https://connect.cloudresearch.com


                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ILR outperforms DPO with time-constrained human supervision. With time-constrained unreli-
able human supervision, ILR demonstrates fast and consistent improvement compared to DPO (Figure
6c). While DPO with strong regularization (large β) improves slowly, DPO with less regularization
(small β) improves quickly in the beginning but then plateaus in performance. We hypothesize that
DPO may be overoptimizing with insufficient regularization, similarly to our LM-simulated experi-
ments. Notably, the results of ILR and DPO with the collected time-constrained human data are most
similar to LM-simulated scenarios with unreliable demonstrations but reliable comparison feedback,
as seen in Figure 3. This suggests that comparing Alpaca outputs remains relatively straightforward
for humans even under time pressure. Future work could explore more complex tasks or even shorter
time constraints to better simulate more unreliable human feedback.
ILR effectively improves SFT data because models finetuned on unreliable demonstrations
can surpass human supervisors. We find humans are at least moderately confident in choosing
model-generated outputs over original human demonstrations for more than 20% of the questions in
both rounds of ILR (Figure 6b). This further confirms the W2SG phenomenon, where models trained
on unreliable supervision can surpass their supervisor. For example, Figure 7 demonstrates that a
participant chose to replace human-written misinterpretation of "random forest" with a more correct
and detailed model-generated explanation.
However, the effect of ILR may decrease over rounds because participants tend to select fewer
AI-generated responses in later rounds (Figure 6b), which may result in fewer opportunities for
label refinement. This could be due to two reasons. First, participants may become less confident in
choosing AI outputs because in later rounds these outputs are more likely to surpass human level in
complexity. Second, W2SG may not be effective enough to consistently produce strictly better AI
outputs. To address these challenges, future work could explore better refinement mechanisms that
combine human demonstrations with AI outputs, potentially allowing for more nuanced refinement
in cases where both human and AI responses are partially correct in complementary ways.



7   D ISCUSSION

In this work, we study the effectiveness of a typical SFT+DPO pipeline for language model post-
training under unreliable supervision, as simulated by small LMs and time-limited humans. We
show that in this setting, unlike with reliable feedback, SFT+DPO fails to improve upon SFT. Our
analysis suggests that DPO struggles to avoid overoptimization with unreliable comparison feedback
and requires heavy regularization, preventing it from correcting significant errors in the SFT model.
To address this, we propose ILR to redirect comparison feedback towards improving unreliable
demonstrations in the SFT dataset. ILR enables larger model updates without the overoptimization
risks in preference optimization and consistently outperforms DPO under unreliable supervision.
Limitations. Our focus on RLHF via DPO may not fully capture the nuances of RLHF pipelines that
use reward modeling and PPO. Future research should verify whether our findings generalize to these
more complex RLHF setups. Also, our human study using time-constrained data collection may not
perfectly simulate human errors that arise from more realistic capability constraints. Exploring more
challenging tasks such as competition math or coding could potentially provide a closer analogy to
supervising AI on tasks that humans truly struggle with.
Future work. Our findings open several exciting directions for future research. For example, one
could explore hybrid approaches that combine ILR with RLHF. Applying PPO or DPO after sev-
eral rounds of ILR could potentially yield more improvements, since the problem of imitating
errors in unreliable demonstrations is relieved after improving the SFT data with ILR. Additionally,
investigating more sophisticated label refinement strategies, such as synthesizing human demonstra-
tions with model-generated proposals or implementing ensemble techniques through more than two
cross-labeling splits, could potentially further enhance the effectiveness of ILR.
Broader impact. Our findings suggest a potential paradigm shift in how we approach human oversight
of AI systems under unreliable supervision. We show that the canonical RLHF post-training pipeline
may no longer be the best use of human comparison feedback. Instead, we need methods like ILR
that leverage model outputs to improve and learn from unreliable human supervision.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Alex Shypula, Eli Bronstein, Meena Jagadeesan, Ruiqi Zhong, Xinyan Hu, and members
of JS’s group for helpful feedback, and to Tianyi Qiu, Xiaoyuan Zhu, Yitao Liu, Meitong Liu, Han
Li for valuable discussions. This work is supported by the Open Philanthropy Action Fund through
funding provided to JS. CL is supported by an Open Philanthropy AI Fellowship. Additional thanks
to Yuchen for her personal support and encouragement.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. 1
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
  Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016. 1, 2
Owura Asare, Meiyappan Nagappan, and N Asokan. Is github’s copilot as bad as humans at
 introducing vulnerabilities in code? Empirical Software Engineering, 28(6):129, 2023. 1
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal
 Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from
 human preferences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
 4447–4455. PMLR, 2024. 3, 22
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022. 1, 3
Federico Bianchi, Mirac Suzgun, Giuseppe Attanasio, Paul Röttger, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori
  Hashimoto, and James Zou. Safety-tuned llamas: Lessons from improving the safety of large
  language models that follow instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07875, 2023. 4, 15
Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Pro-
  ceedings of the eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theory, pp. 92–100, 1998.
  3
Samuel R Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamilė
  Lukošiūtė, Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, et al. Measuring progress on scalable
  oversight for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.03540, 2022. 2
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 3
Collin Burns, Pavel Izmailov, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Bowen Baker, Leo Gao, Leopold Aschenbrenner,
  Yining Chen, Adrien Ecoffet, Manas Joglekar, Jan Leike, et al. Weak-to-strong generalization:
  Eliciting strong capabilities with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09390, 2023. 1, 2,
  3, 4, 16
Sayak Ray Chowdhury, Anush Kini, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Provably robust dpo: Aligning
  language models with noisy feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00409, 2024. 3, 22
Paul Christiano, Buck Shlegeris, and Dario Amodei. Supervising strong learners by amplifying weak
  experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08575, 2018. 3
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. 4, 15
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024. 1, 3, 4, 5


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yann Dubois, Chen Xuechen Li, Rohan Taori, Tianyi Zhang, Ishaan Gulrajani, Jimmy Ba, Carlos
  Guestrin, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpacafarm: A simulation framework for
  methods that learn from human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2024. 1, 4

Adam Fisch, Jacob Eisenstein, Vicky Zayats, Alekh Agarwal, Ahmad Beirami, Chirag Nagpal, Pete
  Shaw, and Jonathan Berant. Robust preference optimization through reward model distillation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19316, 2024. 3

Benoît Frénay and Michel Verleysen. Classification in the presence of label noise: a survey. IEEE
  transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 25(5):845–869, 2013. 3

Kuzman Ganchev. Posterior regularization for learning with side information and weak supervision.
  PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2010. 3

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023. 2, 6

Yang Gao, Dana Alon, and Donald Metzler. Impact of preference noise on the alignment performance
  of generative language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09824, 2024. 3

Matthias Gerstgrasser, Rylan Schaeffer, Apratim Dey, Rafael Rafailov, Henry Sleight, John Hughes,
 Tomasz Korbak, Rajashree Agrawal, Dhruv Pai, Andrey Gromov, et al. Is model collapse in-
 evitable? breaking the curse of recursion by accumulating real and synthetic data. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2404.01413, 2024. 8, 21

Bo Han, Quanming Yao, Xingrui Yu, Gang Niu, Miao Xu, Weihua Hu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with extremely noisy labels.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 3

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021. 17

Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei.       Ai safety via debate.    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.00899, 2018. 3

Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023. 4

Zachary Kenton, Noah Y Siegel, János Kramár, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Samuel Albanie, Jannis Bulian,
  Rishabh Agarwal, David Lindner, Yunhao Tang, Noah D Goodman, et al. On scalable oversight
  with weak llms judging strong llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04622, 2024. 3

Akbir Khan, John Hughes, Dan Valentine, Laura Ruis, Kshitij Sachan, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Ed-
 ward Grefenstette, Samuel R Bowman, Tim Rocktäschel, and Ethan Perez. Debating with more
  persuasive llms leads to more truthful answers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06782, 2024. 3

Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
  2014. 17

Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Yining Chen, Harri Edwards, Jan Leike, Nat McAleese, and Yuri Burda.
  Prover-verifier games improve legibility of llm outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13692, 2024. 3

Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
 Systems Principles, 2023. 15

Jan Leike and Ilya Sutskever. Introducing superalignment, Jul 2023. URL https://openai.
  com/blog/introducing-superalignment. 1


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable agent
  alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871, 2018. 8

Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying
   Geng, Nan Huo, et al. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale
   database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 4,
   15

Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 5 2023. 4, 9, 15

Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and Jialu Liu.
  Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06657,
  2023. 3

Nat McAleese, Rai Michael Pokorny, Juan Felipe Ceron Uribe, Evgenia Nitishinskaya, Maja Trebacz,
  and Jan Leike. Llm critics help catch llm bugs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00215, 2024. 1, 3

Julian Michael, Salsabila Mahdi, David Rein, Jackson Petty, Julien Dirani, Vishakh Padmakumar, and
  Samuel R Bowman. Debate helps supervise unreliable experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08702,
  2023. 3

Eric Mitchell. A note on dpo with noisy preferences & relationship to ipo, 2023. 22

OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o, 2024. URL https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-09-22. 4, 15

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
  27744, 2022. 1, 3

Baolin Peng, Chunyuan Li, Pengcheng He, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Instruction tuning with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277, 2023. 9, 15

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. 3

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 1, 3, 5

Scott Reed, Honglak Lee, Dragomir Anguelov, Christian Szegedy, Dumitru Erhan, and Andrew
  Rabinovich. Training deep neural networks on noisy labels with bootstrapping. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6596, 2014. 3

Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Linlu Qiu, Bailin Wang, and Danica J Sutherland. Language model evolution:
  An iterated learning perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04286, 2024. 8, 21

David Rolnick, Andreas Veit, Serge Belongie, and Nir Shavit. Deep learning is robust to massive
  label noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10694, 2017. 3

William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills, Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan
 Leike. Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802,
 2022. 3

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 1, 3

Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018. 17


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Ander-
   son. The curse of recursion: Training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2305.17493, 2023. 8, 21
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, and Jae-Gil Lee. Learning from noisy
 labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning
 systems, 34(11):8135–8153, 2022. 3
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Alpaca: A strong, replicable instruction-following model.
  Stanford Center for Research on Foundation Models. https://crfm. stanford. edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.
  html, 3(6):7, 2023. 2, 4, 9, 15, 18
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
  Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open models
  based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024. 4
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021. 3
Jiaxin Wen, Ruiqi Zhong, Akbir Khan, Ethan Perez, Jacob Steinhardt, Minlie Huang, Samuel R.
   Boman, He He, and Shi Feng. Language models learn to mislead humans via rlhf, 2024. 1
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in
  natural language processing: system demonstrations, pp. 38–45, 2020. 18
Zhi-Hua Zhou. A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning. National science review, 5(1):
  44–53, 2018. 3
Zhi-Hua Zhou, Ming Li, et al. Semi-supervised regression with co-training. In IJCAI, volume 5, pp.
  908–913, 2005. 3


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     TASKS AND E VALUATION

A.1    DATASETS

GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021): This dataset contains math word problems widely used to evaluate
language models’ mathematical problem solving capabilities. In total, there are 8.5K question-answer
pairs for training and 3K for testing.
BIRD (Li et al., 2024): In this task, models are required to generate an SQL query that answer a
question of interest, given context of database descriptions. We filter out questions with token lengths
greater than 1024 and obtained 8.5K examples for training and 1.4K for testing.
SaferPaca (Bianchi et al., 2023): This dataset is a mixture of instruction following questions from
(Taori et al., 2023) and demonstrations of refusals to unsafe instructions. It requires a model to serve
as an assistant that follows human users’ instructions while generating responsible responses and
rejecting harmful prompts. For efficiency, we use a subset that contains 9500 general instructions
with responses labeled by GPT-4 (collected by Peng et al. (2023)) and 500 safety-related instructions
with the original labels in (Bianchi et al., 2023). The test set we use contains 300 questions and
reference answers taken from AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023), alongside 278 safety questions and simple
rejections ("Sorry, I cannot help with that.") of the I-MaliciousInstructions and I-CoNA
datasets used in (Bianchi et al., 2023).
We format all datasets into question-answer pairs following the same template:

    Prompt template for all datasets

    USER:\n{question}\n\nASSISTANT:{answer}\n


A.2    E VALUATION

Sampling. For all tasks and models, we sample one response for each prompt using vLLM (Kwon
et al., 2023) with beam search enabled and beam size set to 4.
Metrics. For GSM8K, we simply parse the final numerical answer and compute exact match accuracy.
For BIRD, we download all databases and execute the generated code on them to compute execution
accuracy, following (Li et al., 2024). We ensure all models’ generated code is executed on the same
machine for fair comparison. For SaferPaca, we adopt the CoT prompt (shown below) from (Li et al.,
2023) and use GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) to compute model answers’ win rates against the reference
answers. Specifically, we compute GPT-4o’s mean probability of generating a token that chooses the
model’s answer over the reference answer.

    Prompt template for GPT-4o evaluation

    Select the output A or B that best matches the given instruction.
    Choose your preferred output, which can be subjective. Your answer
    should first contain a concise explanation and then it should end
    with ONLY the token: ‘A‘ or ‘B‘ (no dot, no backticks, no new line,
    no quotes, no ’it depends’, no ’both’ ...), because we will use
    ‘output[-1]‘ to extract the best output.

    Here’s an example:

    # Example:
    ## Instruction:
    Give a description of the following job: "ophthalmologist"

    ## Output A:
    An ophthalmologist is a medical doctor who specializes in the
    diagnosis and treatment of eye diseases and conditions.

    ## Output B:



                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    An ophthalmologist is a medical doctor who pokes and prods at your
    eyes while asking you to read letters from a chart.

    ## Concise explanation followed by ‘A‘ or ‘B‘

    ### Concise explanation
    A provides a comprehensive and accurate description of the job of an
    ophthalmologist. In contrast, B is more of a joke.

    ### Which is best, ‘A‘ or ‘B‘?
    A

    # Task:
    Now is the real task.

    ## Instruction:
    {instruction}

    ## Output ‘A‘:
    {A}

    ## Output ‘B‘:
    {B}

    ## Concise explanation followed by ‘A‘ or ‘B‘

    ### Concise explanation


B    LM- BASED S IMULATION D ETAILS
For GSM8K, we experiment both with using the 2B model to supervise the 7B model, and using
the 7B model to supervise the 70B model. For SaferPaca and BIRD, we consider 2B supervising
7B and 2B supervising 70B, respectively, to balance limited compute while maintaining sufficient
performance gaps between models.
In each task, we split the training set into two halves. We use the first half as ground truth to train p̃ and
q̃, and then use p̃ to generate labels for the second half or use q̃ to generate comparison feedback for
answers to questions in the second half. This is similar to the setup in (Burns et al., 2023), despite that
we are operating on text generation tasks with both task demonstrations and comparison feedback.
To collect training data for q̃, we evenly save 10 intermediate checkpoints when training p̃ and use
them to sample answers for questions in their training set. Then, we pair these low-quality answers
with ground truth answers, and train q̃ to select the ground truth with a standard binary classification
loss. In SaferPaca, we balance refusals and acceptances (i.e., following the instruction) in the training
data to avoid class bias in q̃. This is done by first training two p̃ on safe and unsafe instructions in
SaferPaca respectively and sampling answers from them for each instruction. In this way, we obtain
both acceptance and refusal responses for each instruction, and then pair them up with the ground
truth as q̃’s balanced training data.
We use the following template to compose two answers and the question into a prompt for q̃:

    Prompt template for q̃

    QUESTION:
    {{question}}

    ANSWER (A):
    {{answer_a}}

    ANSWER (B):



                                                     16
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 1: Training Hyperparameter for Each Dataset

                           Dataset       Epoch      Batch Size    Max Answer Token
                           GSM8K            2             32               256
                           BIRD             2             32               256
                           SaferPaca        4             32               512


     Algorithm 1: Iterative Label Refinement (ILR)
   Input :Initial SFT dataset D0 = (X , Ỹ0 )
             Comparison feedback annotator q̃
             Maximum iterations K
             Refinement rate α
   Output :Refined dataset DK
             Final model pb K SFT+ILR
 1 for k = 0 to K − 1 do
 2     Split Dk into two disjoint subsets:
 3     Dk1 = (X 1 , Ỹk1 ) and Dk2 = (X 2 , Ỹk2 ), where X 1 ∪ X 2 = X
 4     Train models pb 1SFT on Dk1 and pb 2SFT on Dk2
 5     foreach xi ∈ X 1 do
 6         Sample one proposal zi ∼ pb 2SFT (· | xi )
 7       foreach xi ∈ X 2 do
 8           Sample one proposal zi ∼ pb 1SFT (· | xi )
 9       foreach xi ∈ X do
10           Collect comparison feedback for (zi , ỹk,i ) using q̃
11           Proposal zi is accepted if the feedback is zi ≻ ỹk,i
12       Let A be the set of indices where zi is accepted
13       Limit |A| ≤ α|X | by selecting proposals with highest confidence
14       Update labels:

                     z      if i ∈ A,
15       ỹk+1,i = i
                     ỹk,i otherwise
16       Form the updated dataset Dk+1 = (X , Ỹk+1 )
17       Train model pb k+1
                         SFT+ILR via SFT on Dk+1
18   return DK , p̂SFT+ILR [K]


         {{answer_b}}

         You gave the answer (A) to the question. Do you accept to
         change it to answer (B) proposed by another model?


     Note that the prompt states an order of “your answer” and “answer proposed by another model” due
     to historical reasons. In practice, we randomize the two answers’ order to avoide position bias.

     C    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF SFT, DPO, AND ILR

     In all our experiments, we apply Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) for efficient model
     training. We set r = 64 and α = 128 for all models.
     SFT. For each task, we use a consistent setting of epoch, batch size, and max answer token for all
     models (Table 1). We use set learning rate to 5e−4 for Gemma 2B and 1e−4 for Mistral 7B and Meta
     Llama 3 70B across all tasks. We use Adam (Kingma, 2014) optimizer for Gemma 2B and Mistral
     7B and AdaFactor (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) for Meta Llama 3 70B. We enable gradient checkpointing
     and use gradient accumulation with a mini batch size of 1 for all models.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ILR. We present the pseudo-code of ILR in Algorithm 1. Each round of ILR uses the same training
configuration as the initial SFT, since the only difference is that the dataset is refined. When training
the half-data models used for generating new proposals, we also adopt the same SFT training
configuration for simplicity.
In our LM-simulated experiments, we only collect comparison feedback for proposals and initial
demonstrations that are sufficiently different. In GSM8K and BIRD, this is determined by having
different final numerical answer or execution result. For SaferPaca, we use OpenAI Embeddings
API to compute the embeddings for the two responses, and then take dot product to compute
their embedding distance. We only collect comparison feedback for pairs with the top 50% largest
embedding distance.
DPO. We use the DPOTrainer in HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) to perform DPO
training. In all tasks, we use the suggested rmsprop optimizer with learning rate set to 1e−6 , and we
train for the same number of epochs as SFT. For all LM-simulated tasks, we sample 6 completion for
each prompt, create 3 pairs with them, and then gather comparison feedback using q̃. We subsample
the top 15% most confident feedback (measured by |q̃(y1 ≻ y2 | x) − 0.5|) when constructing D    eRLHF ,
since we find this performs better than using all feedback generated by the unreliable q̃ in DPO.
Specifically, in GSM8K (2B → 7B), model accuracy after one round of DPO is 0.32±0.0043 when
using all feedback and 0.36±0.0032 when using the 15% most confident feedback.

D        H UMAN S TUDY D ETAILS
We use CloudResearch Connect2 to recruit online workers to write human demonstrations for 1000
Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) instructions and provide comparison feedback that are used in two rounds
of ILR and DPO.

D.1       C OLLECTING HUMAN DEMONSTRATIONS

In our survey for collecting human demonstrations, we assign each worker 15 questions with 3
additional screening questions formatted in the same way for filtering out low-quality responses.
Specifically, the screening questions and filtering critiria are:

         1. Instruction: How many letter R’s does the word ‘STRAWBERRY’ have?
            Expected answer: Anything containing 3 or three.
         2. Instruction: Weng earns $12 an hour for babysitting. Yesterday, she just did 50 minutes of
            babysitting. How much did she earn?
            Expected answer: Anything containing 10 or ten.
         3. Instruction: I want to know what dish I can cook with these ingredients: eggs, tomatoes,
            salt, oil. Also, please give me a list of steps to cook it.
            Expected answer: Anything containing the mentioned ingredients and at least 2 steps for
            cooking them.

The task instruction we provided at the beginning of the survey is:
    Task instruction for writing response demonstrations

    Thank you for participating in our study! We would like your help in training an AI assistant that can
    follow users’ instructions in a helpful, honest, and harmless way.

    In this survey, you will be presented with 15 questions posed by human users to an AI chatbot. For each
    question, please take more than 1 minute and less than 2 minutes to write a response that you think is as
    helpful, honest, and harmless as possible. Please aim for high-quality detailed responses within the
    given time.

    Additionally, there will be 3 randomly placed quality check questions. These questions are super easy
    and you will definitely get them right if you are attentive. We will manually check your answers to

    2
        https://connect.cloudresearch.com


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    these questions, and if you don’t pass, your response may not be qualified. However, you will still
    receive a base payment of $0.75. In such a case, please manually return the assignment to ensure we
    can pay you the base amount. Please let us know if you find our judgement incorrect.

   To get full compensation, please complete all questions. Otherwise, you will only receive a base
   payment of $0.75.

   At the end, we welcome your feedback on improving the survey for future participants!

    NOTE: Please refrain from searching for answers during the survey. No use of external sources (e.g.,
    Google or ChatGPT) is allowed.


D.2    C OLLECTING HUMAN COMPARISON FEEDBACK

In each round of ILR and DPO, we collect human comparison feedback for all 1000 questions.
For DPO, model completions are generated by models trained with β = 0.1. In our survey for
collecting human comparison feedback, we assign each worker 50 questions with 3 additional
screening questions formatted in the same way for filtering out low-quality responses. Specifically,
the screening questions and filtering critiria are:

      1. Instruction: Where is water that has its salt removed before it can be used as drinking water
         most likely to have come from?
         Response A: Water that has its salt removed before it can be used as drinking water is most
         likely to have come from a sea.
         Response B: Water that has its salt removed before it can be used as drinking water is most
         likely to have come from a lake.
         Expected answer: A with any confidence level.
      2. Instruction: Help me solve this math problem. Input: How can I compute the area of a
         circle with radius 5?
         Response A: The area of it is 25π.
         Response B: Note that the area of a circle with radius r is π * r2 . Therefore, the area of a
         circle with radius 5 is π * 5 * 5 = 25π.
         Expected answer: B with any confidence level.
      3. Instruction: Immediately before and after running a 50 metre race, your pulse and breathing
         rates are taken. What changes would you expect to find?
         Response A: After running a 50-metre race, an increase in pulse and breathing rate is the
         changes one would expect to find immediately before and after.
         Response B: After running a 50 metre race, you would expect to find an increase in pulse
         but no change in breathing rate when your pulse and breathing rates are taken immediately
         before and after the race.
         Expected answer: A with any confidence level.

The task instruction we provided at the beginning of the survey is:

   Task instruction for providing comparison feedback

   Thank you so much for participating in our study! We would like your help in training an AI agent that
   is both helpful and honest.

    First, you will be shown three screening questions, and if you get them correct, you will be
    able to participate in the rest of our survey. If you do not qualify, you will be eligible to re-
    ceive a base payment of $0.75, and you will be automatically redirected to a Google Form. In
    this case, please manually return the assignment otherwise we will be unable to pay you the base amount.

   For the main task, you will be shown fifty request-response groups: each request is posed by a user
   to an AI chatbot, and you will see two potential responses that the AI chatbot has generated. Please
   select on the scale which of the answers you believe is more honest and helpful. For instance, if
   you believe one of the choices is more helpful, select the bubble corresponding to one of the two



                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Effect of KL Regularization (GSM8K 2B 7B)       10                                                                                             Accuracy Increase vs. KL Divergence (GSM8K 2B 7B)
                                                                                                                                                                                     25.0%
                                 10.0%
                                                                                                    3                                                                                20.0%                                                                                 3.0
                                  7.5%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Coefficient of KL Regularization)
                                                                                                          (Coefficient of KL Regularization)



                                                                                                                                                    Relative Accuracy Increase (%)
Relative Accuracy Increase (%)

                                  5.0%                                                              1                                                                                15.0%

                                  2.5%                                                                                                                                               10.0%
                                                                                                    0.3                                                                                                                                                                    0.3
                                  0.0%
                                                                                                    0.1                                                                               5.0%
                                  2.5%
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0%                                                      DPO w/ Oracle Feedback
                                  5.0%                                                              0.03                                                                                                                                                                   0.03
                                             Oracle feedback                                                                                                                                                                                    DPO
                                             50% oracle + 50% unreliable feedback                                                                                                                                                               ILR w/ Oracle Feedback
                                  7.5%       Unreliable feedback                                                                                                                      5.0%                                                      ILR
                                         0                 1                2         3         4
                                                                                                    0.01                                                                                     0.0     0.5    1.0      1.5      2.0        2.5       3.0       3.5     4.0
                                                                          Round                                                                                                                             KL Divergence from the Initial SFT Model

(a) DPO effectively improves SFT models with or-                                                                                                    (b) Strong regularization in DPO limits useful model
acle feedback, especially with weak regularization.                                                                                                 updates, while small regularization leads to overop-
However, with unreliable feedback, improvements are                                                                                                 timization of unreliable feedback. In contrast, ILR
limited to a narrow range of regularization strengths                                                                                               facilitates large model updates, allowing for faster im-
because weak regularization causes overoptimization.                                                                                                provement and efficient use of comparison feedback.

Figure 8: DPO struggles to avoid overoptimization of noisy preferences while also updating the initial suboptimal
SFT model sufficiently to improve performance.



                                    extremes on the scale, but if you believe the two choices are similar to each other, select a bubble
                                    in the center of the scale. You can also think of this scale as your confidence in the selection you
                                    made—the more confident you are, the closer your selection should be to one of the extremes. Option-
                                    ally, you can explain why you chose the response that you did in the scratch space provided on each page.

                                    You should spend around 30 seconds and no more than 1 minute for each question. The total time
                                    limit of this survey is 50 minutes. Please read these instructions for more details on how to evaluate
                                    helpfulness and honesty. You may open the instructions in a separte tab for reference whenever you
                                    want. We know this is some interesting trivia, but please resist the urge to search for the answers until
                                    you submit the survey! No use of external sources, including Google or ChatGPT, is permitted.

                                    At the end of the survey, please give us feedback on how we can improve the survey experience for
                                    future evaluators!

                                    NOTE: Please do not take this survey more than once! You will not be compensated for more than one
                                    attempt.

                                    Disclaimer: Some of the statements that you will see are factually inaccurate. Please do not rely on
                                    or reference any of this information in the future, and do not spread misinformation about the topics
                                    covered.



D.3                                       DPO AND ILR H YPEPERAMETERS

In both DPO and ILR, we only use comparison data with at least moderate confidence. We tested the
first round of DPO using the top 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 80% most confident comparisons and
found 30% yields the best performance, hence this is applied throughout the two rounds. We also
tested β ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 0.1} for the first round and found β = 0.1 performs the best. For ILR, we
tested α ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} for the first round and applied the best-performing α = 0.1 across the two
rounds.


E                                        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

E.1                                      KL R EGULARIZATION IN DPO

In Figure 8, we present the complete experiment results when using different levels of KL regulariza-
tion and feedback quality for DPO.


                                                                                                                                               20
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          GSM8K (2B 7B)                               0.73       GSM8K (7B 70B)                                           BIRD (2B 70B)                                    SaferPaca (2B 7B)
                             ILR                                                 ILR                                       0.44           ILR                                                  ILR
                                                                      0.72                                                                                                      0.66
             0.38            Naive ILR                                           Naive ILR                                                Naive ILR                                            Naive ILR
                                                                      0.71                                                 0.42                                                 0.64
             0.37                                                     0.70                                                                                                      0.62
Accuracy


                                                           Accuracy


                                                                                                            Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                     Win Rate
                                                                      0.69                                                 0.40
             0.36                                                                                                                                                               0.60
                                                                      0.68
                                                                                                                           0.38                                                 0.58
             0.35                                                     0.67
                                                                      0.66                                                                                                      0.56
             0.34                                                                                                          0.36
                                                                      0.65                                                                                                      0.54
                     0          2            4         6                     0       2           4   6                            0          2           4       6                     0          2            4       6
                                    Round                                                Round                                                   Round                                                Round



     Figure 9: Naively replacing initial SFT labels with new model’s proposals lead to performance degradation
     across all tasks, suggesting the importance of refinement oversight.

                                             ILR Model Accuracy over Rounds                                                                           ILR Label Accuracy over Rounds
                 0.385           5%                                                                                        0.41            5%
                                 15%                                                                                                       15%
                                 20%                                                                                       0.40            20%
                 0.380
                                 30%                                                                                       0.39            30%
Model Accuracy


                 0.375


                                                                                                          Label Accuracy
                                                                                                                           0.38
                 0.370
                                                                                                                           0.37
                 0.365                                                                                                     0.36
                 0.360                                                                                                     0.35
                 0.355                                                                                                     0.34
                         0               1         2           3                 4           5       6                                0           1          2         3                   4               5       6
                                                             Rounds                                                                                                  Rounds

     Figure 10: Left: Overall, ILR is not particularly sensitive to choice of α, although larger α may lead to less stable
     performance, while small α does not allow enough improvement. Right: When α is large enough, SFT data
     label accuracy converge to a similar level. When α is overly small, label accuracy is not efficiently improved.

     E.2                 FAILURE OF NAIVE ILR: S UPERVISON FOR R EFINEMENT IS N ECESSARY

    To understand the importance of comparison feedback within ILR’s refinement process, we compare
    it to a naive approach that directly replaces an α fraction of the original labels with new proposals
    without any feedback. As shown in Figure 9, this naive method leads to performance degradation
    in all tasks, showing that supervision in the refinement process, even if unreliable, is necessary. It
    could be that training on model outputs without any curation leads to model collapse, a phenomenon
    observed when training generative models with synthetic data (Shumailov et al., 2023; Ren et al.,
    2024; Gerstgrasser et al., 2024).

     E.3                 E FFECT OF C ONTROLLING R EFINEMENT S PEED IN ILR

    The refinement speed in ILR, controlled by α, plays a crucial role in maintining stability. Figure 10
    illustrates the impact of different α values on model performance in GSM8K. We find α = 0.05 too
    small for effective improvement of label accuracy, while large α’s make the refinement process less
    stable. According to this result, we set α = 0.15 for all other experiments in LM-based simulation
    and find that this choice leads to relatively stable performance across all tasks, showing that α is not
    particularly sensitive to change in data distribution. Future work can explore adaptive refinement
    speed to remove the potential need for manual hyperparameter tuning.

     E.4                 I MPROVING DPO WITH ILR M ODULES

     Several modules in ILR can also be applied to DPO. In sDPO, we use two models trained on disjoint
     data subsets to generate samples for the preference dataset, similar to how we generate proposals with
     the cross-labeling framework in ILR. In wsDPO, we construct the preference dataset by comparing
     model-generated responses with original unreliable labels, similar to the mechanism of using feedback
     to decide label refinement in ILR. We test these two variants of DPO in the GSM8K (2B → 7B)
     setting. As shown in Table 2, these methods provide minimal improvements upon DPO. We conjecture


                                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Accuracies of DPO variants with ILR modules across 4 rounds. The highest value in each column is
highlighted in bold.

                        Method      Round 1     Round 2     Round 3      Round 4
                        DPO          0.3591      0.3520      0.3462       0.3412
                        sDPO         0.3624      0.3561      0.3457       0.3343
                        wsDPO        0.3626      0.3624      0.3538       0.3482
                        ILR          0.3647      0.3738      0.3851       0.3788

Table 3: Accuracies of DPO variants with improved loss functions across 4 rounds. The highest value in each
column is highlighted in bold.

                        Method      Round 1     Round 2     Round 3      Round 4
                        DPO          0.3591      0.3520      0.3462       0.3412
                        IPO          0.3604      0.3571      0.3503       0.3460
                        cDPO         0.3589      0.3536      0.3563       0.3530
                        rDPO         0.3568      0.3487      0.3386       0.3391
                        ILR          0.3647      0.3738      0.3851       0.3788

that they still struggles due to similar reasons to standard DPO: Errors learned during the initial
SFT stage being hard to correct through preference optimization, and limitations caused by the
overoptimization issues discussed in Section 4.1.

E.5   ROBUST DPO L OSSES

Recent work has proposed several DPO losses that address preference noise. In Table 3, we compare
IPO (Azar et al., 2024), cDPO (Mitchell, 2023), and rDPO (Chowdhury et al., 2024) to standard DPO
and ILR. While these methods may help with random preference noise, they are less effective for
handling unreliable supervision in our setting. This could be because both task demonstrations used
in SFT and comparison feedback are unreliable in our setting. Moreover, noise in demonstrations
or comparison feedback are systematic (Section 2) instead of random, unlike the random label flip
assumed in some theoretical results (Mitchell, 2023; Chowdhury et al., 2024). Such systematic errors
are particularly challenging because they may not be easily modeled using standard robust learning
techniques.


                                                    22
