Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S OFT M ATCHA : A S OFT AND FAST PATTERN
M ATCHER FOR B ILLION -S CALE C ORPUS S EARCHES
  Hiroyuki Deguchi1∗, Go Kamoda2 , Yusuke Matsushita3 , Chihiro Taguchi4 ,
  Kohei Suenaga3 , Masaki Waga3 , Sho Yokoi5,2,6
 1
   NAIST, 2 Tohoku University, 3 Kyoto University, 4 University of Notre Dame,
 5
   NINJAL, 6 RIKEN
 deguchi.hiroyuki.db0@is.naist.jp, go.kamoda@dc.tohoku.ac.jp,
 ymat@fos.kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp, ctaguchi@nd.edu
 ksuenaga@kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp, mwaga@fos.kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 yokoi@ninjal.ac.jp



                                              A BSTRACT

            Researchers and practitioners in natural language processing and computational
            linguistics frequently observe and analyze the real language usage in large-scale
            corpora. For that purpose, they often employ off-the-shelf pattern-matching tools,
            such as grep, and keyword-in-context concordancers, which is widely used in
            corpus linguistics for gathering examples. Nonetheless, these existing techniques
            rely on surface-level string matching, and thus they suffer from the major limita-
            tion of not being able to handle orthographic variations and paraphrasing—notable
            and common phenomena in any natural language. In addition, existing continu-
            ous approaches such as dense vector search tend to be overly coarse, often re-
            trieving texts that are unrelated but share similar topics. Given these challenges,
            we propose a novel algorithm that achieves soft (or semantic) yet efficient pat-
            tern matching by relaxing a surface-level matching with word embeddings. Our
            algorithm is highly scalable with respect to the size of the corpus text utilizing
            inverted indexes. We have prepared an efficient implementation, and we provide
            an accessible web tool. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
            (i) can execute searches on billion-scale corpora in less than a second, which is
            comparable in speed to surface-level string matching and dense vector search; (ii)
            can extract harmful instances that semantically match queries from a large set of
            English and Japanese Wikipedia articles; and (iii) can be effectively applied to
            corpus-linguistic analyses of Latin, a language with highly diverse inflections.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) and corpus linguistics are largely driven by
the availability of massive text corpora (Gao et al., 2020; Biderman et al., 2023b; Raffel et al.,
2019; Van Der Zwaan et al., 2017; Mcgillivray et al., 2020). The field of NLP, driven by the
grand goal of building intelligent chatbots and machine translation systems, has achieved remark-
able breakthroughs over the past decade, largely thanks to self-supervised representation learning
from vast corpora (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Devlin et al., 2019a; Radford et al.,
2019). Notable causal language models (LMs), capable of passing high-stakes exams (Katz et al.,
2024; OpenAI, 2024; Jung et al., 2023), serving as general-purpose problem solvers (Brown et al.,
2020), and engaging in realistic conversations with beloved characters (De Freitas, 2023; Chen et al.,
2024), owe their foundational abilities to next-token prediction learned from large-scale data (Brown
et al., 2020; Dubey et al., 2024; Riviere et al., 2024). In corpus linguistics (McEnery & Hardie,
2011), computational linguistics (Jurafsky & Martin, 2024), and digital humanities (Jensen, 2014)—
disciplines aiming to uncover the scientific and computational principles of human language—such
vast linguistic resources, consisting of the language use itself, have become more indispensable than
ever in this era of large-scale corpora (Van Der Zwaan et al., 2017; Mcgillivray et al., 2020).
    ∗
        Currently affiliated with NTT. E-mail: hiroyuki.deguchi@ntt.com


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Hard pattern matching (e.g., grep) and soft pattern matching (our method). Hard matching
is based on surface-level comparison and does not match if, e.g., a synonym is used; Soft matching
is based on semantic comparison and robust to such variations thanks to word embeddings.

  Pattern                   Theorem 1                               John was born in
  Hard matching         · · · thanks to Theorem 1 · · ·         · · · John was born in 1345 · · ·
  (e.g., grep)
  Soft matching         · · · thanks to Theorem 1 · · ·         · · · John was born in 1345 · · ·
  (ours)                · · · Theorem 3 holds because · · ·     · · · Edward had died in May 1910 · · ·
                        · · · By Lemma 5, we may assume · · ·   · · · Robert was born in England · · ·
                        · · · Equation 1 describes · · ·        · · · the Emperor Henry, died in 1125 · · ·



Given this context, the demand for efficient pattern matchers that enable rapid searches across mas-
sive corpora is higher than ever (Liu et al., 2024; Smadja, 1993). For example, when harmful
information, misinformation, or memorized privacy information is generated by a large LM, it is
necessary to identify the corresponding training instances where this information originated (Guo
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024c; Ippolito et al., 2023; Biderman et al., 2023a). Another example is
when researchers wish to determine which of two linguistic phenomena of interest is more frequent;
conducting exhaustive searches across the largest available corpora is essential (Biber, 2015) for
this purpose. Notably, many linguistic phenomena—word frequency as a simple example—follow
a power-law distribution (Zipf, 1951; Heap, 1980; Kobayashi & Tanaka-Ishii, 2018). Consequently,
only with vast corpora can we observe and analyze the various rare events residing in the long tail,
which constitute the majority of linguistic phenomena.
One of the challenges when working with large corpora is that pattern-matching tools based on string
matching (Hakak et al., 2019), such as grep (Bambenek & Klus, 2009) and ripgrep (Gallant,
2024), or linguist-oriented tools often referred to as KWIC (Anthony, 2013; Culy & Lyding, 2010;
Schweinberger, 2024), primarily rely on surface-level exact matching as their core strategy. Because
natural languages are characterized by their flexibility and richness in how humans can express
similar concepts in different ways (McKeown, 1979; Witteveen & Andrews, 2019; Ganitkevitch
et al., 2013), strictly exact string matching may not meet users’ demands. For example, on top of the
query word in standard spelling, it is often desirable to catch non-standard spellings as well, such as
how r u instead of how are you, which are widespread particularly on the web and in texting (Schulz,
2018). Additionally, it is also desirable to catch different inflected word forms such as sing, sang,
sung, sings, and singing, which differ only in their morphological features and share the same lemma
(base form) (Don, 2014; Embick, 2015). Rule-based exact matching is particularly hard when the
target language is morphologically complex and exhibits irregular inflectional patterns.
To resolve the mismatch between the symbolic nature of existing pattern matchers and the diverse
orthographic and morphological variations inherent in natural language, we have developed a soft
(or semantic) yet efficient pattern matcher (Section 3). The core strategy is based on the simple
idea of softening the matching process from binary {0, 1} values to continuous values, using word
embeddings. By adopting inverted indexes and several other techniques, our tool can enumerate
all softly matching instances in billion-scale corpora in less than a second. Table 1 shows specific
examples of its operation. Our proposed method is capable not only of enumerating exact matches
but also of flexibly listing semantically similar instances, even when their surface forms differ. For
example, given the query “Theorem 1”, the method can retrieve instances such as “Lemma 5”. This
characteristic substantially enhances key tasks in both NLP and corpus linguistics. For instance, it
improves the filtering of harmful texts, and facilitates more efficient example retrieval, particularly
for languages with complex morphological features (Section 4).
The contributions of our study are summarized as follows.

         • We developed a soft (or semantic) pattern-matching algorithm—a relaxation of the exact
           string matching—using word embeddings (Section 3). By leveraging inverted indexing, we
           achieved high scalability (Sections 2.1, 2.3 and 3.3).1
   1
       GitHub: https://github.com/softmatcha/softmatcha


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         • We developed an easy-to-use web demo to facilitate interaction with the soft matching algo-
           rithm.2 This demo is particularly beneficial for NLP researchers and developers who want
           to analyze LMs in a data-driven manner, as well as for language learners and humanities
           researchers who are conducting language analysis on large corpora from the perspectives
           of corpus linguistics and digital humanities (Section 4.1)
         • For quantitative evaluation, we verified that our method achieves complete enumeration
           in less than a second on billion-scale corpora, which are commonly used in training large
           LMs (Section 4.2). For instance, the running time for searching over an English corpus
           with 3.4B words was less than 0.1 seconds without GPUs. This performance is comparable
           in speed to dense vector search; moreover, our method enables the retrieval of examples
           closely aligned with specific queries, rather than just broad topical similarities.
         • We conducted qualitative evaluations in specific scenarios to verify the usefulness of the
           proposed method in both the fields of NLP and corpus linguistics. In experiments assuming
           the training of LMs on large-scale corpora, we provided search examples for identifying
           and removing harmful instances contained within the corpus (Section 4.2). In experiments
           assuming the analysis of classical Western languages by linguists, we chose Latin—a lan-
           guage with highly complex inflections—as an example. We demonstrated that a corpus
           search with our tool can flexibly extract morphologically and semantically similar usage
           examples from the corpus (Section 4.3).

2       R ELATED WORK
The procedures for finding sentences (or lines, documents) that match a given pattern (query) are
prevalent across nearly all areas of computer science and data science, making it difficult to enu-
merate all related research. In this section, we review particularly relevant work in NLP and com-
putational linguistics, which are the primary focus of this study, as well as in the closely related
areas of string matching. Beyond the fields discussed here, we believe many other domains, such as
information retrieval, time series analysis, and semantic web, also have connections to this research.

2.1     NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND CORPUS SEARCH

The significant progress in NLP over the past decade is largely attributed to deep-learning–based
self-supervised representation learning (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Bojanowski
et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019a; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Dubey et al., 2024). The
vast raw corpora without label annotations serve as the source of such models’ capabilities (Gao
et al., 2020; Biderman et al., 2023b; Raffel et al., 2019), and, therefore, these corpora are continu-
ally referenced and analyzed for model improvement and evaluation (Biderman et al., 2023b). For
instance, as LMs can memorize and elicit facts written in training corpora, they are reported to gen-
erate text containing privacy-related information (Huang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Lukas et al.,
2023) or content that could be used for terrorism or violence (Gehman et al., 2020; Schick et al.,
2021; Kumar et al., 2023). In this context, Ippolito et al. (2023) work on filtering out verbatim
memorization, requiring searches accross large-scale training corpora.3 N -gram substring pattern
matchers, as representative tools for corpus search in NLP, have been particularly well-developed
even before the advent of deep learning (Sekine, 2008; Sekine & Dalwani, 2010). In terms of data
structures, inverted indexes (Sekine & Dalwani, 2010; Rogozinski & Kuc, 2016), and suffix arrays
including their variants (Sekine & Dalwani, 2010; Yamamoto & Church, 2001; Liu et al., 2024;
Burrows et al., 1994; Ferragina & Manzini, 2005; Langmead et al., 2009) are typically employed.
Our algorithm is based on inverted indexes due to its algorithmic requirements, which we discuss
in Section 3. Here, regardless of which data structure is used, it is important to note that existing
n-gram matching techniques assume exact surface-level matching, making it extremely challenging
to search and enumerate all relevant sentences while handling the complex characteristics of natural
language, such as paraphrasing, orthographic variation, and inflection. Dense vector search (Khat-
tab & Zaharia, 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Izacard et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024a) has recently
gained widespread popularity as the foundational technology for retrieval-augmented generation
    2
    Demo: https://softmatcha.github.io. The screenshot of the demo is presented in Appendix C.
    3
    Measuring influence of training corpus is also an important theme (Koh & Liang, 2017; Pruthi et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021; Isonuma & Titov, 2024), but their application to vast corpora remains highly challenging.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Khandelwal et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020; Izacard et al., 2024). Dense
vector search is highly compatible with approximate nearest neighbor search (Malkov & Yashunin,
2020; Jégou et al., 2011), and it offers a significant advantage in reducing the issue of hallucina-
tion (Ayala & Bechard, 2024; Gao et al., 2023) in scenarios requiring factual knowledge. However,
dense vector search is a relatively “coarse” method, primarily used to retrieve documents that are
topically similar, making it less suitable for the cases that require more specific n-gram level queries.

2.2   C ORPUS LINGUISTICS AND CORPUS SEARCH

Corpus linguistics is a subfield of linguistics that utilizes corpora to study language based on ex-
amples of ‘real-life’ language use (McEnery & Wilson, 2001). Digital humanities, a closely related
field, is an interdisciplinary domain that aims to advance humanities through the application of data
and information science. In digital humanities as well, quantitative analysis of texts using corpora
is also actively pursued (Jensen, 2014). Corpora consist of collections of texts or spoken language
data (Van Der Zwaan et al., 2017; Mcgillivray et al., 2020), offering real-world examples of how
language is used in various contexts. In most settings, an ideal corpus is large in size to ensure
the statistical reliability of certain linguistic phenomena and to cover a broader range of language
use, including rare occurrences such as low-frequency words (Ha et al., 2009; Coole et al., 2020).
Search tools (Hockey & Martin, 1987; TEI Consortium, 2023) are an indispensable element of
corpus linguistics because they enable the identification of linguistic patterns, such as word frequen-
cies, collocations, and syntactic structures. Traditional search methods commonly used in corpus
linguistics include exact matching and its extension with regular expressions (Jurafsky & Martin,
2024). However, given the nature of natural languages—with their morphological complexity and
unlimited paraphrases and synonyms with varying surface forms—rule-based search methods face
extreme difficulties in exhaustively enumerating instances that closely match a given query.

2.3   S TRING MATCHING

From an algorithmic point of view, our method is closely related to string matching algo-
rithms (Hakak et al., 2019). In what follows, we briefly give an algorithmic comparison with
some of them and elucidate their relationship to ours. Offline string matching algorithms pro-
cess the corpus text to build an index that accelerates future searches, a technique widely applied in
search engines and information retrieval systems such as Elasticsearch (Rogozinski & Kuc, 2016)
and Apache Lucene (Grand et al., 2020). Inverted indexing is a well-known approach in this do-
main (Zobel & Moffat, 2006), and our method serves as a soft generalization of a string matching
algorithm based on inverted indexing. Online string matching algorithms do not rely on prepro-
cessing and handle the corpus text on the fly. Efficient algorithms include the Knuth-Morris-Pratt,
Karp-Rabin, and Boyer-Moore algorithms (Knuth et al., 1977; Karp & Rabin, 1987; Boyer & Moore,
1977). While widely used in tools such as grep, online string matching is also a basis of runtime
verification (Bartocci et al., 2018), where system’s execution data is monitored. Although it is pos-
sible to relax these algorithms with word embeddings, the number of soft word comparisons in
such a relaxation would be linear in the size of the corpus. In contrast, our algorithm requires only
constant soft word comparisons, thanks to indexing. See Section 3.3 for the complexity analysis.
Approximate string matching allows flexible matching, typically using edit distance to accommo-
date noisy or incomplete data (Navarro, 2001). Tools like agrep (Wu & Manber, 1992b;a) perform
online matching that tolerates mismatches. Indexing-based algorithms are also proposed for approx-
imate string matching (Boytsov, 2011). As a relaxation of exact string matching, approximate string
matching is orthogonal to ours: approximate string matching focuses on relaxing surface-level com-
parison, while our approach focuses on semantic-level similarity based on word embeddings. For
example, morphologically irregular forms such as “person” and “people”, only differing in plurality,
will likely be missed in approximate string matching, while our methods are able to catch them.

3     O UR ALGORITHM FOR SOFT PATTERN MATCHING

3.1   OVERVIEW

Key aspect of design: Hard vs. Soft. One key aspect we considered in designing the algorithm
for soft pattern matching is hard computation vs. soft computation. Hard (or exact) pattern matching


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Corpus text                  When            a   jazz pianist plays funk with              a      blues singer · · ·

                                Ia
       Inverted index          Ijazz
                               Iblues
                              (a) Preprocessing: Build the inverted index of the corpus text.

            Pattern       p     =                  the                       jazz                      musician

                                               a             where             blues                       singer
        Word                                                                                plays
                                                   the        when           jazz                      musician
      embeddings                                                                           play
                                                    this         with      funk                               pianist

   Soft pattern           S     =       {the, a, this, · · · }     {jazz, blues, funk, · · · } {musician, singer, pianist, · · · }
                              (b) Matching Step 1: Soften the pattern into the soft pattern.
                                                                                                    Hit!                Hit!
      {


      jazz,   Ijazz                                                                       I˜the
   blues,     Iblues                                                                I˜jazz
   funk,      Ifunk                                                          I˜musician
      ...

               ...
      }


                                                                        Soft matches M
   Sjazz       I˜jazz
                                                                                              a jazz pianist a blues singer · · ·
(c) Matching Step 2-1: Get the soft inverted index.                       (d) Matching Step 2-2: Find the soft matches.

                        Figure 1: Illustration of our algorithm for soft pattern matching.



(such as grep) can process large texts blazingly fast. This is because hard matching requires only
“hard computation”, e.g., bitwise comparison, which is highly efficient. Soft pattern matching, on
the other hand, involves “soft computation”, e.g., cosine similarity of two vectors. Since such soft
computation involves many floating-point arithmetic operations over high-dimensional vectors, it is
typically much slower than hard computation. For instance, just taking the cosine similarity of a
pair of word embeddings can be as expensive as thousands of simple bitwise operations.



Overview of our algorithm. With this in mind, we designed the algorithm for soft pattern match-
ing, which is precise and efficient. Our algorithm is illustrated in Figure 1. Our key idea is to run soft
computation only over the vocabulary, not over the whole text as a naive algorithm would do. More
specifically, our algorithm works in the following two steps: For each query, (Step 1) it first per-
forms soft computation over the vocabulary, softening the pattern into the soft pattern S1 S2 · · · Sn
(Fig. 1b); (Step 2) then it performs hard computation that finds the exact positions in the corpus text
that match the soft pattern (Figs. 1c and 1d). Here, the soft pattern S1 S2 · · · Sn is the key data in
play. It consists of the set of vocabulary words that softly match each word of the pattern in terms of
word embeddings. The amount of soft computation (Step 1) is small, given that the vocabulary size
is typically much smaller than the size of the corpus text. The amount of hard computation (Step 2)
is also quite small, because it only handles filtered positions, not the whole corpus text.



3.2         D ETAILS

Problem formulation. First, we formulate the soft pattern-matching problem by simply relaxing
the classical hard (or exact) pattern-matching problem (Hakak et al., 2019) as follows:


                                                                     5
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 1: Our soft pattern-matching algorithm.
    Given : The corpus text t = t1 t2 · · · tN and its inverted index Iv ⊆ {1, . . . , N } over each vocabulary
             word v ∈ V such that i ∈ Iv if and only if v = ti .
    Input : The phrase pattern p = p1 p2 · · · pn and the threshold α ∈ (0, 1].
    Output : The set of soft match positions M ⊆ {1, . . . , N }, such that i ∈ M holds if and only if
             pk ≈α ti+k−1 holds over any k = 1, . . . , n.
   // Step 1: Soften the pattern p1 p2 · · · pn into the soft pattern S1 S2 · · · Sn
1  for k ← 1 . . . n do
 2     Sk ← ∅
 3     for v ∈ V do
 4         if v ≈α pk then Sk ← Sk ∪ {v}
   // Step 2-1: Get the soft inverted index I˜k by relaxing I with Sk
 5 for k ← 1 . . . n do
 6     I˜k ← ∅
 7     for v ∈ Sk do I˜k ← I˜k ∪ Iv
   // Step 2-2: Get the complete matching M by aggregating I˜k
 8 M ← I˜1

                                    i − (k − 1) i ∈ I˜k

 9 for k ← 2 . . . n do M ← M ∩
10 return M


     The soft pattern-matching problem.
     I NPUT: The corpus text t = t1 t2 · · · tN ∈ V ∗ , the pattern p = p1 p2 · · · pn ∈ V ∗ , and the
     threshold α ∈ (0, 1]
     O UTPUT: The set of soft match positions M with respect to the soft equivalence ≈α , i.e.,
     the set M = i ∈ {1, . . . , N } ∀ k ∈ {1, . . . , n}. pk ≈α ti+k−1
                                                                                        △
    We define here the soft equivalence v ≈α v ′ between words as v ≈α v ′ ⇐⇒ cos(E(v), E(v ′ )) ≥
    α, to capture the similarity in terms of word embeddings E. Here, we let V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vL } be
    the vocabulary and write E(v) ∈ RD for the word embedding of a word v ∈ V. Also, we write
                                                          e·e′
    cos(e, e′ ) for the cosine similarity cos(e, e′ ) ≜ ∥e∥∥e                             ′   D
                                                               ′ ∥ of word embeddings e, e ∈ R .


    Preprocessing. Before processing queries, our algorithm preprocesses the whole corpus text to
    compute the inverted index I (Fig. 1a), following a standard technique in search engine index-
    ing (Zobel & Moffat, 2006). The inverted index I maps each vocabulary word v ∈ V to the set of
    positions Iv ⊆  {1, . . . , N } that represents the occurences of the word v in the corpus text t, that is,
    the set Iv = i ∈ {1, . . . , N } v = ti .

    Our algorithm. Algorithm 1 and Figures 1b to 1d outline our algorithm for soft pattern matching.
    Our algorithm works in the following two steps:

          1. For each query, it performs soft computation over the vocabulary, softening the pattern
             p1 p2 · · · pn into the soft pattern S1 S2 · · · Sn (lines 1 to 4 in Algorithm 1, Figure 1b). Here,
             Sk is the set of vocabulary words that softly
                                                                 matches each word pk of the pattern in terms
             of the soft equivalence ≈α , i.e., Sk = v ∈ V v ≈α pk .
          2. Then, it performs hard computation that computes the exact set of positions M in the
             corpus text that matches the soft pattern S1 S2 · · · Sn by the following two sub-steps:
                                                     ˜
             2-1. Compute
                   ˜       S the soft inverted index I, which maps each pattern word pk to the union
                  Ik = v∈Sk Iv of the exact inverted index I over Sk (lines 5 to 7, Fig. 1c). The
                  set I˜k  agrees with the set of positions that softly match the pattern word pk , i.e.,
                  I˜k = i ∈ {1, . . . , N } ti ≈α pk .
                  Output  the set of soft matches M by computing the shifting intersection M =
             2-2. T
                     n                            ˜
                     k=1 i − (k − 1) i ∈ Ik             over the soft inverted index I˜ (lines 8 to 9,


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Fig. 1d). The resulting set precisely agrees with the expected set, i.e., M =            i ∈
               {1, . . . , N } ∀ k ∈ {1, . . . , n}. pk ≈α ti+k−1 .

We perform soft pattern matching using the index I. First, for each word pk in p, we construct the
set I˜k indicating the positions of the words in t matching pk (lines 1 to 4): we compare each word
v ∈ V in the vocabulary with pk (line 4); we add Iv to I˜k if we have v ≈α pk (line 7). Then, we
construct the result M by aggregating each I˜k considering the position k of pk in p.

Inverted index vs. Suffix array. Our algorithm uses an inverted index rather than a suffix ar-
ray (Yamamoto & Church, 2001), which is crucial. A suffix array manages exact sequences of char-
acters (or tokens) in the corpus text, for which softening patterns cannot be performed efficiently. In
contrast, entries of an inverted index Iv just have the occurrences of each word type v and can be
relaxed for soft matching simply by merging the sets, as illustrated in Fig. 1c.

3.3    F ORMAL ANALYSIS

How efficient is our algorithm? To answer this with theoretical guarantees, we analyze the time and
space complexity of the algorithm. Overall, the high-level observation is that the corpus text size N
affects the time and space required for preprocessing and soft matching only linearly.

Preprocessing. The time complexity for constructing the inverted index I is O(L×N ), consisting
of L × N exact word comparisons, since each vocabulary word v ∈ V is compared with each word
ti in the corpus text t. Notably, the constant factor here is typically very low, as only bitwise
comparison is required. The total space required to store the inverted index I is only O(N + L),
by simply storing the list of positions (of space O(|Iv |)) for each vocabulary word v ∈ V. This
Pbecause each position i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N } in the text t occurs exactly once in I and hence N =
is
   v∈V |Iv |. The space complexity is also O(N + L), since no extra space is required.


Soft matching. Step 1 for softening the pattern takes O(n × L) in time, where the dominant part
is n × L soft word comparisons (taking the cosine similarity of word embeddings) between
                                                                                      Pn each
pattern word pk and each vocabulary word v ∈ V (line 4). The space complexity is O( k=1 |Sk |).
Notably, the time and the space for Step 1 are independent of the corpus text size N . Step 2 for
finding the set of soft matches takes O(K) in time and space, where K is the total size of the soft
                      Pn
inverted index K ≜ k=1 |I˜k | (or roughly the total number of ‘candidate’ positions for matches).
Remarkably, this is only linear to the corpus text size N .

4     E MPIRICAL EVALUATION
We address the following research questions in the experiments:

    RQ1: Does SoftMatcha scale to a billion-scale corpus, which is the typical size of training
         corpus for large causal LMs? (Section 4.2)
    RQ2: Does SoftMatcha perform as expected in typical scenarios in NLP and corpus linguis-
         tics? (Sections 4.2 and 4.3)

4.1    I MPLEMENTATION

We implemented the algorithm in Section 3 as a tool named SoftMatcha.4 Our implementation
adopts the following designs for efficiency. Firstly, we design our inverted index using a sparse
matrix in a compressed sparse row (CSR) format to reduce memory consumption and enable efficient
access to the index for each word, i.e., Iv . The index I is represented by a one-dimensional array,
with the positions of each word contiguously allocated in memory. Secondly, we compile some
time-consuming operations to native code using NUMBA (Lam et al., 2015). Specifically, line 4 in
Algorithm 1 calculates word embedding similarities over n × L times, i.e., the time complexity is
   4
     The word Matcha means powdered green tea in Japanese and is here a pun for ‘matcher’. Matcha softo in
Japanese means soft-serve ice cream of green tea flavor.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O(n × L × D), where D is the dimension of each word embedding. To speed up this calculation,
we leverage the vectorized instruction set (SIMD) for parallel processing. In addition, finding the
intersection of two large sets in line 9 in Algorithm 1 is computationally expensive. We employ
just-in-time (JIT) compilation and parallel loops for efficient comparisons of elements. To ensure
reproducibility, we release our source code on GitHub (Footnote 1) and the package on PyPI5 .
We provide a demo environment (Footnote 2) for users to explore the capabilities of our method
and experience how diverse and linguistically natural the search results are and how quickly results
can be obtained. The corpora used in experiments in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 are available. To prevent
excessive output, for English and Japanese, only subsets of the corpora have been incorporated.
Furthermore, search results are presented in smaller batches—to improve usability—with additional
results available upon request, rather than all at once.

4.2      C ASE STUDY IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING — B ILLION - SCALE CORPUS SEARCH

In this section, we simulate scenarios where NLP researchers use SoftMatcha on billion-scale
English and Japanese corpora. We focus on two types of evaluations: (i) quantitative evaluation —
we assess the running time using large data comparable in size to those used for training standard
large LMs; and (ii) qualitative evaluation — we examine the tool’s effectiveness in detecting toxic
instances within large LM training corpora.

Why English and Japanese? English is the dominant language in modern NLP and accounts for
the largest portion of training data for large LMs (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Tou-
vron et al., 2023). In contrast, Japanese presents a typologically distinct language, with orthographic
and structural features that differ significantly from English, such as: (i) character types (alphabetic
vs. hiragana, katakana, and kanji); (ii) syntax (SVO vs. SOV, head-initial vs. head-final); and (iii)
word segmentation (space-separated vs. no word separation) (Haspelmath et al., 2005). Further-
more, the substantial size of Japanese corpora (Wikipedia, 2024) makes it suitable for testing the
scalability of our approach.

Setup. Corpora: we utilized the LLM-jp corpus v2.0 (LLM-jp et al., 2024), which con-
tains organized collections of Wikipedia articles in both English (3.4B words) and Japanese
(1.1B words). Word embeddings: we used GloVe glove-wiki-gigaword-300 (Penning-
ton et al., 2014) with a threshold α = 0.55 for the English word embeddings, and fastText
facebook/fasttext-ja-vectors (Grave et al., 2018) with a threshold α = 0.50 for the
Japanese word embeddings. Baseline methods: we compared the search results of SoftMatcha
with those of exact matching, i.e., pattern matching with a standard inverted index, and dense vector
search using intfloat/multilingual-e5-large model (Wang et al., 2024b). In dense vec-
tor search, we encoded each training instance6 in the corpus and built the graph-based index using
hierarchical navigable small worlds (HNSW) (Malkov & Yashunin, 2020) with the FAISS imple-
mentation (Douze et al., 2024) for the approximate nearest neighbor search. In HNSW, the number
of edges was 32, the efConstruction was set to 40, and efSearch was configured as 16 (Malkov &
Yashunin, 2020). We prepended the prefix “passage: ” to each instance and “query: ” to each query,
following Wang et al. (2024b), and truncated any instances that exceeded 512 tokens. The text
embeddings were calculated by averaging the contextualized token embeddings. Computational
environment: we measured the running time on 152 core CPUs (Intel® Xeon® Platinum 8368 CPU
@ 2.40GHz) and a 226 GiB main memory for the exact matching and SoftMatcha, and on 8
NVIDIA A100 GPUs for the dense vector search.

Running time. We measured the indexing time and search time in both the English and Japanese
Wikipedia articles. Table 2 demonstrates that SoftMatcha is faster than dense vector search
in both indexing and search time and takes the same indexing time as exact matching. Next, we
investigated the relationship between the search speed and the corpus size. We constructed subsets
of the English Wikipedia, whose sizes are {10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 } times that of the original corpus
of 3.4B tokens, by randomly sampling from the original corpus, and measured the search time with
each subset. Figure 2 shows the results. We observed that the search time increased only sublinearly,
   5
       PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/softmatcha
   6
       A training instance of LLM is a chunk of texts, which may consist of multiple sentences.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                     1
                                                                                10
Table 2: Running time (sec) of indexing and search in                                             0.55
                                                                                                  1.0
the English and Japanese Wikipedia articles.


                                                                   time (sec)
                        En (3.4B words)     Ja (1.1B words)                          2
                                                                                10
                        Indexing Search     Indexing Search
 Exact matching            685.8    0.005      242.5 0.022
                           685.8    0.098      242.5 0.055                                    3               2        1        0
 SoftMatcha                                                                              10              10       10       10
 Dense vector search      1036.5    0.389      320.4 0.283                              size ratio
                                                                     Figure 2: Running time on subsampled
                                                                     English Wikipedia corpora.

  Table 3: Results of billion-scale corpus search in the English and Japanese Wikipedia articles.

                       Exact matching       SoftMatcha                          Dense vector search
 Query: “homemade bombs” (2 tokens) in English Wikipedia (3.4B words)
  # Hits           107                  1,473                  n/a (depends on the top-k)
  Match examples homemade bombs homemade bombs                 Article: Survival Under Atomic Attack
                                        home-made grenades Article: Mark 24 nuclear bomb
                                        homemade missiles      Article: List of common misconceptions
 Query: “手製爆弾 (homemade bombs)” (2 tokens) in Japanese Wikipedia (1.1B words)
  # Hits         27                    42                     n/a (depends on the top-k)
  Match examples 手製爆弾                  手製爆弾                   Article: 花火 (fireworks)
                       (homemade bombs)     (homemade bombs)
                                            手製手榴弾                               Article: 手持ち花火 (consumer fireworks)
                                            (home-made grenades)


not linearly, with respect to the increase in corpus size. We thus confirmed that our algorithm works
effectively for billion-scale corpus searches.

Search results. Table 3 shows the results of the billion-scale corpus search. We queried “home-
made bombs” in the English Wikipedia corpus and “手製爆弾 (homemade bombs)” in the Japanese
Wikipedia corpus. In the dense vector search, we selected some retrieved examples from the top-10
search results. The table demonstrates that our SoftMatcha extends the exact matching. Note that
the results of exact matching are a subset of the results of SoftMatcha. In Japanese, the dense
vector search retrieved an article of “花火” (fireworks), which does not contain the contents related
to the query. In contrast, SoftMatcha lists all contents that have the query pattern or its similar
pattern. In addition, while dense vector search allows semantic similarity search, it cannot identify
where the query pattern is located in a text. To summarize, a text that exactly contains the query
pattern is not always retrieved in dense vector search, i.e., the recall is not always 100%, while exact
matching and SoftMatcha can return all texts that contain the query pattern, and SoftMatcha
also enables matching of semantically similar patterns.


4.3   C ASE STUDY IN CORPUS LINGUISTICS — R ETRIEVING L ATIN EXAMPLES

Why Latin? Latin is a morphologically complex fusional language where a lemma (dictionary
form) may exhibit numerous different word forms depending on the morphological features (e.g.,
voice, mood, tense, aspect, person, and number for verbals; gender, number, and case for nominals)
that the word bears. For example, a transitive verb may conjugate to more than 100 different finite
verb forms. This morphological complexity makes it harder to search through a corpus by exact
matching. Furthermore, due to Latin’s philological significance and the vast body of accumulated
literature, there has been a persistent demand for advanced search tools to facilitate corpus analysis
(Bamman & Smith, 2012). For these reasons, Latin is a suitable touchstone to test the utility of our
proposed soft pattern matcher, particularly for humanities researchers and language learners.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Latin match examples by SoftMatcha with queries factus est ‘he/it was
done/finished/made’ and equus est ‘it is a horse’. The top row of an interlinear gloss represents
words (and the cosine similarity between the matched word and its corresponding query word), the
middle row their morphological analysis, and the bottom row the free translation. Morphological
matches are highlighted in pink, semantics matches in blue, and exact matches in green.

                          Query                                                     Query
 factus                               est                         equus                  est
 do.PASS . PF. PTCP - M . NOM . SG    be.IND . PRS .3 SG          horse.M . NOM . SG     be.IND . PRS .3 SG
 ‘he/it is done/finished/made’                                    ‘it is a horse’
                         Matches                                                    Matches
 0.56                                 0.56                        0.48                   1.00
 facta                               sunt                         bos                    est
 do.PASS . PF . PTCP - N . NOM . PL  be.IND . PRS .3 PL           cow.F. NOM . SG        be.IND . PRS .3 SG
 ‘they are done’ or ‘they are facts’                              ‘it is a cow.’
 0.53                                 0.58                        0.44                   0.63
 mortuus                              esset                       currus                 fuit
 die.ACT. PF . PTCP - M . NOM . SG    be.SUB . IMPF.3 SG          chariot.M . NOM . SG   be.IND . PF.3 SG
 ‘he/it was dead’                                                 ‘it was a chariot’
 0.65                                 0.65                        0.49                   0.58
 creatus                                erat                      Minotaurus            esset
 create.PASS . PF . PTCP - M . NOM . SG be.IND . IMPF.3 SG        Minotaur.M . NOM . SG be.SUB . IMPF.3 SG
 ‘he/it was created’                                              ‘it would be the Minotaur’


Setup. Corpora: we used two corpora: one from the Perseus Project (Crane, 2023)
(5M tokens) and the Augustinian Sermon Parallelism (ASP) Dataset (Bothwell et al.,
2023) (0.1M tokens). Word embeddings: we used the pre-trained fastText embeddings
facebook/fasttext-la-vectors (Grave et al., 2018).


Search results. Table 4 shows the returned matches with the queries factus est (‘it/he is done’ or
‘it/he is made’) and equus est (‘it is a horse’). It is evident that SoftMatcha effectively links the
queries to semantically similar words, as seen in mortuus ‘dead’ and creatus ‘created’ matched with
the query factus ‘done, finished, made’, and bos ‘cow’, currus ‘chariot’, and Minotaurus ‘Minotaur’
with equus ‘horse’. Interestingly, the tool is also able to catch different word forms with different
morphological features while sharing the same lemma, which are highlighted in pink. For example,
although the Latin copula verb in the query est ‘is’ exhibits highly irregular conjugation patterns, the
matches successfully include their inflected forms such as sunt, esset, erat, and fuit. Furthermore,
the matches mortuus and creatus are not only semantically similar to the query word factus but also
have morphological features in common (perfect, participle, masculine, nominative, and singular).



5       C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a new pattern-matching algorithm that can flexibly handle the orthographic
diversity of natural languages while also performing efficiently on large-scale corpora. Our algo-
rithm, combining word embeddings and inverted indexing, achieves inference speed independent
of corpus size. We have also developed and released a simple-to-use web demo for researchers
and practitioners. For quantitative evaluation, we confirm that the developed tool can enumerate
all search results within one second on billion-scale corpora, a typical scenario in training large
LMs. For qualitative evaluation, we assess the tool in typical scenarios in NLP (detecting harmful
examples from large-scale Japanese and English Wikipedia corpora) and computational linguistics
(example retrieval from Latin, a language with highly diverse inflections), observing that our method
can retrieve semantically similar examples that hard pattern matchers would miss.

                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We conducted experiments using the language and computational resources of LLM-jp (https:
//llm-jp.nii.ac.jp). This research was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI JP24KJ0133,
JSPS KAKENHI JP23K24910, JST ACT-X JPMJAX200S, JST ACT-X JPMJAX200U, JST FOR-
EST JPMJFR2331, JST PREST JPMJPR22CA, and JST CREST JPMJCR2012.


E THICS S TATEMENT

The corpora used for training large LMs, composed of web corpora, including Common Crawl
(Common Crawl, 2024) and digitized book data such as (Zhu et al., 2015), can be said to encompass
a substantial portion of humanity’s linguistic knowledge. Inevitably, these corpora include a signifi-
cant amount of ethically problematic content. This includes personal information (Subramani et al.,
2023), as well as information that could be “beneficial” for violence and terrorism (or in more con-
ventional terms, harmful information) (Albalak et al., 2024). Moreover, as these corpora continue to
grow exponentially and our languages possess numerous paraphrases, comprehensively identifying
such harmful learning resources is far from a simple task. Our research aims to substantially simplify
this crucial activity for human ethics: identifying harmful learning instances within vast linguistic
resources Section 4.2. We hope that, by leveraging our tool, NLP researchers and developers will
contribute to providing LLMs as a safe and reliable social infrastructure.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Our source code is available on GitHub (Footnote 1), and we released an installable package on
PyPI (Footnote 5). In all experiments, we used open datasets. Further details on the embeddings,
corpora, computational environment, and protocols used in experiments are explained in Section 4.


R EFERENCES
Alon Albalak, Yanai Elazar, Sang Michael Xie, Shayne Longpre, Nathan Lambert, Xinyi Wang,
  Niklas Muennighoff, Bairu Hou, Liangming Pan, Haewon Jeong, Colin Raffel, Shiyu Chang,
  Tatsunori Hashimoto, and William Yang Wang. A Survey on Data Selection for Language Models.
  arXiv [cs.CL], 26 February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16827.

Laurence Anthony. A critical look at software tools in corpus linguistics. Linguistic Research, 30
  (2):141–161, 2013.

Orlando Ayala and Patrice Bechard. Reducing hallucination in structured outputs via retrieval-
  augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 6: Indus-
  try Track), pp. 228–238, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.naacl-industry.19.pdf.

John Bambenek and Agnieszka Klus. Grep Pocket Reference: A Quick Pocket Reference for a Utility
  Every UNIX User Needs. O’Reilly Media, 2009.

David Bamman and David Smith. Extracting two thousand years of latin from a million book library.
  J. Comput. Cult. Herit., 5(1), April 2012. ISSN 1556-4673. doi: 10.1145/2160165.2160167. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/2160165.2160167.

Ezio Bartocci, Yliès Falcone, Adrian Francalanza, and Giles Reger. Introduction to runtime verifi-
  cation. In Lectures on Runtime Verification, volume 10457 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
  pp. 1–33. Springer, 2018.

Michael Bendersky, Honglei Zhuang, Ji Ma, Shuguang Han, Keith Hall, and Ryan McDonald.
 Rrf102: Meeting the trec-covid challenge with a 100+ runs ensemble, 2020. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2010.00200.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Douglas Biber. Corpus-Based and Corpus-Driven Analyses of Language Variation and Use. In The
  Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Analysis. Oxford Academic, 2nd edition, 2015. doi: 10.1093/
  oxfordhb/9780199677078.013.0008.
Stella Biderman, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony,
  Shivanshu Purohit, and Edward Raff. Emergent and Predictable Memorization in Large Language
  Models, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11158.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hal-
  lahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya
  Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar van der Wal. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large
  language models across training and scaling. arXiv [cs.CL], 3 April 2023b. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2304.01373.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors
  with subword information. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 5:135–146, December 2017. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/Q17-1010.pdf.
Stephen Bothwell, Justin DeBenedetto, Theresa Crnkovich, Hildegund Müller, and David Chiang.
  Introducing Rhetorical Parallelism Detection: A New Task with Datasets, Metrics, and Base-
  lines. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5007–5039, Singapore, December
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.305. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.305.
Robert S. Boyer and J Strother Moore. A Fast String Searching Algorithm. Commun. ACM, 20
  (10):762–772, 1977. doi: 10.1145/359842.359859. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  359842.359859.
Leonid Boytsov. Indexing methods for approximate dictionary searching: Comparative analysis.
  ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics, 16(1), 2011.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
  Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.      Language Models are
  Few-Shot Learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Michael Burrows, D J Wheeler D I G I T A L, Robert W. Taylor, David J. Wheeler, and David
 Wheeler. A block-sorting lossless data compression algorithm. 1994. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2167441.
Julius Caesar. Commentarii de bello gallico. With explanatory notes, lexicon, maps, indexes, etc.
  Eldredge & Brother, Philadelphia, 1882.
Yi-Pei Chen, Noriki Nishida, Hideki Nakayama, and Yuji Matsumoto. Recent Trends in Person-
  alized Dialogue Generation: A Review of Datasets, Methodologies, and Evaluations. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language
  Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pp. 13650–13665, 2024. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.1192.pdf.
Yuanyuan Chen, Boyang Li, Han Yu, Pengcheng Wu, and Chunyan Miao. HyDRA: Hypergra-
  dient Data Relevance Analysis for Interpreting Deep Neural Networks. Proc. Conf. AAAI Ar-
  tif. Intell., 35(8):7081–7089, 18 May 2021. URL https://cdn.aaai.org/ojs/16871/
  16871-13-20365-1-2-20210518.pdf.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with Pathways.
  arXiv [cs.CL], 5 April 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311.
Common Crawl. Common Crawl - Open Repository of Web Crawl Data, 2024. URL https:
  //commoncrawl.org/.
Matthew Coole, Paul Rayson, and John Mariani. LexiDB: Patterns & Methods for Corpus Linguis-
 tic Database Management. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation
 Conference, pp. 3128–3135, 2020. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.
 383.pdf.
Gregory Crane. The Perseus Digital Library and the future of libraries. International Journal on
  Digital Libraries, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s00799-022-00333-2.
Chris Culy and Verena Lyding. Double Tree: An Advanced KWIC Visualization for Expert Users.
  In 2010 14th International Conference Information Visualisation, pp. 98–103, 2010. doi: 10.
  1109/IV.2010.24.
Daniel De Freitas. Announcing our Series A and our new AI model, C1.2. https://blog.
  character.ai/character-ai/, 23 March 2023. Accessed: 2024-10-1.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4171–4186,
  Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2019a. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/N19-1423.pdf.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019b. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1423/.
Jan Don. Morphological theory and the morphology of English. Edinburgh University Press, 2014.
  doi: 10.1515/9780748645145.
Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-
 Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. The Faiss library, 2024.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08281.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand,
  Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
  Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples,
  Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco,
  Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman,
  Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto
  De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
  [cs.AI], 31 July 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

David Embick. The morpheme: A theoretical introduction. De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin, München,
  Boston, 2015. doi: 10.1515/9781501502569.

Paolo Ferragina and Giovanni Manzini. Indexing compressed text. J. ACM, 52(4):552–581, July
  2005. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/1082036.1082039. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/1082036.1082039.

Andrew Gallant. ripgrep: ripgrep recursively searches directories for a regex pattern while respect-
  ing your gitignore, 2024. URL https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep.

Juri Ganitkevitch, Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch. PPDB: The Paraphrase
  Database. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 758–764, 2013.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/N13-1092.pdf.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
  An 800GB dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv [cs.CL], 31 December 2020.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.00027.

Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng
  Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey.
  arXiv [cs.CL], 18 December 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10997.

Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. Real-
  ToxicityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 3356–3369, Stroudsburg,
  PA, USA, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.301.pdf.

Adrien Grand, Robert Muir, Jim Ferenczi, and Jimmy Lin. From MAXSCORE to Block-Max Wand:
  The Story of How Lucene Significantly Improved Query Evaluation Performance. In ECIR (2),
  volume 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 20–27. Springer, 2020.

Edouard Grave, Piotr Bojanowski, Prakhar Gupta, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Learning
  Word Vectors for 157 Languages, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.06893.

Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. A Survey on Automated Fact-Checking.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:178–206, 2022. doi: 10.1162/
  tacl a 00454. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.11.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. REALM: Retrieval-
  Augmented Language Model Pre-Training. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020.
Le Quan Ha, Philip Hanna, Ji Ming, and F. J. Smith. Extending Zipf’s law to n-grams for large
  corpora. Artificial Intelligence Review, 2009. doi: 10.1007/s10462-009-9135-4.
Saqib Hakak, Amirrudin Kamsin, Palaiahnakote Shivakumara, Gulshan Amin Gilkar, Wazir Zada
  Khan, and Muhammad Imran. Exact String Matching Algorithms: Survey, Issues, and Future
  Research Directions. IEEE Access, 7:69614–69637, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2914071.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2914071.
Martin Haspelmath, Martin S Dryer, David Gil, and Bernard Comrie. The World Atlas of Language
 Structures. Oxford University Press, London, England, 21 July 2005.
H. S. Heap. Information retrieval: Computational and theoretical aspects. Libr. Q., 50(1):153–154,
  January 1980. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/629887.
Susan Hockey and Jeremy Martin. The Oxford Concordance Program version 2. Literary and
  Linguistic Computing, 2(2):125–131, January 1987. doi: 10.1093/llc/2.2.125.
Jie Huang, Hanyin Shao, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Are Large Pre-Trained Language Models
   Leaking Your Personal Information? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
   tics: EMNLP 2022, pp. 2038–2047, December 2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/
   2022.findings-emnlp.148.pdf.
Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramer, Milad Nasr, Chiyuan Zhang, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee,
  Christopher Choquette Choo, and Nicholas Carlini. Preventing generation of verbatim memoriza-
  tion in language models gives a false sense of privacy. In C. Maria Keet, Hung-Yi Lee, and Sina
  Zarrieß (eds.), Proceedings of the 16th International Natural Language Generation Conference,
  pp. 28–53, Prague, Czechia, September 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/2023.inlg-main.3. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.inlg-main.3.
Masaru Isonuma and Ivan Titov. Unlearning Traces the Influential Training Data of Language Mod-
 els. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6312–6325, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2024. Association for Compu-
 tational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.343.pdf.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
  Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised Dense Information Retrieval with Contrastive Learn-
  ing, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.09118.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot Learning
  with Retrieval Augmented Language Models. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24(1), March 2024. ISSN
  1532-4435.
Hervé Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. Product Quantization for Nearest Neighbor
  Search. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(1):117–128, 2011.
Kim Ebensgaard Jensen. Linguistics in digital humanities: (computational) corpus linguistics.
  MedieKultur: Journal of Media and Communication Research, 30(57), 2014. doi: 10.7146/
  mediekultur.v30i57.15968.
Leonard B Jung, Jonas A Gudera, Tim L T Wiegand, Simeon Allmendinger, Konstantinos Dimi-
  triadis, and Inga K Koerte. ChatGPT Passes German State Examination in Medicine With Pic-
  ture Questions Omitted. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int., 120(21):373–374, 30 May 2023. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.m2023.0113.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural
  Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition with Language Mod-
  els. 3rd edition, 2024. URL https://web.stanford.edu/˜jurafsky/slp3/. Online
  manuscript released August 20, 2024.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Richard M. Karp and Michael O. Rabin. Efficient Randomized Pattern-Matching Algorithms. IBM
  J. Res. Dev., 31(2):249–260, 1987.

Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain Question Answering. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), pp. 6769–6781, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.550. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.emnlp-main.550.

Daniel Martin Katz, Michael James Bommarito, Shang Gao, and Pablo Arredondo. GPT-4 Passes
  the Bar Exam. Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 382(2270):20230254, 15 April 2024. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2023.0254.

Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. General-
  ization through Memorization: Nearest Neighbor Language Models. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  HklBjCEKvH.

Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. ColBERT: Efficient and Effective Passage Search via Contextu-
 alized Late Interaction over BERT. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Confer-
 ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, New York, NY, USA, 25 July 2020.
 ACM. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3397271.3401075.

Donald E. Knuth, James H. Morris Jr., and Vaughan R. Pratt. Fast pattern matching in strings. SIAM
  J. Comput., 6(2):323–350, 1977.

Tatsuru Kobayashi and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Taylor’s law for Human Linguistic Sequences. In
  Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 1138–1148, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2018. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1105.pdf.

Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. Understanding Black-box Predictions via Influence Functions.
  arXiv [stat.ML], 14 March 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04730.

Sachin Kumar, Vidhisha Balachandran, Lucille Njoo, Antonios Anastasopoulos, and Yulia Tsvetkov.
  Language Generation Models Can Cause Harm: So What Can We Do About It? An Actionable
  Survey. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 3299–3321, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2023. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.241.
  pdf.

Siu Kwan Lam, Antoine Pitrou, and Stanley Seibert. Numba: a LLVM-based Python JIT compiler.
  In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure in HPC, LLVM ’15,
  New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450340052. doi:
  10.1145/2833157.2833162. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2833157.2833162.

B Langmead, C Trapnell, M Pop, and S Salzberg. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of
  short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol, 10:R25, 2009. doi: 10.1186/
  gb-2009-10-3-r25.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-Tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. arXiv [cs.CL],
  22 May 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401.

Haoran Li, Dadi Guo, Wei Fan, Mingshi Xu, Jie Huang, Fanpu Meng, and Yangqiu Song. Multi-
  step Jailbreaking Privacy Attacks on ChatGPT. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 4138–4153, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, December 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-emnlp.272.pdf.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiacheng Liu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Infini-gram:
   Scaling Unbounded n-gram Language Models to a Trillion Tokens. arXiv [cs.CL], 30 January
   2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17377.

LLM-jp, :, Akiko Aizawa, Eiji Aramaki, Bowen Chen, Fei Cheng, Hiroyuki Deguchi, Rintaro
  Enomoto, Kazuki Fujii, Kensuke Fukumoto, Takuya Fukushima, Namgi Han, Yuto Harada,
  Chikara Hashimoto, Tatsuya Hiraoka, Shohei Hisada, Sosuke Hosokawa, Lu Jie, Keisuke Ka-
  mata, Teruhito Kanazawa, Hiroki Kanezashi, Hiroshi Kataoka, Satoru Katsumata, Daisuke Kawa-
  hara, Seiya Kawano, Atsushi Keyaki, Keisuke Kiryu, Hirokazu Kiyomaru, Takashi Kodama,
  Takahiro Kubo, Yohei Kuga, Ryoma Kumon, Shuhei Kurita, Sadao Kurohashi, Conglong Li, Taiki
  Maekawa, Hiroshi Matsuda, Yusuke Miyao, Kentaro Mizuki, Sakae Mizuki, Yugo Murawaki,
  Ryo Nakamura, Taishi Nakamura, Kouta Nakayama, Tomoka Nakazato, Takuro Niitsuma, Jiro
  Nishitoba, Yusuke Oda, Hayato Ogawa, Takumi Okamoto, Naoaki Okazaki, Yohei Oseki, Shin-
  taro Ozaki, Koki Ryu, Rafal Rzepka, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Shota Sasaki, Satoshi Sekine, Kohei
  Suda, Saku Sugawara, Issa Sugiura, Hiroaki Sugiyama, Hisami Suzuki, Jun Suzuki, Toyotaro
  Suzumura, Kensuke Tachibana, Yu Takagi, Kyosuke Takami, Koichi Takeda, Masashi Takeshita,
  Masahiro Tanaka, Kenjiro Taura, Arseny Tolmachev, Nobuhiro Ueda, Zhen Wan, Shuntaro Yada,
  Sakiko Yahata, Yuya Yamamoto, Yusuke Yamauchi, Hitomi Yanaka, Rio Yokota, and Koichiro
  Yoshino. LLM-jp: A Cross-organizational Project for the Research and Development of Fully
  Open Japanese LLMs, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03963.

Nils Lukas, Ahmed Salem, Robert Sim, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-
  Béguelin. Analyzing Leakage of Personally Identifiable Information in Language Models. In
  2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, May 2023. URL http://dx.
  doi.org/10.1109/sp46215.2023.10179300.

Yu A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search
  Using Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 42
  (4):824–836, April 2020. ISSN 0162-8828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473.

Tony McEnery and Andrew Hardie. Corpus Linguistics: Method, Theory and Practice. Cambridge
  University Press, 2011.

Tony McEnery and Andrew Wilson. Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh,
  2001. doi: 10.1515/9781474470865.

Barbara Mcgillivray, Thierry Poibeau, and Pablo Ruiz. Digital Humanities and Natural Language
  Processing: “Je t’aime... Moi non plus”. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 14(2), 2020. doi: 10.
  17863/CAM.55816.

Kathleen R McKeown. Paraphrasing Using Given and New Information in a Question-Answer
  System. In Proceedings of the 17th annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics
  -, pp. 67–72, Morristown, NJ, USA, 1979. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/P79-1016.pdf.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient Estimation of Word Rep-
  resentations in Vector Space. arXiv [cs.CL], 16 January 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1301.3781.

D. Lee Miller. Wordllama: Recycled token embeddings from large language models, 2024. URL
  https://github.com/dleemiller/wordllama.

Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loic Magne, and Nils Reimers. MTEB: Massive text em-
  bedding benchmark. In Andreas Vlachos and Isabelle Augenstein (eds.), Proceedings of the 17th
  Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2014–
  2037, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2023.eacl-main.148. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.148/.

Gonzalo Navarro. A Guided Tour to Approximate String Matching. ACM Comput. Surv., 33(1):
  31–88, 2001.

                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI.       Introducing OpenAI o1.         https://openai.com/index/
  introducing-openai-o1-preview/, 12 September 2024. Accessed: 2024-10-1.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word
   representation. In Alessandro Moschitti, Bo Pang, and Walter Daelemans (eds.), Proceedings
   of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
   1532–1543, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
   3115/v1/D14-1162. URL https://aclanthology.org/D14-1162.

Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan. Estimating Training Data
  Influence by Tracing Gradient Descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:19920–19930, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2020/file/e6385d39ec9394f2f3a354d9d2b88eec-Paper.pdf.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. 2019.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-
  Text Transformer. arXiv [cs.LG], 23 October 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.
  10683.

Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard
 Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret, Peter Liu, Pouya
 Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Charline Le Lan, Sammy
 Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin, Nikola Momchev, Matt
 Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur, Olivier Bachem, Alanna
 Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison, Alvin Abdagic,
 Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge, Antonia Paterson, Ben
 Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar, Chris Perry, Chris
 Welty, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger, Dimple Vijayku-
 mar, Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang, Eric Noland, Erica
 Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin, Gary Wei, Glenn
 Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen Batra, Harsh Dhand,
 Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha Chan, Jin Peng
 Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost van Amersfoort,
 Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju-Yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed, Kartikeya Badola,
 Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia, Kish Greene,
 Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago, Lilly Mc-
 Nealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel Reid,
 Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow,
 Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moyni-
 han, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao,
 Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil
 Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culli-
 ton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni,
 Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M R
 Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan,
 Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain,
 Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye,
 Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta,
 Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral,
 Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol
 Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya,
 Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek
 Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving Open Language Models at a Practical Size. arXiv [cs.CL], 31 July
 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.

Kirk Roberts, Tasmeer Alam, Steven Bedrick, Dina Demner-Fushman, Kyle Lo, Ian Soboroff, Ellen
  Voorhees, Lucy Lu Wang, and William R. Hersh. Searching for scientific evidence in a pandemic:

                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  An overview of trec-covid. J. of Biomedical Informatics, 121(C), September 2021. ISSN 1532-
  0464. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103865. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2021.
  103865.
Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and beyond.
  Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 3(4):333–389, April 2009. ISSN 1554-0669. doi: 10.1561/1500000019.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000019.
Marek Rogozinski and Rafal Kuc. Elasticsearch Server, 3rd edition. Packt Publishing, 2016.
Timo Schick, Sahana Udupa, and Hinrich Schütze. Self-Diagnosis and Self-Debiasing: A Proposal
  for Reducing Corpus-Based Bias in NLP. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 9:1408–1424, 17 De-
  cember 2021. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.tacl-1.84.pdf.
Sarah Schulz. The Taming of the Shrew: Non-Standard Text Processing in the Digital Humanities.
  PhD thesis, University of Stuttgart, 2018.
Martin Schweinberger. Concordancing with R. https://ladal.edu.au/kwics.html,
 2024.
Satoshi Sekine. A Linguistic Knowledge Discovery Tool: Very Large Ngram Database Search with
  Arbitrary Wildcards. In Coling 2008: Companion volume: Demonstrations, pp. 181–184, 2008.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/C08-3010.pdf.
Satoshi Sekine and Kapil Dalwani. Ngram Search Engine with Patterns Combining Token, POS,
  Chunk and NE Information. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Lan-
  guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10), 2010. URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/
  proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/158_Paper.pdf.
Frank Smadja. Retrieving Collocations from Text:           Xtract, 1993.      URL https://
  aclanthology.org/J93-1007.pdf.
Nishant Subramani, Sasha Luccioni, Jesse Dodge, and Margaret Mitchell. Detecting Personal In-
  formation in Training Corpora: an Analysis. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Trustwor-
  thy Natural Language Processing (TrustNLP 2023), pp. 208–220, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2023.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  trustnlp-1.18.pdf.
TEI Consortium. TEI P5: Guidelines for electronic text encoding and interchange, 2023. URL
  https://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models.
  arXiv [cs.CL], 18 July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
Janneke Van Der Zwaan, Wouter Smink, Anneke Sools, Gerben Westerhof, Bernard Veldkamp,
  and Sytske Wiegersma. Flexible NLP Pipelines for Digital Humanities Research. In 4th Digital
  Humanities Benelux Conference, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2017.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, Linjun Yang, Daxin Jiang, Rangan Ma-
  jumder, and Furu Wei. Text Embeddings by Weakly-Supervised Contrastive Pre-training, 2024a.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03533.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Mul-
  tilingual e5 text embeddings: A technical report, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2402.05672.

Yuxia Wang, Revanth Gangi Reddy, Zain Muhammad Mujahid, Arnav Arora, Aleksandr Ruba-
  shevskii, Jiahui Geng, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Liangming Pan, Nadav Borenstein, Aditya Pil-
  lai, Isabelle Augenstein, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. Factcheck-bench: Fine-grained
  evaluation benchmark for automatic fact-checkers, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.09000.

Wikipedia. Wikipedia:Multilingual statistics, 2024. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/
 wiki/Wikipedia:Multilingual_statistics.

Sam Witteveen and Martin Andrews. Paraphrasing with Large Language Models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Neural Generation and Translation, pp. 215–220, Strouds-
  burg, PA, USA, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/D19-5623.pdf.

Sun Wu and Udi Manber. Fast Text Searching Allowing Errors. Commun. ACM, 35(10):83–
  91, 1992a. doi: 10.1145/135239.135244. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/135239.
  135244.

Sun Wu and Udi Manber. Agrep – A Fast Approximate Pattern-Matching Tool. In 1992 Winter
  USENIX Conference, 1992b.

Mikio Yamamoto and Kenneth W Church. Using Suffix Arrays to Compute Term Frequency and
 Document Frequency for All Substrings in a Corpus. Comput. Linguist. Assoc. Comput. Linguist.,
 27(1):1–30, March 2001. URL https://aclanthology.org/J01-1001.pdf.

Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Tor-
  ralba, and Sanja Fidler. Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explana-
  tions by Watching Movies and Reading Books. arXiv [cs.CV], 22 June 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1506.06724.

George Kingsley Zipf. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Human
  Ecology. Am. J. Psychol., 64(1):149, January 1951. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/
  1418618.

Justin Zobel and Alistair Moffat. Inverted Files for Text Search Engines. ACM Comput. Surv., 38(2):
  6, 2006. doi: 10.1145/1132956.1132959. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1132956.
  1132959.


A    OTHER EXAMPLES OF SOFT MATCHES IN L ATIN

Table 5 shows several additional examples of Latin soft matches by SoftMatcha.


B    L IST OF G LOSSING A BBREVIATIONS

Table 6 lists the glossing abbreviations used in this paper.


C    W EB I NTERFACE

Figures 3 to 5 shows screenshots of our demo tool.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Additional examples of soft matches in Latin and their scores returned by SoftMatcha.
The top row of an interlinear gloss represents words (and the cosine similarity between the word and
its corresponding query word), the middle row their morphological analysis, and the bottom row
the free translation. Morphological matches are highlighted in pink, semantic matches in blue, and
exact matches in green.


                     Query                                       Query8
non                   potest                 bellum           gallicum
not                   can.IND . PRS .3 SG    war.N - NOM . SG gallic-N . NOM . SG
‘he/she/it cannot’                           ‘the Gallic war’
                   Matches                                      Matches
1.00                  0.59                   1.00             0.44
non                   possit                 bellum           etruscum
not                   can.SUB . PRS .3 SG    war.N - NOM . SG Etruscan-N . NOM . SG
‘he/she/it cannot’                           ‘the Etruscan war’
0.53                  0.52                   0.49             0.45
nec                   posse                  contra           Caesarem
nor                   can.INF. PRS           against          Caesar.M-ACC . SG
‘not to be able’                             ‘against Caesar’

                     Query                                       Query9
homo               sapiens                   quo             vadis
human.M . NOM . SG wise.M . NOM . SG         where           go.IND . PRS .2 SG
‘a wise human’                               ‘where do you go’
                   Matches                                      Matches
1.00                  0.39                   0.42             1.00
homo               honestus                  ibi              vadis
human.M . NOM . SG noble-M . NOM . SG        there            go.IND . PRS .2 SG
‘an honorable human’                         ‘you go there’
0.47                  0.40                   0.50             0.48
vir                   sincerus               autem           vocaris
man.M . NOM . SG      pure-M . NOM . SG      but             summon-PASS.IND . PRS .2 SG
‘a pure man’                                 ‘but you are summoned’

                   Query7                                               Query10
post                  meridiem               quod            erat               demonstrandum
after                 noon.M . ACC . SG      which           be.IND . IMPF.3 SG show.GER - N . NOM . SG
‘after noon’                                 ‘which was to be shown’
                   Matches                                              Matches
0.68                  1.00                   0.46             1.00                  0.41
ante                  meridiem               haec             erat               forma
before                noon.M . ACC . SG      this.F. NOM . SG be.IND . IMPF.3 SG form.F. NOM . SG
‘before noon’                                ‘this was the form’
0.51                  0.52                   1.00             0.54                  0.47
contra             septentrionem             quod            postea                 accipiamus
against            Ursa.Major.F. ACC . SG    which           afterwards             accept.ACT. SUB . PRS .1 PL
‘against Ursa Major’, i.e., ‘facing north’   ‘which we shall accept later’


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Table 6: List of the gloss abbreviations used in this paper.

                                            Gloss               Meaning
                                            1, 2, 3             1st, 2nd, 3rd person, respectively
                                            ACC                 accusative
                                            ACT                 active voice
                                            F                   feminine (gender)
                                            FUT                 future
                                            GER                 gerundive
                                            IMPF                imperfective
                                            IND                 indicative mood
                                            M                   masculinie (gender)
                                            N                   neuter (gender)
                                            NOM                 nominative case
                                            PASS                passive voice
                                            PF                  perfective
                                            PL                  plural
                                            PRS                 present tense
                                            PTCP                participle
                                            SG                  singular
                                            SUB                 subjunctive mood

                                                                    March 1 , 2016                                                                         Search
                                                                    wikitext103 (0.1B) | glove-wiki-gigaword-300
                                                                   Threshold: 0.5
                     Examples
                    theorem 1 march 1, 2016 John was born in                    海鮮丼        言語の普遍性             フランスでは            factus est equus est
                    bellum Gallicum

                     Results                                                                                                                 Hits:         7738
                                                                                                                                             Search Time: 0.317 sec
                    In 2015 , Fey created and produced the television comedy Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt with fellow 30 Rock-alumnus Robert
                    Carlock . The series stars Ellie Kemper as the titular character who escapes from a doomsday cult and moves to New York . It
                    also stars Fey 's former co-star Jane Krakowski , as well as Tituss Burgess ( who had previously appeared in four 30 Rock
                    episodes ) and Carol Kane . Although it was originally produced                for NBC , it was eventually sold to Netflix and immediately
                                                                                          1.00 0.811.00 0.67
                    renewed for a second season . The show premiered on March 6 , 2015 to critical acclaim .
                         0.91 0.60 1.00 0.67
                    On July 16 , 2015 , the series was nominated for seven Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Comedy Series .
                    Fey herself was nominated both as the creator / executive producer of the series and for Outstanding Guest Actress in a
                    Comedy Series for her guest performance as Marcia , a bumbling prosecutor in reference to Marcia Clark .
                    In 2015 , it was0.93 announced
                                             0.56 1.00 0.67
                                                            Fey would be the narrator for the Disney Nature film Monkey Kingdom , which was released in
                    theaters on April 17 , 2015 . She then re-teamed with Poehler , starring in the 2015 comedy film Sisters as the title
                    characters , and received positive reviews for her role . In 2016 , Fey starred in the biographical war comedy-drama Whiskey
                    Tango Foxtrot , based on the memoir The Taliban Shuffle : Strange Days in Afghanistan and Pakistan , to positive reviews .
                    The album was completed on November 2013 , and a bonus disc was also made for the album , containing the leftover
                    material from the main album as well as songs from Ghost 2 , the unreleased compilation of leftover tracks from Ghost .
                    Originally in 2012 , Townsend stated that this album will be the sixth and the last album in the Devin Townsend Project series
                    , but he ultimately confirmed that Casualties of Cool is its own project . Townsend also started a crowdfunding campaign
                    through PledgeMusic to support the release of the album . The funding quickly reached its0.64goal0.58,1.00and0.74all additional funds
                    were put directly to Townsend 's upcoming projects . Casualties of Cool was released on May 14 , 2014 . The album was re-

Figure 3: The screenshot of our demo. Given the query “March 1, 2016”, it returns lines including
softly-matched patterns such as “July 16, 2015.”


D       E FFECTS OF VARYING THRESHOLDS ON SEARCH TIME AND RESULTS

We inspected the relationship between the value of α , search time, and the number of matched
entries for the query “homemade bomb”. We varied the threshold parameter, i.e., α from
    7
       p.m.
    8
       book by Caesar (1882)
     9
       Bible, John 13:36
    10
       Q.E.D.


                                                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Theorem 1                                                                           Search
                                                               wikitext103 (0.1B) | glove-wiki-gigaword-300
                                                              Threshold: 0.5
                  Examples
                  theorem 1 march 1, 2016 John was born in 海鮮丼 言語の普遍性 フランスでは factus est equus est
                  bellum Gallicum

                  Results                                                                                                         Hits:          7
                                                                                                                                  Search Time: 0.132 sec
                 Since A-K-L is a straight line , parallel to BD , then rectangle BDLK has twice the area of triangle ABD because they share the 0
                 base   BD and have the same altitude BK , i.e. , a line normal to their common base , connecting the parallel lines BD and AL . ( le
                   .66 0.93
                 mma 2 )
                 Surface diffusion kinetics can be thought of in terms of adatoms residing at adsorption sites on a 2D lattice , moving between
                 adjacent ( nearest-neighbor ) adsorption sites by a jumping process . The jump rate is characterized by an attempt frequency
                 and a thermodynamic factor that dictates the probability of an attempt resulting in a successful jump . The attempt frequency
                 ν is typically taken to be simply the vibrational frequency of the adatom , while the 0.51thermodynamic
                                                                                                                1.00
                                                                                                                            factor is a Boltzmann factor
                 dependent on temperature and Ediff , the potential energy barrier to diffusion . Equation 1 describes the relationship :
                 Where ν and Ediff are as described above , Γ is the jump or hopping rate , T is temperature , and kB is the Boltzmann constant .
                 Ediff must be smaller0.51
                                           than
                                            1.00
                                                 the energy of desorption for diffusion to occur , otherwise desorption processes would dominate .
                 Importantly , equation 1 tells us how very strongly the jump rate varies with temperature . The manner in which diffusion takes
                 place is dependent on the relationship between Ediff and kBT as is given in the thermodynamic factor : when Ediff < kBT the
                 thermodynamic factor approaches unity and Ediff ceases to be a meaningful barrier to diffusion . This case , known as mobile
                 diffusion , is relatively uncommon and has only been observed in a few systems . For the phenomena described throughout
                 this article , it is assumed that Ediff > > kBT and therefore Γ < < ν . In the case of Fickian diffusion it is possible to extract both
                 the ν and Ediff from an Arrhenius plot of the logarithm of the diffusion coefficient , D , versus 1 / T. For cases where more than
                 one diffusion mechanism is present ( see below ) , there may be more than one Ediff such that the relative distribution between
                 the different processes would change with temperature .

Figure 4: The screenshot of our demo. Given the query “Theorem 1”, it returns lines including
softly-matched patterns such as “lemma 2.”

                                                               John was born in                                                                    Search
                                                               wikitext103 (0.1B) | glove-wiki-gigaword-300
                                                              Threshold: 0.51
                  Examples
                  theorem 1 march 1, 2016 John was born in 海鮮丼 言語の普遍性 フランスでは factus est equus est
                  bellum Gallicum

                  Results                                                                                                            Hits:         102
                                                                                                                                     Search Time: 0.373 sec
                 John was the youngest of the four sons of Erard II , Count of Brienne , and Agnes of Montfaucon . He seemed " exceedingly old
                 ... about 80 " to the 14-year-old George Akropolites in 1231 ; if Akropolites ' estimate was correct , John was born around 1150
                 . However , no other 13th-century authors described John as an old man . His father referred to John 's brothers as " children "
                 in 1177 and mentioned the tutor of John 's oldest   brother , Walter III , in 1184 ; this suggests that John 's brothers were born in
                                                                 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.58
                 the late 1160s . Modern historians agree that John was born after 1168 , probably during the 1170s .
                                                                                     0.58      1.00 1.00 0.63
                 In 1952 Goffman married Angelica Choate ; in 1953 , their son Thomas was born . Angelica suffered from mental illness and
                 committed suicide in 1964 . Outside his academic career , Goffman was known for his interest , and relative success , in the
                 stock market and in gambling . At one point , in pursuit of his hobbies and ethnographic studies , he became a pit boss at a Las
                 Vegas casino .
                 It is a sign of Edward 's high regard for Lancaster that he would bestow such extensive      0.54
                                                                                                                   privileges  on him . The two men were
                                                                                                                      1.00 1.00 1.00
                 second cousins through their great-grandfather Henry III and practically coeval ( Edward was born in 1312 ) , so it is natural to
                 assume that a strong sense of camaraderie existed between them . Another factor that might have influenced the king 's
                 decision was the fact that Henry had no male heir , so the grant was made for the Earl 's lifetime only , and not intended to be
                 hereditary .
                 In 1883 , Leno met Sarah Lydia Reynolds ( 1866 – 1942 ) , a young dancer and comedy singer from Birmingham , while both
                 were appearing at King Ohmy 's Circus of Varieties , Rochdale . The daughter of a stage carpenter , Lydia , as she was known
                 professionally , was already an accomplished actress as a teenager : of her performance in Sinbad the Sailor in 1881 , one critic
                 wrote that she " played Zorlida very well for a young artiste . She is well known at this theatre and with proper training will

Figure 5: The screenshot of our demo. Given the query “John was born in,” it returns lines including
softly-matched patterns such as “Edward was born in.”


{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}, in the English Wikipedia search. The search time and the number of matched
entries for each α are shown in Table 7. As you can see, both the search time and the number of
matched entries vary significantly depending on the threshold. The results of α ≤ 0.2 are note-
worthy. From the result, we can observe that the search time of the tool is too long to be used for
real-time use if the alpha is set below 0.2. However, we remark that the threshold as low as 0.2 is not


                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 7: The search time (seconds) and the number of matched entries for each α.

                                      α     seconds        # of hits
                                    0.1   1213.503     504,955,515
                                    0.2     55.854      19,899,652
                                    0.3      1.105         183,202
                                    0.4      0.258          34,766
                                    0.5      0.079           1,839
                                    0.6      0.025             381
                                    0.7      0.028             259
                                    0.8      0.027             259
                                    0.9      0.028             107
                                    1.0      0.005             107


chosen in practice since the search result includes too many nonsensical phrases. For example, the
results for α = 0.2 included “mixing test” and “authentic scale”, which are not related to the query.

E        A DDITIONAL DISCUSSIONS
E.1       O UT- OF - VOCABULARY PROBLEM

Our current implementation does not handle out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words; it ignores unknown
words. Handling OOV words appropriately is deferred to future work. We plan to (1) use fasttext to
fallback unknown words to character embeddings and (2) extend our algorithm to handle subword
units to deal with the OOV problem.

E.2       S TATIC EMBEDDINGS VS . DYNAMIC EMBEDDINGS

We used static embeddings for all experiments, but dynamic embeddings could also be used.
The simple one is to use the embedding layer of contextualized models such as BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019b), taking an approach like WordLlama (Miller, 2024). We conducted a follow-up experiment
using the embedding layer of BERT11 for the search in the English Wikipedia with a threshold
of α = 0.6. From the experiment, our SoftMatcha with the embedding layer of BERT newly
retrieved “makeshift bomb” and “improvised bomb” etc. with a query of “homemade bombs”. It
took less than one second, just as fast as when using the GloVe embedding. These new matches
may seem a bit counterintuitive, but they suggest that we can possibly obtain deep semantic matches
using more dynamic embeddings.
The other more radical one is to actually use contextualized token embeddings instead of mere words
for the search keys. Although the contextualized embeddings can be arbitrary real vectors and are
not suitable for indexing as is, we can approximate them to a finite number of embeddings by vector
quantization or other methods to apply our algorithm. The context information of the query can be
strengthened by adding some extra phrases before and after the query.

E.3       O MISSION , INSERTION , AND SWAPPING

The current SoftMatcha does not treat word omission and insertion, e.g., “the jazz musician”
does not match “a fantastic jazz musician”. That said, omission and insertion could be handled by
modifying Step 2-2 (technically, how to take intersections in line 9, Algorithm 1) using wildcards.
Wildcards can skip matching at any position, and is easy to implement by just adjusting the shift
width of Step 2-2 in Algorithm 1. This extension allows us to represent various similar patterns with
a single simple query.
In addition, it is possible to extend the algorithm to allow the flexible order of words in the query by
considering every permutation of the query pattern. This can be quite efficient, because only Step
    11
         google-bert/bert-base-uncased


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Table 8: The results of the information retrieval task on the TREC-COVID dataset.

                    Method                    P@20     R@1000      NDCG@20
                    BM25                        39.5        22.2           34.6
                    Soft-BM25 (α = 0.55)        41.5        23.5           36.3


2-2 (Find the soft matches) needs to be repeated and typically the pattern length is not too large
(technically, dynamic programming can be used here to achieve even better performance).

F   E FFECTIVENESS OF S O F T M A T C H A IN THE INFORMATION TASK
We conducted experiments to apply our method to information retrieval.

Soft-BM25 The well-known and strong baseline, BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009), calculates
relevance scores between a query and a document using term frequency (TF) and inverse document
frequency (IDF), which involve counting occurrences of words or n-grams.
We implemented a soft version of BM25 (soft-BM25). For calculating the soft term frequency in
a document, we compute the pattern-level score by multiplying the matching scores of each word
in a query pattern, and then sum up for each pattern occurrence. Similarly, soft inverse document
frequency is calculated by counting documents that softly contain the given query patterns. Then,
we calculated the soft-BM25 score based on the most standard Lucene implementation.
To examine the effectiveness of soft matching on the information retrieval task, we compared the
threshold parameter α between 1.0 and 0.55. α = 1.0 means “not performing any semantic relax-
ation”, making it equivalent to standard BM25. In contrast, α = 0.55 allows for semantic relaxation
of query pattern counting using our method, serving as a means to verify the effectiveness of the
proposed method in information retrieval.

Benchmark dataset We used TREC-COVID dataset (Roberts et al., 2021), which is a part of
Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) (Muennighoff et al., 2023). This dataset consists of
171k documents and 50 queries (= instances). Notably, the original dataset comprised only queries
formatted as natural language questions that are not suitable for queries of BM25 and soft-BM25;
thus, we prepared the pattern queries for this experiment. Specifically, we manually transformed the
natural language question, e.g., “how does the coronavirus respond to changes in the weather” to the
queries for BM25 and soft-BM25, e.g., [“coronavirus”, “response to weather”, “weather change”,
“coronavirus response to weather changes”].

Evaluation metrics We evaluated the retrieval performance on the precision@20 (P@20), re-
call@1000 (R@1000), NDCG@20 following the previous work (Bendersky et al., 2020).

Results The experimental results are demonstrated in Table 8. The table shows that soft matching
achieved better performance compared with exact matching in the information retrieval task.
To summarize this experiment, we confirmed that our SoftMatcha is effective not only in full-text
search but also in the information retrieval task, which ranks relevant texts.


                                                26
