Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING MODEL OUT-
OF - DISTRIBUTION GENERALISATION FOR THE BIO -
CHEMICAL DOMAIN

 Raúl Fernández-Dı́az                                           Thanh Lam Hoang & Vanessa Lopez
 School of Medicine                                               IBM Research
 Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research         Dublin, D02 PN40, Ireland.
 University College Dublin                                        {t.l.hoang,vanlopez}@ie.ibm.com
 Dublin, D04 V1W8, Ireland.

 IBM Research
 Dublin, D02 PN40, Ireland.
 raul.fernandezdiaz@ucdconnect.ie

 Denis C. Shields
 School of Medicine
 Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research
 University College Dublin
 Dublin, D04 V1W8, Ireland.
 denis.shields@ucd.ie



                                           A BSTRACT

        Quantifying model generalization to out-of-distribution data has been a longstand-
        ing challenge in machine learning. Addressing this issue is crucial for leveraging
        machine learning in scientific discovery, where models must generalize to new
        molecules or materials. Current methods typically split data into train and test
        sets using various criteria — temporal, sequence identity, scaffold, or random
        cross-validation — before evaluating model performance. However, with so many
        splitting criteria available, existing approaches offer limited guidance on selecting
        the most appropriate one, and they do not provide mechanisms for incorporating
        prior knowledge about the target deployment distribution(s).
        To tackle this problem, we have developed a novel metric, AU-GOOD, which
        quantifies expected model performance under conditions of increasing dissimilar-
        ity between train and test sets, while also accounting for prior knowledge about the
        target deployment distribution(s), when available. This metric is broadly applica-
        ble to biochemical entities, including proteins, small molecules, nucleic acids, or
        cells; as long as a relevant similarity function is defined for them. Recognizing
        the wide range of similarity functions used in biochemistry, we propose criteria to
        guide the selection of the most appropriate metric for partitioning. We also intro-
        duce a new partitioning algorithm that generates more challenging test sets, and
        we propose statistical methods for comparing models based on AU-GOOD.
        Finally, we demonstrate the insights that can be gained from this framework by
        applying it to two different use cases: developing predictors for pharmaceutical
        properties of small molecules, and using protein language models as embeddings
        to build biophysical property predictors.


                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION

The last decade has been characterised by the impact that the introduction of machine learning mod-
els has had in the acceleration of scientific discovery. These models are frequently used to predict
the properties of entities (drug candidates, materials, cells, etc.) that are inherently different from
those present in their training distribution. This deployment scenario, known as out-of-distribution
(OOD), is particularly frequent within the biochemical domain which encompasses both biological
and chemical modelling. Proper OOD evaluation of models is necessary, within this domain specif-
ically, due to the enormous economic and societal impact that wrong predictions might have, for
example, when a drug candidate that was predicted as non-toxic (Huang et al., 2021a) goes through
to the latter phases of the drug development pipeline, including pre-clinical or clinical trials. Further
tasks where OOD evaluation is critical are: modelling of the interaction between a known molecular
target and new compounds (Corso et al., 2024), the prediction of the structure of molecular targets
mediating disease (Mirdita et al., 2022), or cell type annotation (Fischer et al., 2024). Overall, ro-
bust OOD evaluation is necessary for the development of trustworthy predictive models, driving
advancements in biochemistry.
Prior literature in the biochemistry domain, has already highlighted the importance of evaluating
model generalisation to OOD data, though there is no prior work attempting to build a framework
for both measuring the generalisation capabilities of any given model and to provide a statistical
method to compare the performance of different models. Instead, prior works have focused on
developing algorithms for: i) measuring pairwise similarity values between biochemical entities
(Steinegger & Söding, 2017; Rogers & Hahn, 2010; Orsi & Reymond, 2024), ii) splitting a dataset
into independent train-test subsets (Butina, 1999; Ramsundar et al., 2019; Tom et al., 2023; Steshin,
2023; Teufel et al., 2023), iii) combining different partitioning algorithms to simulate the compo-
sition of a single target deployment distribution (Tossou et al., 2024), and iv) exploring the effect
of overlap between training and testing on model performance (Ektefaie et al., 2024). Due to the
absence of a comprehensive framework for evaluating model generalisation to out-of-distribution
(OOD) data, validating claims about machine learning generalisation remains challenging.
In response to this gap, we first present a framework to study and quantify model generalisation to
OOD data for biochemistry. We propose a novel partitioning algorithm that, unlike existing methods
(Butina, 1999; Ramsundar et al., 2019; Tom et al., 2023; Steshin, 2023; Teufel et al., 2023), is
broadly applicable across various biochemistry contexts, including proteins and small molecules.
Our approach is agnostic to the underlying data types; instead, it relies on any similarity functions
that can be defined between two data instances. In contrast to previous methods that choose a
certain similarity function assuming that it can capture generalisation within the context of a certain
modelling task (Butina, 1999; Ramsundar et al., 2019; Tom et al., 2023; Steshin, 2023; Teufel et al.,
2023; Tossou et al., 2024; Ektefaie et al., 2024), our framework provides quantitative measurements
indicating how appropriate a similarity metric is for guiding the partitioning of a certain dataset,
with minimal relience on domain knowledge. We also propose two new similarity functions based
on physico-chemical descriptors, rather than structure-based fingerprints and a statistical metric to
compare the generalisation capabilities of different models.


2   H ESTIA -GOOD FRAMEWORK

This section presents the Hestia-GOOD framework for quantifying out-of-distribution generalisation
in biochemistry. It is divided into three subsections.

      1. We present the AU-GOOD metric for quantifying model generalisation to target deploy-
         ment distribution(s). This metric corresponds with the expected empirical risk of a model
         trained on a given dataset with varying train/test similarity conditioned on any arbitrary
         target deployment distribution(s).
      2. We propose an algorithm for dataset partitioning that i) does not remove any data points, ii)
         creates strict boundaries between training and testing, and iii) supports multiple similarity
         thresholds.
      3. We propose a statistical test to compare the generalisation capabilities of two different
         models.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   AU-GOOD METRIC FOR QUANTIFYING MODEL GENERALISATION TO THE TARGET
      DEPLOYMENT DISTRIBUTION ( S )

We consider the problem of estimating model performance against any arbitrary target deployment
distribution(s) that are out-of-distribution of the data available during model training. Our approach
consists on three steps:

      1. Partition the available data (training data) into training/testing subsets with the condition
         that there are no elements in the testing set that are similar (up to a threshold value) to
         those in training. Multiple partitions are created by applying different thresholds to this
         similarity.
      2. The model is trained in each training subset and its performance evaluated against the
         corresponding testing subset. Then, we describe model performance as a function of the
         similarity threshold. We refer to this function as the Generalisation Out-Of-Distribution
         (GOOD) curve.
      3. Given any number of arbitrary target deployment distribution(s), we calculate the similarity
         between each of its elements and the training data. For each element in the deployment
         distribution, we keep the maximum similarity and calculate a histogram of their distribution
         such that each bin corresponds to one of the thresholds in the GOOD curve. The AU-
         GOOD, or Area Under the GOOD curve, can be calculated as the weighted average of all
         points in the GOOD curve where the weight of each point corresponds to the value of the
         histogram for the corresponding threshold.

Formally, we demonstrate that the AU-GOOD metric corresponds to the expected empirical risk of
the model conditioned on the target deployment distribution (see Appendix - A).


Figure 1: Illustration of the calculation of the AU-GOOD metric. A-C correspond to synthetic data.

To illustrate how the AU-GOOD metric is calculated and what insights can be drawn from its anal-
ysis, let us consider a simple simulation, which will serve to illustrate the relationship between
GOOD curve, target distribution(s) and AU-GOOD. Let us consider two models, “Model A” and
“Model B”, with GOOD curves as shown in Figure 1.A. In Figure 1.A, Model A performs better
when predicting molecules similar to the training data, whereas for Model B there is comparatively
better performance at low similarity values.
Let us now consider two different target deployment distributions, “Target 1” and “Target 2”. The
histograms reflecting their similarity to the training data are shown in Figures 1.B-C. Target 1 (Figure
1.B) comprises entities with low similarity to the training data, while Target 2 (Figure 1.C) represents
the opposite case, where most entities are similar to those the model has been trained on.
The AU-GOOD metric allows for the evaluation of model generalisation relative to a target deploy-
ment distribution. Therefore, it allows us to determine that, though apparently Model B has a more
consistent performance through different similarity thresholds, Model A is a better choice for Target


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2, which is skewed towards molecules similar to the training data. Conversely, Model B is a better
choice for Target 1.
This simple example also highlights one of the main strengths of the AU-GOOD metric, which
is that it allows to obtain estimators of model generalisation for an arbitrary number of target de-
ployment distributions without the need for additional experiments. This is a significant advantage
when compared with other approaches for out-of-distribution performance estimation, like MOOD
(Tossou et al., 2024) which focuses on generating test sets that closely resemble the target deploy-
ment distribution and requires repeating the training/evaluation cycle for each new target deployment
distribution; whereas with ours, only the similarity histogram needs to be updated. Our approach
is also similar to Ektefaie et al. (2024) with three main differences: 1) their method defines ar-
bitrarily a certain similarity threshold and considers model performance against the proportion of
similar entities between training and testing; whereas, our approach defines a certain proportion
of similar entities (0%) and explores the effect on model performance of the different similarity
thresholds; 2) their method assumes that whatever similarity function they have chosen is good at
capturing the relevant properties that mediate any given task; however, our method makes no such
assumption and we provide a series of analyses to determine that a GOOD curve reasonably de-
scribes out-of-distribution generalisation; and 3) their approach does not provide any estimation of
model performance conditioned on the target deployment distribution(s), which limits its practical
application in real-world scenarios.
Finally, our study is limited by the lack of experimental follow up studies to confirm empirically the
advantages of our method. The closest study to ours in this regard are the aforementioned MOOD
from (Tossou et al., 2024) and Spectra (Ektefaie et al., 2024), neither of which provided a metric to
evaluate the approach on “ground truth” data. Development of scenarios where such a ground truth
exists will help inform evaluation of the performance of our method.


2.2   DATASET PARTITIONING TO SIMULATE OUT- OF - DISTRIBUTION DATA GIVEN A
      SIMILARITY VALUE


The AU-GOOD values can also be affected by the sampling performed during the partitioning step,
as it may bias the composition of the test set. There are three conditions that the partitioning al-
gorithms have to fullfil are: 1) to not remove any data point, otherwise the comparison between
thresholds could also correspond to the loss of information and would make them not directly com-
parable; 2) to enforce strict boundaries between training and testing subsets for any given similarity
threshold (Walsh et al., 2020), otherwise we would not be measuring strictly the dependence on the
similarity threshold, but also (implicitly) the effect of overlap within any given threshold; and 3) to
allow for multiple thresholds, otherwise we cannot describe model performance as a function of the
threshold.
All prior partitioning algorithms described for biochemical data violate at least one of the three
conditions: perimeter and maximum dissimilarity do not fulfill condition 2 and scaffold split does
not fulfill condition 3 (Ramsundar et al., 2019), cluster splits relying on hierarchical clustering (Tom
et al., 2023) do not fulfill conditions 2 and 3; GraphPart (Teufel et al., 2023) or Lo-Hi splitting
(Steshin, 2023) do not fulfill condition 1. The Butina split (Butina, 1999) generates clusters where
every member of a given cluster is guaranteed to be closer to the centroid than the threshold, however
the frontiers between clusters are not strict, and therefore does not fulfill condition 2.
Here, we propose the CCPart (Connected Components Partitioning) a new strategy for partitioning
the datasets that fulfills all three previous conditions and that is extensible to any biochemical data.
The algorithm first constructs a graph, where the nodes are all elements in the datasets and the
edges are drawn between nodes with similarity greater than the threshold. It then identifies all
unconnected subgraphs. The testing set is iteratively built by assigning the smallest subgraphs until
the desired size is reached. Smaller subgraphs are considered more unique. CCPart thus focuses the
evaluation on the most dissimilar regions of the dataset distribution. Additionally, stratified sampling
can be applied to maintain label balance in classification tasks. Figure 2 illustrates this process (see
Algorithm S1).
In any case, our framework is agnostic to the specific partitioning strategy used and future devel-
opment of alternative algorithms that fulfill the three conditions could improve the accuracy of the


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Schema showing how CCPart builds the training and testing subsets based on the similarity
graph at different similarity thresholds.


AU-GOOD calculation. It is also an open research question what the impact is of violating any of
the three assumptions on the reliability of the AU-GOOD metric.

2.3      S TATISTICAL TEST FOR COMPARING AU-GOOD VALUES

Generally, comparison between the statistical significance of the difference in performance between
two given models is made by comparing their confidence intervals. This standard practice, implicitly
assumes that performance is normally distributed. However, the performance values at different
thresholds cannot be assumed to be normally distributed. Therefore, the analysis of the statistical
significance between individual AU-GOOD values requires a different kind of statistical test. We
propose to use the non-parametric equivalent to the one-tailed T-test, the one-tailed paired Wilcoxon
ranked-sum test Wilcoxon (1945); Ash et al. (2024). Finally, if we want to compare the performance
of n models, n × n pairwise tests can be performed. In cases where we are performing multiple tests
(n > 5), the Bonferroni correction for multiple testing (Bonferroni, 1936) can be applied so that the
significance threshold depends on the number of models: 0.05/n (Ash et al., 2024).

2.4      HESTIA: C OMPUTATIONAL EMBODIMENT

The partitioning algorithms rely on pairwise similarity calculations and scale in complexity and
memory footprint by O(N 2 ). In response to this, our implementation improves computational and
memory efficiency by relying on sparse matrices and parallelism. We have run toy examples with
datasets of up to 400,000 protein sequences within a day in 32 CPU cores and 200GB of RAM,
thus we believe that scaling does not limit the usefulness of the method within the domain. In other
domains, algorithmic improvements might be required for scaling to very large datasets.
We have open sourced the code 1 , including: 1) wrappers for most common similarity functions be-
tween a) small molecules, b) biosequences including protein and nucleic acids, c) protein structures,
and d) embeddings from pre-trained representation learning models; 2) implementation of differ-
ent partitioning algorithms such as: a) GraphPart and b) CCPart; and 3) calculation of AU-GOOD
values. More details in Appendix - B.

3       E XPERIMENTS

We have chosen two different real-world use cases to demonstrate the insights that can be drawn
from using our framework for the comparison of ML models within the biochemical domain. The
first one is the selection of predictive models for pharmaceutical properties given a target deployment
distribution and the second is the selection of what protein language model embedding to use for
different target deployment distributions.

3.1      U SE CASE 1: P REDICTION OF PHARMACEUTICAL PROPERTIES OF SMALL MOLECULES

ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, and Toxicity) properties encompass dif-
ferent biophysical attributes of small molecules that may affect both their pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic behaviour within the organism (Wang et al., 2024). The estimation of which model
will generalise better to which target deployment distribution, will allow researchers to decide on
what model to use for each particular project. For the purposes of this study, we have selected the
    1
        Github Repository: https://github.com/IBM/Hestia-GOOD


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Drug Repurposing Hub (Corsello et al., 2017) as the library of choice as it represents a realistic
scenario with known approved drugs.
We examine our framework with six datasets containing different ADMET properties from the Ther-
apeutics Data Commons collection (Huang et al., 2021b): Ames’ mutagenicity (Xu et al., 2012), cell
effective permeability in Caco-2 cell line (Wang et al., 2016), drug-induced liver injury (DILI) (Xu
et al., 2015), acute toxicity LD50 (Zhu et al., 2009), drug half-life (Obach et al., 2008), and parallel
artificial membrane permeability assay (PAMPA) (Siramshetty et al., 2021). We report model per-
formance with Matthew’s correlation coefficient for classification tasks (Ames, DILI, and PAMPA)
and Spearman’s ρ correlation coefficient for regression tasks (Caco2, Half-life, and LD50).
Each experiment described uses as featurization method Extended-Connectivity FingerPrints
(ECFP) with radius 2 and 2,048 bits, as they are a well-known baseline for all the datasets under
consideration (Huang et al., 2021b). Each experiment consists of 5 independent runs with different
seeds. Each run for a dataset and similarity metric has the exact same partitions, because the par-
titioning algorithm is heuristic and not stochastic, therefore any variance between runs depends on
the learning algorithm and the Bayesian hyperparameter-optimisation which is conducted for each
run independently with Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019) (see Table - S3).

3.1.1      W HAT IS THE BEST SIMILARITY FUNCTION ?

Experimental setup
The first step for using the Hestia-GOOD framework is to determine what is the optimal similar-
ity function to use. We evaluated three types of fingerprints: ECFP with radius 2 and 2,048 bits,
MACCS, and chiral Min-hashed atom pair (MAPc) with radius 2 and 2,048 bits. We considered 4
binary set similarity functions for the binary fingerprints (ECFP and MACCS): Tanimoto (Rogers &
Tanimoto, 1960), Dice (Dice, 1945), Sokal (Sokal & Michener, 1958), and Rogot-Goldberg (Rogot
& Goldberg, 1966). We also considered cosine similarity as an alternative geometry-based similarity
function. For MAPc, which is not a binary fingerprint, we only considered the Jaccard similarity.
Additionally, we have also considered alternative similarity metrics that are not fingerprint-based,
including: the euclidean distance between embeddings from two pre-trained chemical language
models: Molformer (Ross et al., 2022) and ChemBERTa-2 (77M MLM) (Ahmad et al., 2022); the
canberra distance between two types of vectors of physicochemical descriptors 1) BUTCD (Stanton,
1999) and Lipinski (Lipinski et al., 1997). More details in Appendix - C.
Criteria for selecting similarity function
We observed that different similarity functions led to GOOD curves with notably different shapes
(see Appendix - D). The two properties of the curves that experienced the biggest variance across
similarity functions were 1) their dynamic range, i.e., the difference between the minimum and max-
imum similarity thresholds that could be used to generate viable partitions with test sets with at least
18.5% of the total data2 ; and 2) their monotonicity, measured as the Spearman’s ρ correlation coef-
ficient between similarity threshold and model performance. A necessary assumption of the GOOD
and AU-GOOD calculations is that model performance can be described as a function of the sim-
ilarity threshold. Therefore, Spearman’s correlation coefficient serves as a robust, non-parametric
diagnostic test to ensure that any GOOD curve meets this assumption, without assuming linearity.
We propose to use both metrics as selection criteria:

        1. Rank all similarity functions by their largest dynamic range and choose the top functions.
        2. Compare the monotonicity of the GOOD curves generated with those similarity functions
           and select the similarity function with the highest monotonicity.

The first criterion aims to produce GOOD curves that span a greater similarity range to minimise the
impact of noise. The second focuses on improving discrimination between low and high similarity
thresholds for better evaluation of model generalization. It also serves as a diagnostic test to ensure
that the GOOD curves meet the assumption of model performance dependence on the similarity
thresholds. If none of the similarity functions achieves a reasonable monotonicity, it is likely that a
   2
       We keep the conventional 20% value and allowed for a 1.5% margin of error.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


custom similarity function is required; or that there are underlying issues with the data generation
process that need to be corrected in a dataset specific way.
Choice of similarity function is dataset-specific
We applied these criteria to the datasets and similarity metrics considered in the study. Table 1 sum-
marises the decisions and the properties of the GOOD curves obtained in each case and Appendix -
D contains a more in-depth analysis.
Overall, MAPc - Jaccard seems to be the most versatile similarity metric, being the optimal choice
for three out of six datasets. It has the highest dynamic range and good monotonicity in the majority
of datasets. This is consistent with the literature that describes it as a fine-grained and sensitive tool
for performing similarity searches in chemical databases (Orsi & Reymond, 2024).
It is also interesting that Molformer and ChemBERTa-2, both similarity metrics based on the
homonymn molecular language models, show the best relative performance in the same two datasets
PAMPA and Caco2. This suggests that the models are able to capture chemical properties relevant
for the respective tasks that are then exploited when partitioning. It also worth noting that, in both
cases, the Molformer similarity has larger dynamic range, demonstrating a greater resolution at low
thresholds.
Finally, one of the new similarity metrics proposed in this study, Lipinski, is the best for the half-life
dataset which proved quite challenging for the other alternatives.


                           Table 1: Similarity function chosen per dataset.
                    Dataset        Similarity metric    Dynamic range      Monotonicity
                Ames               MAPc - Jaccard           0.75           0.82 ± 0.02
                DILI               MAPc - Jaccard           0.85           0.81 ± 0.02
                PAMPA-NCATS        Molformer                0.80           0.13 ± 0.02
                Caco2              Molformer                0.85           0.76 ± 0.03
                Half-life          Lipinski                 0.60           0.46 ± 0.06
                LD50               MAPc - Jaccard           0.70           0.94 ± 0.02

The main conclusion that can be drawn from these results is that there is no one-size-fits-all simi-
larity function. Different datasets require different similarity metrics. Therefore, before starting any
analysis regarding model generalisation, a careful selection of the similarity metric used to measure
generalisation is crucial. This initial step of analysis is missing from previous works (Butina, 1999;
Ramsundar et al., 2019; Steshin, 2023; Tom et al., 2023; Tossou et al., 2024; Ektefaie et al., 2024).
Remarkably, the PAMPA dataset has low monotonicity with all similarity metrics considered in
this study, which makes the interpretation of the GOOD curve unreliable. We believe that this
behaviour is due to the idiosyncrasies of this dataset which is relatively small (≈ 2, 000 molecules)
and highly unbalanced (1,739 positives to 295 negatives). The imbalance is further exacerbated by
the partitioning algorithm with the test set containing, in most partitions, around two thirds of all
negatives ≈ 200. This dataset provides a concrete showcase of the limitations of our framework,
which are: 1) it depends on the similarity metrics and certain tasks may require custom similarity
functions and 2) it may not be reliable for highly unbalanced datasets as the partitioning can increase
the imbalance. For this reason, the PAMPA dataset will be excluded from the next step, as the GOOD
curve and AU-GOOD values are not reliable.
In any case, we highly recommend performing an initial analysis with any similarity function to
determine whether the GOOD has an appropriate dynamic range and meets the assumption of cor-
relation between similarity threshold and model performance.
Qualitative analysis of CCPart as an OOD partitioning algorithm
We visualised the overlap between training and testing partitions (generated with the corresponding
chosen similarity metric). The visualisation of the chemical space is achieved by using uniform man-
ifold approximation and projection (UMAP) (McInnes et al., 2018; Ross et al., 2022; Ahmad et al.,
2022) to project the ECFP fingerprints of each dataset into two dimensions. Figure 3 shows how the
testing partition of the Cell-effective permeability dataset gets clustered together at low thresholds
and gets more evenly distributed over the training data distribution as the threshold increases. It is


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


particularly interesting how the partitions at threshold 0.9 are still less evenly distributed than those
obtained with random partitioning. Figure S2 contains similar representations for the rest of the
datasets considered in the study.


Figure 3: UMAP representation of the chemical space covered by the training (blue) and testing
(red) partitions of the Cell-effective permeability dataset at different similarity thresholds.


Overall, these visualizations provide a qualitative and empirical demonstration that the CCPart al-
gorithm is able to generate out-of-distribution partitions.


3.1.2   W HAT MODELS GENERALISE BETTER TO THE D RUG R EPURPOSING H UB ?

Experimental setup
We evaluated the performance of four traditional ML algorithms to build models for the ADMET
datasets: K-nearest neighbours (KNN), support vector machines (SVM), random forest (RF), and
light gradient boosting (LightGBM) and evaluated their AU-GOOD values using as target deploy-
ment distribution the Drug Reporpusing Hub Corsello et al. (2017).
Demonstration of an in-depth Hestia analysis
To demonstrate the depth of the analysis that can be performed with our framework, let us consider
one of the datasets in detail. Figure S3 contains equivalent analyses for the rest of the datasets.
Figure 4.A shows the GOOD curves for all models considered. The behaviour of KNN is particularly
interesting as it tends to perform worse at lower similarity thresholds and better at higher similarity.
This observation is not surprising in itself (KNN explictly depends on the distance to neighbouring
data points within the data), but it exemplifies the type of situation our framework is built to address.
Figure 4.B shows the distribution of maximal similarities between training and target deployment
distribution. In this particular case, it seems that the distribution is skewed towards higher similari-
ties. Figure 4.C shows the distribution of AU-GOOD values of the Matthew’s correlation coefficient
calculated for each model against the target deployment distribution. It shows that RF has the best
average AU-GOOD value, even though it shows greater variance across runs. Interestingly, KNN
is the second best model, despite it performing worse at the lower similarity thresholds. This is
because the maximal similarity distribution is skewed towards higher similarities and, therefore, the
performance at those thresholds has a greater contribution towards the final AU-GOOD score.
Figure 4.D shows the p-values of comparing the 4 models against each other with the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test. In this case, the alternative hypothesis is that Model A (y-axis) has better AU-
GOOD values than Model B (x-axis). This clearly shows that RF is significantly better (p < 0.001)
than the other three models.
Demonstration of a summary of the Hestia analysis
The results for the rest of the datasets are summarised in Table 2. The significant rank reflects the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test results. For each model, it is calculated as the difference between the
total number of models and the number of models to which it is significantly superior. For example,
the significant rank for RF in Figure 4 would be 4 (number of models) - 3 (number of models that
are significantly inferior to RF) = 1; KNN would be 4 − 2 = 2, SVM and LightGBM would be
4 − 0 = 4.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: HESTIA analysis for Ames’ mutageneicity dataset. A. GOOD curve with MAPc (radius
2 and 2,048 bits) and jaccard index; B. Maximal similarity between entities in Ames’ mutageneicity
dataset and target distribution (Drug Repurposing Hub); AU-GOOD values across 5 different runs;
Wilcoxon test p-values with alternative hypothesis Model A > Model B.


Table 2: Comparison between the different downstream models for each dataset. AU-GOOD refers
to average AU-GOOD value across 5 runs, the error corresponds to the standard error of the mean.
The AU-GOOD value is calculated for the classification tasks for the Matthew’s correlation coeffi-
cient (MCC) for Ames, DILI, and PAMPA. For the regression tasks ( Caco2, Half life, and LD50)
Spearman’s ρ is used. S. Rank: Significant rank.
                             KNN                     SVM                      RF                   LightGBM
         Dataset      AU-GOOD      S. Rank    AU-GOOD      S. Rank    AU-GOOD      S. Rank    AU-GOOD       S. Rank
         Ames        0.89 ± 0.01      2      0.88 ± 0.00      4      0.90 ± 0.01      1      0.88 ± 0.01       4
         DILI        0.95 ± 0.00      3      0.96 ± 0.00      1      0.95 ± 0.00      3      0.77 ± 0.04       4
         Caco2       0.87 ± 0.00      4      0.92 ± 0.00      1      0.92 ± 0.00      2      0.88 ± 0.00       3
         Half life   0.93 ± 0.00      2      0.97 ± 0.00      1      0.69 ± 0.04      3      0.23 ± 0.01       4
         LD50        0.86 ± 0.00      2      0.83 ± 0.00      4      0.89 ± 0.00      1      0.83 ± 0.00       4
         Average     0.90 ± 0.01     2.6     0.91 ± 0.01     2.2     0.87 ± 0.02     2.0     0.72 ± 0.05      4.8


3.2     U SE CASE 2: E VALUATION OF P ROTEIN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Protein Language Models (PLMs) are pre-trained representation learning models that rely on the
transformer architecture and are trained with a masked-language modelling objective on protein se-
quences. Here, we explore which PLM generates an embedding space that is better suited for gener-
alising to different target deployment distributions. We considered a biophysical property prediction
task, Optimal temperature for catalysis (Li et al., 2022), from (Chen et al., 2024). To this end,
we downloaded all protein sequences for four organisms in the SwissProt database (Consortium,
2019) as target deployment distributions: human (Homo sapiens), Baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae strain YJM789), and bacteria (Escherichia coli strain CFT073 / ATCC 700928 / UPEC)
and the human hepatitis B virus (HPV-B) Orthohepadnavirus hepatitis B virus.

3.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

We considered the following models: ESM2-8M (Lin et al., 2022), ESM2-150M (Lin et al., 2022),
ESM2-650M (Lin et al., 2022), ProtBERT (Elnaggar et al., 2021), Prot-T5-XL (Elnaggar et al.,
2021), Prost-T5 (Elnaggar et al., 2021), Ankh-base (Elnaggar et al., 2023), and Ankh-large (Elnag-
gar et al., 2023). We extracted the embeddings for all sequences in our downstream datasets and
for each sequence s we computed its embeddings using average pooling (Unsal et al., 2022). We
used SVM as the downstream model to reduce the amount of noise in our analyses due to model
selection.

3.2.2    W HAT IS THE BEST SIMILARITY FUNCTION ?

The task we are considering concerns protein sequence property prediction. We decided to com-
pare two computationally efficient similarity functions MMSeqs2 and MMSeqs2 with prior k-mer
prefiltering (Steinegger & Söding, 2017). However, for other protein tasks where data points are
evolutionary related we recommend using alternative metrics like Hamming distance like in the
Fluorescence task in the TAPE benchmarks Rao et al. (2019) or distance in phylogenetic trees.
The results clearly indicate that MMSeqs2 with prefilter is the best option in all respects i) dynamic
range, (Figure S4.A) and ii) monotonicity (Figure S4.B).


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2.3   W HAT PLM GENERATES THE MOST USEFUL EMBEDDINGS ?
Figure 5 shows the analyses of the different PLM embeddings (More details in Figure S5). Clearly,
the bigger models (Prot-T5-XL, ESM2-650M, and Prost-T5) tend to generalise better than their
smaller counterparts. This is particularly clear with the ESM2 models which are ordered in as-
cending performance according to their size ESM2-8M, ESM2-150M, and ESM2-650M. The worst
performing models are the Ankh models, which is surprising as the original paper (Elnaggar et al.,
2023) reported better performance in several tasks. This result is not conclusive as we are only
evaluating a single task. However, it is an interesting finding that opens the question as to whether
scaling down model parameter size might be detrimental for the ability of the model embeddings to
generalise to new data.
It is also worth noting that, although the ranking of the models is the same regardless of the target
distribution, in some cases, like human or the hepatitis virus, the use of a much smaller model like
ESM2-150M instead of Prost-T5 could be statistically justified.


Figure 5: Hestia analyses for Optimal Temperature of Catalysis, comparing different PLM repre-
sentations. AU-GOOD values correspond to Spearman’s ρ. The variance corresponds to 5 different
runs.


4   C ONCLUSION
The AU-GOOD is a new metric that estimates the expected model performance against any target
deployment distribution(s), and thus provides a quantifiable value to guide the selection of the most
appropriate model to use in different deployment scenarios, without the requirement for additional
experiments. It is applicable to any biochemical entities for which a relevant similarity function can
be defined. The calculation of this metric requires partitioning the training data into training/testing
subsets that are increasingly dissimilar. We propose CCPart a new partitioning algorithm to generate
strict splits at multiple thresholds, without the removal of any data points.
We provide a robust framework for analysing whether a similarity function is appropriate for par-
titioning a given dataset, with a series of quantitative metrics to provide a formal analysis of the
reliability of the resulting GOOD curves. Finally, we discuss how to obtain statistical support for
comparing different AU-GOOD values. Our experiments show that different datasets may require
different similarity functions that better capture the chemical relationships in the context of the spe-
cific modelling problem and that the selection of the appropriate similarity metric for each dataset
has a significant impact on the GOOD curves.
We demonstrate the use of this framework for two different use cases: the development of models for
predicting properties of small molecules, and the selection of a protein language model to generate
embeddings upon which to build biophysical property predictors.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Walid Ahmad, Elana Simon, Seyone Chithrananda, Gabriel Grand, and Bharath Ramsundar.
 Chemberta-2: Towards chemical foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01712, 2022.
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2623–2631, 2019.
Jeremy R Ash, Cas Wognum, Raquel Rodrı́guez-Pérez, Matteo Aldeghi, Alan C Cheng, Djork-Arné
   Clevert, Ola Engkvist, Cheng Fang, Daniel J Price, Jacqueline M Hughes-Oliver, et al. Practically
   significant method comparison protocols for machine learning in small molecule drug discovery.
   2024.
Carlo Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilita. Pubblicazioni del R istituto
  superiore di scienze economiche e commericiali di firenze, 8:3–62, 1936.
Darko Butina. Unsupervised data base clustering based on daylight’s fingerprint and tanimoto sim-
  ilarity: A fast and automated way to cluster small and large data sets. J. Chem. Inf. Comput.
  Sci., 39(4):747–750, 1999. doi: 10.1021/CI9803381. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/
  ci9803381.
John-Marc Chandonia, Naomi K Fox, and Steven E Brenner. Scope: classification of large macro-
  molecular structures in the structural classification of proteins—extended database. Nucleic acids
  research, 47(D1):D475–D481, 2019.
Bo Chen, Xingyi Cheng, Pan Li, Yangli-ao Geng, Jing Gong, Shen Li, Zhilei Bei, Xu Tan, Boyan
  Wang, Xin Zeng, et al. xtrimopglm: unified 100b-scale pre-trained transformer for deciphering
  the language of protein. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06199, 2024.
UniProt Consortium. Uniprot: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic acids research, 47
  (D1):D506–D515, 2019.
Steven M Corsello, Joshua A Bittker, Zihan Liu, Joshua Gould, Patrick McCarren, Jodi E
  Hirschman, Stephen E Johnston, Anita Vrcic, Bang Wong, Mariya Khan, et al. The drug re-
  purposing hub: a next-generation drug library and information resource. Nature medicine, 23(4):
  405–408, 2017.
Gabriele Corso, Arthur Deng, Benjamin Fry, Nicholas Polizzi, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
  Jaakkola. Deep confident steps to new pockets: Strategies for docking generalization. ArXiv,
  2024.
Lee R Dice. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species. Ecology, 26(3):
  297–302, 1945.
Joseph L Durant, Burton A Leland, Douglas R Henry, and James G Nourse. Reoptimization of mdl
  keys for use in drug discovery. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 42(6):
  1273–1280, 2002.
Yasha Ektefaie, Andrew Shen, Daria Bykova, Maximillian Marin, Marinka Zitnik, and Maha Farhat.
  Evaluating generalizability of artificial intelligence models for molecular datasets. bioRxiv, 2024.
Ahmed Elnaggar, Michael Heinzinger, Christian Dallago, Ghalia Rehawi, Yu Wang, Llion Jones,
  Tom Gibbs, Tamas Feher, Christoph Angerer, Martin Steinegger, et al. Prottrans: Toward un-
  derstanding the language of life through self-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 44(10):7112–7127, 2021.
Ahmed Elnaggar, Hazem Essam, Wafaa Salah-Eldin, Walid Moustafa, Mohamed Elkerdawy, Char-
  lotte Rochereau, and Burkhard Rost. Ankh: Optimized protein language model unlocks general-
  purpose modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.06568, 2023.
Felix Fischer, David S Fischer, Roman Mukhin, Andrey Isaev, Evan Biederstedt, Alexandra-Chloé
  Villani, and Fabian J Theis. sctab: Scaling cross-tissue single-cell annotation models. Nature
  Communications, 15(1):6611, 2024.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Limin Fu, Beifang Niu, Zhengwei Zhu, Sitao Wu, and Weizhong Li. Cd-hit: accelerated for cluster-
  ing the next-generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics, 28(23):3150–3152, 2012.
Aric Hagberg and Drew Conway. Networkx: Network analysis with python. URL: https://networkx.
  github. io, 2020.
Christof Hannesschlaeger, Andreas Horner, and Peter Pohl. Intrinsic membrane permeability to
  small molecules. Chemical reviews, 119(9):5922–5953, 2019.
David Z Huang, J Christian Baber, and Sogole Sami Bahmanyar. The challenges of generalizability
  in artificial intelligence for adme/tox endpoint and activity prediction. Expert opinion on drug
  discovery, 16(9):1045–1056, 2021a.
Kexin Huang, Tianfan Fu, Wenhao Gao, Yue Zhao, Yusuf Roohani, Jure Leskovec, Connor W Coley,
  Cao Xiao, Jimeng Sun, and Marinka Zitnik. Therapeutics data commons: Machine learning
  datasets and tasks for drug discovery and development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09548, 2021b.
Oliver Kramer. Scikit-learn. Machine learning for evolution strategies, pp. 45–53, 2016.
Greg Landrum. Rdkit documentation. Release, 1(1-79):4, 2013.
Gang Li, Filip Buric, Jan Zrimec, Sandra Viknander, Jens Nielsen, Aleksej Zelezniak, and Mar-
  tin KM Engqvist. Learning deep representations of enzyme thermal adaptation. Protein Science,
  31(12):e4480, 2022.
Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Allan dos San-
  tos Costa, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Tom Sercu, Sal Candido, et al. Language models of protein
  sequences at the scale of evolution enable accurate structure prediction. BioRxiv, 2022:500902,
  2022.
Christopher A Lipinski, Franco Lombardo, Beryl W Dominy, and Paul J Feeney. Experimental and
  computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in drug discovery and develop-
  ment settings. Advanced drug delivery reviews, 23(1-3):3–25, 1997.
Alex CW May. Percent sequence identity: the need to be explicit. Structure, 12(5):737–738, 2004.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Milot Mirdita, Konstantin Schütze, Yoshitaka Moriwaki, Lim Heo, Sergey Ovchinnikov, and Martin
 Steinegger. Colabfold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nature methods, 19(6):679–682,
 2022.
Saul B Needleman and Christian D Wunsch. A general method applicable to the search for similar-
  ities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. Journal of molecular biology, 48(3):443–453,
  1970.
R Scott Obach, Franco Lombardo, and Nigel J Waters. Trend analysis of a database of intravenous
  pharmacokinetic parameters in humans for 670 drug compounds. Drug Metabolism and Disposi-
  tion, 36(7):1385–1405, 2008.
Markus Orsi and Jean-Louis Reymond. One chiral fingerprint to find them all. Journal of chemin-
 formatics, 16(1):53, 2024.
Valery O Polyanovsky, Mikhail A Roytberg, and Vladimir G Tumanyan. Comparative analysis of
  the quality of a global algorithm and a local algorithm for alignment of two sequences. Algorithms
  for molecular biology, 6:1–12, 2011.
Bharath Ramsundar, Peter Eastman, Patrick Walters, Vijay Pande, Karl Leswing, and Zhenqin Wu.
  Deep Learning for the Life Sciences. O’Reilly Media, 2019. https://www.amazon.com/
  Deep-Learning-Life-Sciences-Microscopy/dp/1492039837.
Roshan Rao, Nicholas Bhattacharya, Neil Thomas, Yan Duan, Peter Chen, John Canny, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Yun Song. Evaluating protein transfer learning with tape. Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter Rice, Ian Longden, and Alan Bleasby. Emboss: the european molecular biology open software
  suite. Trends in genetics, 16(6):276–277, 2000.
David Rogers and Mathew Hahn. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of chemical informa-
  tion and modeling, 50(5):742–754, 2010.
David J Rogers and Taffee T Tanimoto. A computer program for classifying plants: The computer
  is programmed to simulate the taxonomic process of comparing each case with every other case.
  Science, 132(3434):1115–1118, 1960.
Eugene Rogot and Irving D Goldberg. A proposed index for measuring agreement in test-retest
  studies. Journal of chronic diseases, 19(9):991–1006, 1966.
Jerret Ross, Brian Belgodere, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Inkit Padhi, Youssef Mroueh, and Payel Das.
   Large-scale chemical language representations capture molecular structure and properties. Nature
   Machine Intelligence, 4(12):1256–1264, 2022.
Vishal Siramshetty, Jordan Williams, ac-Trung Nguyen, Jorge Neyra, Noel Southall, Ewy Mathé,
  Xin Xu, and Pranav Shah. Validating adme qsar models using marketed drugs. SLAS DISCOV-
  ERY: Advancing the Science of Drug Discovery, 26(10):1326–1336, 2021.
Temple F Smith, Michael S Waterman, et al. Identification of common molecular subsequences.
  Journal of molecular biology, 147(1):195–197, 1981.
Robert R Sokal and Charles D Michener. A statistical method for evaluating systematic relation-
  ships. University of Kansas Scientific Bulletin, 38(6):1409–38, 1958.
David T Stanton. Evaluation and use of bcut descriptors in qsar and qspr studies. Journal of chemical
  information and computer sciences, 39(1):11–20, 1999.
Martin Steinegger and Johannes Söding. Mmseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for
 the analysis of massive data sets. Nature biotechnology, 35(11):1026–1028, 2017.
Simon Steshin. Lo-hi: Practical ml drug discovery benchmark. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:64526–64554, 2023.
Felix Teufel, Magnús Halldór Gı́slason, José Juan Almagro Armenteros, Alexander Rosenberg Jo-
  hansen, Ole Winther, and Henrik Nielsen. Graphpart: homology partitioning for biological se-
  quence analysis. NAR genomics and bioinformatics, 5(4):lqad088, 2023.
Gary Tom, Riley J Hickman, Aniket Zinzuwadia, Afshan Mohajeri, Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling,
  and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Calibration and generalizability of probabilistic models on low-data
  chemical datasets with dionysus. Digital Discovery, 2(3):759–774, 2023.
Prudencio Tossou, Cas Wognum, Michael Craig, Hadrien Mary, and Emmanuel Noutahi. Real-world
  molecular out-of-distribution: Specification and investigation. Journal of Chemical Information
  and Modeling, 2024.
Serbulent Unsal, Heval Atas, Muammer Albayrak, Kemal Turhan, Aybar C Acar, and Tunca Doğan.
  Learning functional properties of proteins with language models. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4
  (3):227–245, 2022.
Michel van Kempen, Stephanie S Kim, Charlotte Tumescheit, Milot Mirdita, Cameron LM Gilchrist,
 Johannes Söding, and Martin Steinegger. Foldseek: fast and accurate protein structure search.
 Biorxiv, pp. 2022–02, 2022.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: funda-
  mental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.
Ian Walsh, Dmytro Fishman, Dario Garcia-Gasulla, Tiina Titma, Jen Harrow, Fotis E Psomopoulos,
  and Silvio CE Tosatto. Recommendations for machine learning validation in biology. arXiv,
  2020.

                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ning-Ning Wang, Jie Dong, Yin-Hua Deng, Min-Feng Zhu, Ming Wen, Zhi-Jiang Yao, Ai-Ping Lu,
  Jian-Bing Wang, and Dong-Sheng Cao. Adme properties evaluation in drug discovery: prediction
  of caco-2 cell permeability using a combination of nsga-ii and boosting. Journal of chemical
  information and modeling, 56(4):763–773, 2016.
Wenyi Wang, Fjodor Melnikov, Joe Napoli, and Prashant Desai. Advances in the application of
 in silico admet models–an industry perspective. Computational Drug Discovery: Methods and
 Applications, 2:495–535, 2024.
Frank Wilcoxon. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. biom bull 1 (6): 80–83, 1945.
Congying Xu, Feixiong Cheng, Lei Chen, Zheng Du, Weihua Li, Guixia Liu, Philip W Lee, and Yun
  Tang. In silico prediction of chemical ames mutagenicity. Journal of chemical information and
  modeling, 52(11):2840–2847, 2012.
Youjun Xu, Ziwei Dai, Fangjin Chen, Shuaishi Gao, Jianfeng Pei, and Luhua Lai. Deep learning
  for drug-induced liver injury. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 55(10):2085–2093,
  2015.
Hao Zhu, Todd M Martin, Lin Ye, Alexander Sedykh, Douglas M Young, and Alexander Trop-
  sha. Quantitative structure- activity relationship modeling of rat acute toxicity by oral exposure.
  Chemical research in toxicology, 22(12):1913–1921, 2009.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     M ATHEMATICAL FORMALISATION OF AU-GOOD METRIC
This Appendix section discusses the formal definition of the AU-GOOD metric and its connection
with statistical learning theory. It is divided into four subsections, as follows: i) empirical risk in
terms of the dataset partitioning strategy, ii) definition of the AU-GOOD metric as an estimation of
model generalisation to a target distribution, iii) theoretical considerations regarding the assumption
of unbiased sampling during dataset partitioning, and iv) empirical considerations regarding model
performance metrics.

A.1   E MPIRICAL RISK IN TERMS OF THE DATASET PARTITIONING STRATEGY

This subsection demonstrates that the empirical risk can be expressed in terms of the partitioning
operation used to divide the data into training and testing subsets.
Let us consider a model fθ defined by a set of parameters θ and trained on a data distribution P (x, y)
where each datum is defined by a set of features x ∈ X and a set of labels y ∈ Y. The model will
attempt to approximate an unknown function g that provides a mapping from the feature space to
the label space fθ ≈ g : X → Y. The quality of the approximation can be described in terms of a
loss function L that measures the error in each individual mapping. In the end, the parameters of the
model will be optimised to minimise the expectation of the loss across the whole population which
is also known as the population risk:

                                R(fθ ) := E(x,y)∼P (x,y) [L(fθ (x), y)]                            (1)

In practice, we do not have access to the data distribution, only to a subset, D ∼ P (x, y). Without
access to the data distribution, the population risk has to be approximated by the empirical risk.
The empirical risk of a model given a dataset D is calculated by partitioning D into two mutually
exclusive subsets T , E ∈ D such that T ∩ E = ∅, where T is the train subset and E is the test
subset defined by the partitioning operation denoted as Φ : D → T , E. The model trained on the
train subset is denoted as fθ,T (x) Therefore, the empirical risk can be estimated in terms of the
partitioning strategy:

                                               1 X
                                R̂D (fθ ) :=       L(fθ,T (x), y)                                  (2)
                                               n
                                                  (x,y)∈E

where n is the number of elements in E.

A.2   D EFINITION OF A METRIC ESTIMATING MODEL GENERALISATION TO A TARGET
      DISTRIBUTION

This subsection builds upon the previous definition of empirical risk in terms of the partitioning
operator and derives a metric for model generalisation to any target data distribution based on the
similarity between the elements of the training and target distributions.
Let us consider a hypothetical function that measures the similarity between the features of any two
elements in the population, s : X ×X → R. Let us also consider a partitioning operator that enforces
a maximal value of similarity λ between the elements in training and testing. Such an operator would
necessarily be a function of both the similarity function s and the threshold similarity λs . Then, the
empirical risk would depend on the similarity function and the similarity threshold:

                                                 1X
                                 R̂λs (fθ ) :=      L(fθ,T (xi ), yi )                             (3)
                                                 n
                                                   i∈E

Model generalisation to a target deployment distribution E ∗ that has been drawn from a population
distribution E ∗ ∼ P ∗ (x, y) different from P (x, y) could then be described as the expectation of the
empirical risk across the distribution of the similarity λs , denoted as P (λs |P ∗ ) induced from the
unknown target distribution P ∗ (x, y), within the bounds of a minimal similarity λ0 and a maximal
similarity λn :


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Z λn
                               ∗
                     GΦ (fθ |P ) := E[λs |P ∗ ] R̂λs (fθ ) =           R̂λs P (λs |P ∗ )dλs           (4)
                                                                  λ0

where P (λs |P ∗ ) is the probability density distribution of the similarity between D and E ∗ , i.e., the
expected distribution of similarities between D and E ∗ : P (λs |P ∗ ) = P (max{s(xi , xj ) ∀ xi , xj ∈
D, E ∗ } = λs ). This integral can be approximated numerically by:

                                                   λn
                                                   X
                                           ∗
                                   GΦ (fθ |P ) ≈          R̂λis P (λis |P ∗ )∆λs                      (5)
                                                   i=λ0


A.3    S AMPLING CONSIDERATIONS

In this subsection, we discuss the limitations of the assumption of unbiased sampling made in the
previous subsections.
In many biological domains, data points are noisy, and it’s quite possible that the type of discon-
nected subgraphs generated by similarity-based partitioning algorithms would tend to bias the testing
set towards unrepresentative regions of the (bio)chemical space. This behaviour would lead to unsta-
ble GOOD curves where there is low monotonic correlation between similarity threshold and model
performance and would therefore be identified when following the guidelines outlined in Subsection
3.1.1.
However, if the GOOD curve is monotonic, there could be some specific partitions at given thresh-
olds that show unstable behaviour. Given that the AU-GOOD is an expected value, with a sufficient
number of thresholds (n > 10) and a wide enough dynamic range, the estimated and the true popu-
lation AU-GOOD values will tend to converge.

A.4    M ODEL PERFORMANCE METRIC CONSIDERATIONS

Finally, in this subsection we discuss practical limitations, regarding the effect that choice of model
performance metric might have on the calculated AU-GOOD values and our general recommenda-
tion.
The GOOD curve generates test partitions with different label distributions at different thresholds.
Thus, both the monotonicity and AU-GOOD calculation could be affected by the label distribution
shifts across different thresholds.
For this reason, we recommend the use of model performance metrics that are not sensitive to label
imbalance, like Matthew’s correlation coefficient or weighted F1 for classification tasks and Spear-
man’s or Pearson’s correlation coefficient for regression tasks.

B     H ESTIA COMPUTATIONAL SUITE
B.1   S IMILARITY CALCULATION

Hestia implements a diverse array of pairwise similarity functions s(x, y) which need to fulfill two
conditions:

      1. The similarity between an entity and itself is maximal.
      2. They are symmetric, s(x, y) = s(y, x).

Biological sequences. The similarity function calculated for protein sequences and nucleic acids is
the sequence identity in pairwise alignments. Local alignments are calculated using the MMSeqs2
implementation (Steinegger & Söding, 2017) of the Waterman-Smith algorithm (Smith et al., 1981)
with or without prior k-mer prefiltering. Global alignments are calculated using the EMBOSS im-
plementation (Rice et al., 2000) of the Needleman-Wunch algorithm (Needleman & Wunsch, 1970).
More information regarding the empirical differences between local and global alignments can be


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


found in (Polyanovsky et al., 2011; Teufel et al., 2023). The denominator used to calculate the
identity can be the length of the longest or the shortest sequence, as well as the length of the full
alignment. Choice of the most appropriate denominator depends on the dataset (May, 2004).
Protein structures. The similarity function calculated for a pair of protein structures is the probabil-
ity that they belong to the same SCOPe family (Chandonia et al., 2019). This probability is approx-
imated using the Foldseek alignment algorithm (van Kempen et al., 2022) with both sequence and
structural interaction representation (3Di+AA) in either global (Foldseek-TM) or local (Foldseek)
modes.
For both biological sequences and protein structures, pairwise alignments are not necessarily sym-
metric so we enforce condition 3 by taking the maximal similarity for each pair of entities:
s∗ := max[s(x, y), s(y, x)].
Small molecules. Similarity between small molecules can be calculated using a variety of similarity
functions including: Tanimoto (Rogers & Tanimoto, 1960), Dice (Dice, 1945), Rogot-Goldberg
Rogot & Goldberg (1966), Sokal (Sokal & Michener, 1958), euclidean, manhattan, canberra, or
cosine similarity between various types of fingerprints including extended connectivity fingerprints
(ECFP) (Rogers & Hahn, 2010), MACCS (Durant et al., 2002), or MAPc (Orsi & Reymond, 2024);
an physicochemical descriptors.
Representation learning pre-trained model embeddings. Similarity between embeddings in-
cludes traditional geometrical distance functions like cosine, euclidean, manhattan, canberra, as
well as offering the option to use any custom similarity function. The distance functions d are
                                                                          1
transformed into similarities with the following expression: s(x, y) = 1+d(x,y)

B.2   S IMILARITY CORRECTION ALGORITHMS

Basic notation. Let D be an arbitrary dataset comprised of n entities. D can be expressed as a
graph G(N, E) where the nodes (N ) are the set of all entities in D and the edges (E), the subset of
all pairwise similarity measurements between those entities s(Ni , Nj ) with values above a threshold
λ, thus, E = {(n1 , n2 ) ∀ n1 , n2 ∈ N such that s(n1 , n2 ) > λ}. Let T and V be two partitions of D
such that T ∩ V = ∅. Then, Ef , the forbidden edges, can be defined as the subset of all similarities
between any two entities in T and V that is above the threshold, Ef = {(t, v) ∀ t ∈ T, v ∈ V such
that f (t, v) > λ}.
In this paper, similarity correction techniques refer to algorithms targeting the reduction of Ef . We
discuss them extensively as outlined below.
Similarity reduction. Similarity reduction aims at reducing redundant entities from D. This is
achieved by a two-step process comprising a clustering step and a redundancy reduction step in
which the representative entities of each cluster are selected and the rest of cluster members are re-
moved. Hestia relies on custom implementations of greedy incremental clustering and greedy linear
cover-set algorithms for the clustering step. These algorithms are commonly used in the context of
sequence clustering, by specialised software like CD-HIT (greedy incremental clustering) (Fu et al.,
2012) and MMSeqs (both) (Steinegger & Söding, 2017). Our custom implementations generalise
their utility to any arbitrary data type for which a pairwise distance matrix can be calculated.
Random partitioning. Random partitioning algorithms aim to divide the dataset into subsets
through unbiased sampling. The idea is to generate partitions with similar distributions. Strictly
speaking, it could only be considered a similarity correction algorithm under the assumption of in-
dependent and identically distributed data, e.g., after performing similarity reduction on the dataset.
Hestia leverages the corresponding scikit-learn implementation (Kramer, 2016) of the algo-
rithm.
GraphPart generalisation. Similarity partitioning algorithms aim at dividing the dataset into n
subsets or partitions such that Ef = ∅ between any two partitions. This is achieved through the
removal of entities whenever necessary. Hestia relies on a custom implementation of the Graph-Part
algorithm (Teufel et al., 2023) that generalises it to any similarity function and biochemical data
type.
The algorithm starts with a clustering step using limited agglomerative clustering with single linkage
with the restriction that the clustering stops when either a) a cluster reaches the expected partition


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


size N/n where N is the number of entities in the dataset and n the number of desired partitions
or b) there are no more edges above the threshold λ. Then, clusters are iteratively merged into the
n partitions so that the generated partitions have a balanced distribution of labels (if the dataset has
categorical labels) and similar number of entities. The number of interpartition neighbours (entities
with E > λ) is checked and entities are moved to the partition with which they have the most
neighbours. If the number of entities with at least one interpartition neighbour is greater than 0,
then the c × log (i/100) + 1 entities with most interpartition neighbours are removed, where c is
the number of interpartition neighbours and i, the current iteration. This iterative process continues
until c = 0. Our custom implementation leverages Scipy (Virtanen et al., 2020) and Networkx
(Hagberg & Conway, 2020).
Connected components partitioning.
The algorithm first identifies the set of all unconnected subgraphs of G, {U1 , U2 , . . . , Uk }. These un-
connected subgraphs, by definition, will not have any intercluster neighbours, otherwise they would
not be unconnected. We have observed that generally this strategy leads to one cluster being popu-
lated with most entities and a variable number of much smaller subgraphs (10 - 103 ). The smaller
a cluster is, the more unique it is with respect to the dataset distribution. Based on this assump-
tion, the algorithm builds the evaluation set by assigning subgraphs in ascending order of number
of members, i.e., smaller subgraphs first. As above, there is also the optional additional objective of
maximising evaluation label balance. This sampling strategy biases the evaluation subset towards
the regions of the dataset distribution that are the most unconnected and thus the most dissimilar to
other members of the dataset. See Algorithm - 1.

Algorithm 1 CCPart (Connected Components Partitioning) algorithm
 1: Define G(D, λs )
 2: U ← Find all unconnected subgraphs of G
 3: Sort U in order of ascending number of elements
 4: T , E ← ∅, ∅
 5: while |E| ≤ 0.185 × |D| do
 6:     Add to E first element of U
 7:     Remove first element from U
 8: end while
 9: T ← U
10: return T , E


C    M OLECULAR FINGERPRINTS AND PHYSICOCHEMICAL DESCRIPTORS

ECFP (Extended-connectivity fingerprints) (Rogers & Hahn, 2010) are binary fingerprints where
an “on” bit represents the presence of a substructure and an “off” bit, its absence. The radius de-
termines the number of hops consider in the molecular graph to define each substructure, whereas
the number of bits determines the level of information compression applied with smaller numbers
leading to higher compression and increasing the likelihood of “collisions”, i.e., two substructures
being assigned the same bit. We have chosen the values of radius 2 and 2,048 bits as it is their most
common configuration (Rogers & Hahn, 2010; Orsi & Reymond, 2024) and an early exploratory
analysis showed that they were the most cost effective configuration.
MACCS (Molecular ACCess System) (Durant et al., 2002) are binary fingerprints, as well, with
166 bits. They differ from ECFPs in that there is a direct mapping between the bits and specific,
pre-defined, chemical substructures.
MAPc (MinHashed Atom-Pair chiral fingeprint) (Orsi & Reymond, 2024) fingerprints are hash-
based fingerprints, as ECFP, but they are not binary, each position can be occupied by different
hash-values. They have been shown to outperform any other fingerprint in similarity searches with
unique properties such as being able to discriminate between different stereoisomers of the same
molecule. Number of bits and radius was selected based on the best configuration reported by its
authors.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The Lipinski physicochemical descriptors are a vector that we introduce in this study for the pur-
poses of measuring molecular similarity that has been inspired by Lipinski’s rule of 5 (Lipinski
et al., 1997). It describes the following properties of a molecule: 1) number of H acceptors, 2)
number of H donors, 3) number of heteroatoms, 4) number of rotable bonds, 5) number of saturated
carbocycles, 6) number of rings. The calculation of each the properties was performed through the
implementation in RDKit (Landrum, 2013).
The BUTC is a vector with 8 terms describing the lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval
of the following molecular characteristics related to the maximum value of the Burden Cluster-based
Van der Waals atomic surface area (Stanton, 1999): 1 and 2) upper and lower bound of the mass
eigenvalue; 3 and 4) upper and lower bound of the eigenvalue of the Gasteiger chargea; 5 and 6)
upper and lower bound of the eigenvalue for Crippen logP; and 7 and 8) upper and lower bound of
the eigenvalue for molar refractivity. It is calculated through the implementation in RDKit(Landrum,
2013).


D    C HOICE OF SIMILARITY FUNCTION FOR THE ADMET DATASETS

Figure S1 displays detailed results per dataset and Tables S1-2 contain the raw data from each of
the experiments. It is clear that similarity functions with small GOOD curve dynamic ranges, like
all involving MACCS fingerprints or the BUTC descriptors, also demonstrate the biggest variance
in their GOOD curve monotonicity. This is completely reasonable, as the smaller the dynamic
range, the smaller the number of points comprising the GOOD curve and the more sensitive that the
monotonicity calculation will be to random noise.
For the Ames’ mutagenicity test dataset the similarity function with the largest dynamic range is
Molformer (0.85), however this similarity function is ranked 9th in monotonicity (0.24 ± 0.02). The
next largest dynamic range belongs to MAPc - Jaccard (0.75), which is also the highest monotonicity
(0.82 ± 0.01). The GOOD curve corresponding to MAPc - Jaccard shows three phases. First, an
approximately stationary phase at thresholds 0.2−0.45, then a phase or steep growth 0.45−0.60 and,
finally, a phase with a more controlled growth 0.60−0.95. It is also worth noting that for this dataset
all the similarity functions with a dynamic range below 0.4 (with the exception of RG - ECFP2), have
either a high variance on their monotonicity or very low monotonicity. This observation suggests that
even for such a large dataset (≈ 7, 000 molecules), the increased number of thresholds is necessary
to avoid random noise.
For the Drug-Induced Liver Injury, DILI, dataset the two largest dynamic ranges are Molformer
and MAPc - Jaccard (0.85), with MAPc - Jaccard ranked 3rd in monotonicity (0.81 ± 0.02) and
Molformer 16th (0.33 ± 0.02). The GOOD curve of MAPc-Jaccard shows only one phase of steady
growth. Interestingly, for this small dataset (476 molecules), the GOOD curve is less smooth than in
the rest of the datasets, with small jumps between one threshold and the next. However, this jumps
are well within the error ranges and the overall trend of the curve is clearly monotonic. Another
interesting aspect of this dataset is that all similarity functions show decent monotonicity (lowest is
0.33 ± 0.02), which may respond to the molecular diversity within the dataset.
The PAMPA NCATS dataset is the most challenging of all the datasets considered in this study.
Only the Molformer similarity function achieves a positive monotonicity, albeit a small one
(0.13 ± 0.02). We hypothesize that this is a consequence of the highly unbalanced nature of the
dataset (1,739 positives to 295 negatives), which is further exacerbated by CCPart. Another con-
tributing factor to this behaviour is the nature of the chemical predictive task, cell permeability,
which is not mediated by the scaffold of the molecule or its overall structure, but for smaller local
properties like the charges at the ends of the molecule or its lipophilicity (Hannesschlaeger et al.,
2019). This is also shown in the Caco2 dataset (see below), which also shows uncharacteristic low
monotonicity for fingerprint-based similarity metrics. Overall, this dataset shows the importance of
working with good quality datasets and the need for further research into similarity functions within
the biochemical domain.
Similarly, the Caco2 cell effective permeability dataset shows that MAPc-Jaccard and Molformer
are tied as the similarity functions with largest dynamic range (0.85), but Molformer has the 2nd best
monotonicity (0.76±0.03) and MAPc - Jaccard the 5th (0.45±0.02). Interestingly the 1st similarity
function in monotonicity is ChemBERTa-2 (0.80 ± 0.05), which is also based on a Language Model.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These results are consistent with those seen for the PAMPA dataset, and indicate some dependence
on the chemical task (in both cases cell penetration). If we look at the GOOD curve for Molformer,
even though monotonic, most of the variance due to the threshold is concentrated at very low thresh-
olds (0.1 - 0.25) and then the growth of the curve is very modest. It is clear from this observation
and the previous one with PAMPA that there isi a need for further research into similarity functions
that do not focus as much in global molecular structure (like common fingerprints), but also on the
physicochemical characteristics of the molecules.
The Half-life dataset is quite idiosyncratic, as well. The three similarity functioons with the largest
dynamic range (Molformer, 0.85; MAPc - Jaccard, 0.80; and Sokal - ECFP2, 0.70) all show monono-
tonicity below or around 0.0. The fourth largest dynamic range corresponds to the Lipinski simi-
larity function, which is a new physicochemical similarity function that we first introduced in this
study to address the shortcomings of other alternatives. It has a decent, albeit small, monotonicity
(0.46 ± 0.06). Interestingly, the best monotonicity is achieved by the other physicochemical simi-
larity function we have introduced in this study (BUTC) with 0.80 ± 0.06, however, it has two short
a dunamimc range (0.25). The Lipinski GOOD curve shows a some noise at the beginnig, proba-
bly caused by a pathological sampling by CCPart at the lowest threshold; and then a steep growth
(0.40 - 0.50). From 0.50 until the end model performance remains static. The dataset is quite small
(≈ 667 molecules) and this behaviour could be explained by a lack of internal chemical diversity.
Alternatively, the Lipinski similarity function might not be fine-grained enough to properly exploit
the existing diversity in the dataset. Overall, the results from this dataset paired with the previous
two datasets highlight the importance of considering more diverse similarity functions that do not
rely on the traditional hash-based fingerprints; and the need within the field for more research into
other types of similarity functions.
Finally, the LD50 dataset shows a similar behaviour to that of Ames, which may be explained by
both of them being the biggest. Interestingly, Molformer shows a larger dynamic range (0.85) than
MAPc - Jaccard (0.70); however Molformer ranks 12th in monotonicity (0.48 ± 0.02) and MAPc -
Jaccard, 6th (0.94 ± 0.00), but has an almost perfect monotonicity.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: A: Analysis of dynamic range. B: Analysis of monotonicity, violin plot show the disper-
sion across 5 runs. C: GOOD curves, error bars correspond to the standard error of the mean across
5 runs with independent hyperparameter optimisation. The similarity metric chosen for each dataset
is highlighted.

                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Complete analysis of all similarity functions (Part I). Measurement error corresponds to the
standard error of the mean for 5 independent runs.
                           Dataset     Similarity metric        Monotonicity   Dynamic range
                         ames          Tanimoto - ECFP2     0.74 ± 0.00        0.55
                         ames          Tanimoto - MACCS     −0.62 ± 0.01       0.20
                         ames          Dice - ECFP2         0.74 ± 0.01        0.35
                         ames          Dice - MACCS         −0.60 ± 0.01       0.10
                         ames          Cosine - ECFP2       0.67 ± 0.00        0.35
                         ames          Cosine - MACCS       −0.60 ± 0.01       0.10
                         ames          Sokal - ECFP2        0.77 ± 0.00        0.70
                         ames          Sokal - MACCS        0.03 ± 0.02        0.35
                         ames          RG - ECFP2           0.60 ± 0.02        0.15
                         ames          RG - MACCS           0.20 ± 0.10        0.05
                         ames          MAPc - Jaccard       0.82 ± 0.01        0.75
                         ames          MolFormer            0.24 ± 0.01        0.85
                         ames          BUTC                 −0.90 ± 0.04       0.20
                         ames          Lipinski             0.51 ± 0.02        0.70
                         ames          ChemBERTa-2          0.66 ± 0.07        0.55
                         caco2         Tanimoto - ECFP2     0.33 ± 0.00        0.65
                         caco2         Tanimoto - MACCS     −0.02 ± 0.00       0.25
                         caco2         Dice - ECFP2         0.16 ± 0.01        0.50
                         caco2         Dice - MACCS         0.40 ± 0.02        0.10
                         caco2         Cosine - ECFP2       −0.28 ± 0.01       0.50
                         caco2         Cosine - MACCS       −0.60 ± 0.01       0.10
                         caco2         Sokal - ECFP2        0.55 ± 0.01        0.75
                         caco2         Sokal - MACCS        0.52 ± 0.01        0.40
                         caco2         RG - ECFP2           −0.14 ± 0.04       0.20
                         caco2         RG - MACCS           −1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                         caco2         MAPc - Jaccard       0.45 ± 0.01        0.85
                         caco2         MolFormer            0.76 ± 0.02        0.85
                         caco2         BUTC                 −0.50 ± 0.00       0.10
                         caco2         Lipinski             0.41 ± 0.02        0.60
                         caco2         ChemBERTa-2          0.80 ± 0.05        0.55
                         dili          Tanimoto - ECFP2     0.75 ± 0.00        0.70
                         dili          Tanimoto - MACCS     0.69 ± 0.00        0.35
                         dili          Dice - ECFP2         0.75 ± 0.00        0.55
                         dili          Dice - MACCS         0.62 ± 0.01        0.20
                         dili          Cosine - ECFP2       0.82 ± 0.00        0.55
                         dili          Cosine - MACCS       0.76 ± 0.01        0.20
                         dili          Sokal - ECFP2        0.54 ± 0.01        0.80
                         dili          Sokal - MACCS        0.54 ± 0.02        0.50
                         dili          RG - ECFP2           0.91 ± 0.00        0.25
                         dili          RG - MACCS           0.40 ± 0.05        0.10
                         dili          MAPc - Jaccard       0.81 ± 0.01        0.85
                         dili          MolFormer            0.33 ± 0.01        0.85
                         dili          BUTC                 0.36 ± 0.04        0.15
                         dili          Lipinski             0.41 ± 0.04        0.60
                         dili          ChemBERTa-2          0.80 ± 0.05        0.55
                         pampa ncats   Tanimoto - ECFP2     −0.33 ± 0.01       0.50
                         pampa ncats   Tanimoto - MACCS     −0.40 ± 0.01       0.15
                         pampa ncats   Dice - ECFP2         −0.22 ± 0.01       0.35
                         pampa ncats   Dice - MACCS         −1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                         pampa ncats   Cosine - ECFP2       −0.49 ± 0.01       0.35
                         pampa ncats   Cosine - MACCS       −1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                         pampa ncats   Sokal - ECFP2        −0.28 ± 0.02       0.65
                         pampa ncats   Sokal - MACCS        −0.36 ± 0.02       0.25
                         pampa ncats   RG - ECFP2           −0.36 ± 0.02       0.15
                         pampa ncats   RG - MACCS           −1.00 ± 0.00       0.00
                         pampa ncats   MAPc - Jaccard       −0.27 ± 0.02       0.80
                         pampa ncats   MolFormer            0.13 ± 0.02        0.80
                         pampa ncats   BUTC                 −1.00 ± 0.00       0.00
                         pampa ncats   Lipinski             −0.30 ± 0.05       0.50
                         pampa ncats   ChemBERTa-2          −0.18 ± 0.07       0.40
                         half life     Tanimoto - ECFP2     −0.34 ± 0.00       0.60
                         half life     Tanimoto - MACCS     −0.70 ± 0.01       0.20
                         half life     Dice - ECFP2         −0.47 ± 0.01       0.40
                         half life     Dice - MACCS         0.50 ± 0.00        0.10
                         half life     Cosine - ECFP2       −0.67 ± 0.00       0.40
                         half life     Cosine - MACCS       −1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                         half life     Sokal - ECFP2        −0.68 ± 0.00       0.70
                         half life     Sokal - MACCS        −0.11 ± 0.01       0.35
                         half life     RG - ECFP2           0.48 ± 0.01        0.20
                         half life     RG - MACCS           −1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                         half life     MAPc - Jaccard       −0.12 ± 0.01       0.80
                         half life     MolFormer            −0.08 ± 0.01       0.85
                         half life     BUTC                 0.80 ± 0.04        0.15
                         half life     Lipinski             0.46 ± 0.05        0.60
                         half life     ChemBERTa-2          0.36 ± 0.04        0.55


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Complete analysis of all similarity functions (Part II). Measurement error corresponds to
the standard error of the mean for 5 independent runs.
                                Dataset        Similarity metric      Monotonicity     Dynamic range
                                ld50          Tanimoto - ECFP2       0.96 ± 0.00       0.45
                                ld50          Tanimoto - MACCS       0.54 ± 0.01       0.20
                                ld50          Dice - ECFP2           0.97 ± 0.00       0.30
                                ld50          Dice - MACCS           1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                                ld50          Cosine - ECFP2         0.79 ± 0.01       0.30
                                ld50          Cosine - MACCS         1.00 ± 0.00       0.05
                                ld50          Sokal - ECFP2          0.93 ± 0.00       0.65
                                ld50          Sokal - MACCS          0.57 ± 0.01       0.35
                                ld50          RG - ECFP2             1.00 ± 0.00       0.10
                                ld50          RG - MACCS             −1.00 ± 0.00      0.00
                                ld50          MAPc - Jaccard         0.94 ± 0.00       0.70
                                ld50          MolFormer              0.48 ± 0.02       0.85
                                ld50          BUTC                   −0.90 ± 0.05      0.15
                                ld50          Lipinski               0.51 ± 0.06       0.70


E   H YPERPARAMETER S EARCH FOR HPO
Table S3 describes the hyperparameter space defined for all experiments.


                 Table 3: Hyperparameter search space for each learning algorithm.
      Model      Trials                                            Hyperparameter search space
                          Name                                     Type               Range                          Log-scale
                          C                                        float              1 × 10−3 - 103                 Yes
                          kernel                                   categorical        linear, poly, rbf, sigmoid     NA
      SVM        200      degree (only kernel poly)                integer            2-5                            No
                          coef0 (only with poly or sigmoid)        float              10−8 - 1                       Yes
                          epsilon (only regression)                float              10−5 - 1                       Yes
                          K                                        integer            1-30                           No
                          Weights                                  categorical        uniform, distance              NA
                          algorithm                                categorical        ball tree, kd tree, brute      NA
      KNN        200
                          leaf size (only with ball or kd tree)    integer            5 - 100                        No
                          power of Minkowski metric                integer            1-3                            No
                          number of estimators                     integer            10-5,000                       No
                          criterion                                categorical        gini*, entropy*, log loss*,
                                                                                      MSE**, MAE**, friedman MSE**   NA
      RF         200
                          minimum samples per split                integer            2 - 100                        No
                          maximum features                         categorical        log2, sqrt                     NA
                          complexity parameter (ccp alpha)         float              10−10 - 10−3                   Yes
                          number of estimators                     integer            10-5,000                       No
                          minimum child samples                    integer            10 - 500                       No
      LightGBM   200      minimum split gain                       float              10−10 - 10−3                   Yes
                                                                      −10        −3
                          regularization α                         10       - 10      Yes
                          learning rate                            float              10−7 - 10−1                    Yes


F   V ISUALISATION OF THE CHEMICAL SPACE
This appendix contains the visualisation of the level of overlap between the training and testing
partitions of the dataset in the chemical space defined by the ECFP fingerprints.


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: UMAP representation of the chemical space covered by the training (blue) and testing
(red) partitions of all molecular datasets considered during this study.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    D ETAILED H ESTIA ANALYSES FOR ALL ADMET DATASETS


This appendix contains the detailed Hestia analyses for all ADMET datasets considered in this study.


Figure 3: Hestia analyses for the comparison of learning algorithms for the 6 ADMET datasets
considered in this study.


H    D ETAILED H ESTIA ANALYSES FOR ALL PROTEIN DATASETS


Figure 4: A: Analysis of dynamic range. B: Analysis of monotonicity. Violin plot show the disper-
sion in the GOOD curve slope across 8 alternative representation methods and 5 runs per represen-
tation (total of 40 experiments)


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Analyses for the comparison of PLM embeddings algorithms for the optimal temperature
for catalysis.


                                               26
