Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING FROM E ND U SER DATA WITH S HUFFLED
D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY OVER K ERNEL D ENSITIES
 Tal Wagner
 The Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI
 Tel-Aviv University
 tal.wagner@gmail.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         We study a setting of collecting and learning from private data distributed across
         end users. In the shuffled model of differential privacy, the end users partially pro-
         tect their data locally before sharing it, and their data is also anonymized during
         its collection to enhance privacy. This model has recently become a prominent al-
         ternative to central DP, which requires full trust in a central data curator, and local
         DP, where fully local data protection takes a steep toll on downstream accuracy.
         Our main technical result is a shuffled DP protocol for privately estimating the
         kernel density function of a distributed dataset, with accuracy essentially match-
         ing central DP. We use it to privately learn a classifier from the end user data, by
         learning a private density function per class. Moreover, we show that the density
         function itself can recover the semantic content of its class, despite having been
         learned in the absence of any unprotected data. Our experiments show the fa-
         vorable downstream performance of our approach, and highlight key downstream
         considerations and trade-offs in a practical ML deployment of shuffled DP.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Collecting statistics on end user data is commonly required in data analytics and machine learning.
As it could leak private user information, privacy guarantees need to be incorporated into the data
collection pipeline. Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) currently serves as the gold
standard for privacy in machine learning. Most of its success has been in the central DP model,
where a centralized data curator holds the private data of all the users and is charged with protecting
their privacy. However, this model does not address how to collect the data from end users in the first
place. The local DP model (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011), where end users protect the privacy of
their data locally before sharing it, is often used for private data collection (Erlingsson et al., 2014;
Ding et al., 2017; Apple, 2017). However, compared to central DP, local DP often comes at a steep
price of degraded accuracy in downstream uses of the collected data.
The shuffled DP model (Bittau et al., 2017; Cheu et al., 2019; Erlingsson et al., 2019) has recently
emerged as a prominent intermediate alternative. In this model, the users partially protect their data
locally, and then entrust a centralized authority—called the “shuffler”—with the single operation of
shuffling (or anonymizing) the data from all participating users. Data collection protocols in this
model are designed so that the composition of shuffling over local user computations rigorously en-
sures DP. The appeal of shuffled DP lies in the convergence of theoretical and practical properties:
mathematically, recent work has proved that shuffling can boost the accuracy of local DP to levels
that may reach those of central DP (Erlingsson et al., 2019; Balle et al., 2019b; 2020b; Koskela
et al., 2021; Girgis et al., 2021c; Feldman et al., 2022; 2023; Zhou & Shi, 2022). At the same
time, the strictly limited functionality of the shuffler lends itself to realistic secure implementations,
and a trusted shuffler can be implemented using techniques from secure computation and cryptog-
raphy, like mixnets, onion routing, trusted execution environments (TEEs), and secure aggregation
(SecAgg) (Ishai et al., 2006; Bittau et al., 2017; Gordon et al., 2022; Kairouz et al., 2021a;b).
There is by now a well-developed body of work on basic operations under shuffled DP, primarily
summation (see Section 2.2). Work on machine learning has mostly focused on iterative settings
(see Section 2.4), where distributed parties contribute local computations on their sensitive data, like


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


gradients, over multiple rounds of shuffled DP communication. This is compatible with distributed
(or federated) training scenarios, in which a known set of parties collaborate in a training process
that unfolds over time, typically with each contributing a local dataset and local computational
resources (say, for computing local gradients). For example, the parties could be local branches of a
large corporation (e.g., a bank), each holding the private data of multiple local customers.
Unfortunately, this is incompatible with data collection scenarios, where a “snapshot” of user data is
collected in one shot from a pool of uncommitted users who hold a single training point (their own
private data), which they may opt in or out of sharing, and who do not participate computationally
in the training process beyond possibly contributing their data. For example, the users could be end
customers of a smartphone app, prompted to privately share statistics about their app activity.
In this work, we study the data collection scenario under shuffled DP. We propose a private learning
approach which can intuitively be seen as a shuffled DP analog of a nearest neighbor (kNN) clas-
sifier. A distributed training set of sensitive labeled data is privately collected from users, and like
in kNN, subsequent test points are classified according to the most similar training examples. Since
using a small number of neighbors in classification may violate their privacy, our classifier uses ker-
nel density estimation (KDE) as a “smooth” alternative to kNN, which can be realized with shuffled
DP. It thus labels test points as the class where their privately estimated density is maximized.
Moreover, our classifier produces a function representation of each class. We show this representa-
tion can be used to recover the semantics of the class—for example, a list of terms that captures the
topic of a class in textual data—even though the learner did not observe any unprotected text record
from the class before privacy was imposed. We refer to this as private class decoding.
Our results. Formally, we consider the following learning setting. Training data is distributed
across n users, each holding a single private training point (x, c), where x ∈ Rd is a feature vector
and c ∈ [m] is a class label. The learner collects data from the users through shuffled DP, and uses
them to construct a classifier, which can then be used to classify feature vectors y ∈ Rd from an
unlabeled test set. The classifier itself needs to be private w.r.t. the collected dataset; this enables
labeling an unbounded number of test points without additional loss of privacy.
To address this setting, our main theoretical result is a shuffled DP protocol for KDE estimation,
that learns a private KDE function from distributed user data, which can then be used to estimate
densities of test points. The utility guarantee is given in terms of the supremum mean squared error
over all test points in Rd , so that test points need not be known to the protocol in advance. The
proof goes through a reduction to binary summation (abbrev. bitsum), which is among the most
well-studied problems in shuffled DP, with a variety of available protocols to employ.
Experimentally, we evaluate our method with various combinations of kernels and bitsum protocols,
yielding different trade-offs between privacy, accuracy and communication, and highlighting key
downstream considerations for shuffled DP compared to central DP and local DP baselines.

2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
2.1   C ENTRAL , L OCAL AND S HUFFLED DP

We review models of differential privacy. Let X be a universe of data elements. A dataset is an n-
tuple X ∈ X n . Two datasets X, X ′ are called neighboring if they differ on at most one coordinate.
A randomized algorithm M , that maps an input dataset to an output from a range of outputs T , is
(ε, δ)-DP if for every pair of neighboring datasets X, X ′ and every T ⊂ T , it satisfies
                            Pr[M (X) ∈ T ] ≤ eε · Pr[M (X ′ ) ∈ T ] + δ.                            (1)

In central DP, a single data curator holds a dataset X ∈ X n containing the data of n users, with each
coordinate in the n-tuple X representing a user. The curator runs M and releases its output.
In local DP, each user holds her own data element, on which she runs M locally, and releases its
output. Here, M operates on a single data element (or 1-tuple), and needs to satisfy eq. (1) for every
X, X ′ ∈ X (every pair of single elements is neighboring). A central analyzer collects the already
“privatized” outputs from all users and performs an aggregate computation. In this model, there is
no trusted central party at all, yielding a stronger form of privacy, albeit at the cost of accuracy.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The shuffled DP model (Bittau et al., 2017; Cheu et al., 2019; Erlingsson et al., 2019) bridges the
central and local DP models, by introducing a limited trusted central party—called a “shuffler”—
whose only function is to anonymize (or randomly permute) the users’ outputs before they are shown
to the analyzer. The analyzer is considered untrusted, simialrly to local DP and unlike central DP.
Formally, a shuffled DP protocol Π consists of three randomized algorithms Π = (ΠR , ΠS , ΠA ):
• Randomizer ΠR , which maps a single element from X to some sequence of messages. Each user
  runs ΠR locally on her data element, and forwards the output messages to the shuffler.
• Shuffler ΠS , which collects the messages from all users and forwards them to the analyzer in a
  uniformly random order (thus, intuitively, removing sender identities).
• Analyzer ΠA , which receives the permuted messages from the shuffler and outputs the result of
  an aggregate computation.
The protocol is (ε, δ)-DP in the shuffled DP model if the output of ΠS satisfies eq. (1) (i.e., it holds
with M (X) := ΠS (∪ni=1 ΠR (Xi ))). Due to the DP post-processing property (Dwork et al., 2014),
the output of ΠA is (ε, δ)-DP as well. The parties in the protocol also have access to a source of
shared public randomness, which is considered publicly known, and thus cannot be exploited to
compromise privacy (see Kairouz et al. (2021a)).

2.2     B ITSUM P ROTOCOLS IN THE S HUFFLED DP M ODEL

Binary summation, which we refer to throughout as bitsum, is a fundamental and well-studied prob-
lem in DP, and particularly in shuffled DP. Each ofPnn users holds a private bit Xi ∈ {0, 1}, and the
goal is to compute a DP estimate of the sum S = i=1 Xi . The accuracy of a randomized estimate
Se is often quantified by its root mean squared error (RMSE), (E[(Se − S)2 ])1/2 .
A long line of work on shuffled DP bitsums (Cheu et al., 2019; Cheu & Yan, 2021; Ghazi et al.,
2020b;a; 2021b; 2023) had yielded protocols whose RMSE essentially matches central DP, and is
significantly better than local DP, along with additional desirable properties, like low communication
and pure DP (i.e., δ = 0). We will use these protocols as black-boxes and not require familiarity
with their details. For completeness and intuition, we describe how they work in Appendix B.1.

2.3     P RIVATE K ERNEL D ENSITY E STIMATION

Let k : Rd × Rd → R be a kernel, such as the Gaussian kernel k(x, y) = exp(−∥x − y∥22 ). The
kernel density estimation (KDE) mapPKDEX : Rd → R, associated with a multiset X ⊂ Rd of
size n, is defined as KDEX (y) = n1 x∈X k(x, y).
Numerous works studied KDE in the central DP model (Hall et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2016; Alda &
Rubinstein, 2017; Coleman & Shrivastava, 2021; Wagner et al., 2023; Backurs et al., 2024), mostly
in a setting known as function release. In this setting, the data curator holds all of X, and her goal is
to release a function description K(·)
                                  e which is DP w.r.t. X, such that K(y) e    is an accurate estimate of
KDEX (y) for every y ∈ Rd . We will adapt this problem to the shuffled DP model in Definition 3.1.
Our approach to this problem will use the following notion of locality-sensitive quantization (LSQ),
recently introduced in Wagner et al. (2023) for KDE in the central DP model.
Definition 2.1 (Wagner et al. (2023)). Let Q, R, S, β > 0. Let Q be a distribution over pairs
of functions f, g : Rd → [−R, R]Q . We say that Q is a β-approximate (Q, R, S)-locality sensitive
quantization (abbrev. LSQ) family for the kernel k, if the following are satisfied for all x, y ∈ Rd :
 •    |k(x, y) − E(f,g)∼Q [f (x)T g(y)]| ≤ β.
 •    f (x) and g(y) have each at most S non-zero coordinates.
If this holds, then k is β-approximate (Q, R, S)-LSQable. If β = 0, then k is (Q, R, S)-LSQable.
                                                                            √
For example, Wagner et al. (2023) observed that the Gaussian kernel is (1, 2, 1)-LSQable by ran-
dom Fourier features (Rahimi & Recht, 2007), and the Laplacian and exponential kernels are β-
approximate (O(β −1 ), 1, 1)-LSQable for all β > 0 by locality sensitive hashing (Indyk & Motwani,
1998). They proved that LSQable kernels admit efficient KDE mechanisms in the central DP model.
We will prove an analogous result for shuffled DP. While we draw on ideas from their central DP
mechanism, our proofs will be different and self-contained.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.4   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

Prior work on machine learning with shuffled DP has mostly focused on two iterative learning set-
tings: distributed and federated model training (Cheu et al., 2021; Girgis et al., 2021b;a; Liu et al.,
2021; Kairouz et al., 2021a), where users share privately computed gradients; and multi-armed and
contextual bandits (Tenenbaum et al., 2021; Chowdhury & Zhou, 2022; Zhou & Chowdhury, 2023;
Tenenbaum et al., 2023), where users share private contexts and rewards. The main difference from
our setting is their iterative nature, in which the users communicate with the analyzer over multiple
rounds of a shuffled DP protocol. Of these, Tenenbaum et al. (2021) is somewhat akin to us in that
they also reduce their problem to bitsums, although in their case the connection is more direct as
they assume binary rewards in their multi-armed bandits problem.
Beyond bitsums, there has been much work on shuffled DP protocols for integer and real summation
(Cheu et al., 2019; Cheu & Zhilyaev, 2022; Balle et al., 2019b;a; 2020a; Ghazi et al., 2020b;a;
2021b; Balcer et al., 2021) and other basic operations (Balcer & Cheu, 2019; Ghazi et al., 2019;
2021a; Chen et al., 2020a; Chang et al., 2021; Scott et al., 2021; Tenenbaum et al., 2023). We
discuss real summation in the context of our work in more detail in Appendix B.2.
Outside shuffled DP, a relevant work in the central DP model is Backurs et al. (2024), who also
suggested a classifier that maximizes the privately computed similarity to a class. They presented
results for the CIFAR-10 dataset by measuring distances to class means. Our experiments in Sec-
tion 4 include the same data in a distributed setup, evaluated with our shuffled DP protocol.


3     DATA C OLLECTION AND C LASSIFICATION WITH S HUFFLED DP

In this section we present our private data collection and learning protocol. In Section 3.1, we dis-
cuss certain practical considerations with shuffled DP, that would inform the design of our method.
In Section 3.2, we give our shuffled DP result for KDE, which is the main building block in our
classifier. In Section 3.3, we use it to privately learn a classifier from collected user data.


3.1   P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS WITH S HUFFLED DP

User counts. A key limitation of shuffled DP is that protocols are required to know in advance the
number of participating users n. Technically, the noise added by each local randomizer ΠR generally
decreases with n. This is crucial for boosted accuracy, albeit if some users drop out, the protocol
fails to meet its DP guarantee for the remaining users. This limitation may be acceptable in the
distributed training scenario from Section 1, where a predetermined group of parties is expected to
collaborate on training and reliably execute the protocol. However, in our data collection scenario, it
would make less sense to assume that the number of participating users is known in advance. We will
therefore designate a preliminary communication round for allowing users to opt into participation.
Privacy threat models. There are several possible places to impose DP in an ML pipeline. Pono-
mareva et al. (2023) outline three options, from the most stringent to most lenient form of privacy:
input/data-level DP, where the adversary has access to the data used to train the ML model; model-
level DP, where the adversary has full access to the weights of the trained model; and prediction-
level DP, where the adversary has access only to model outputs when presented with test points.
We will consider the first two of these options, adapted to shuffled DP. Input/data-level DP means the
adversary sees all communication sent to the analyzer (equivalently, the analyzer itself is the adver-
sary). Note that communication from the users to the shuffler is never exposed (that would void the
premise of shuffled DP); in practice, this line of communication is implemented cryptographically,
exploiting on the restricted nature of the shuffler (Kairouz et al., 2021a). However, the adversary can
see all communication between the shuffler and the analyzer, as well as all direct communication
(if any) between the users and the analyzer. We refer to this as the communication-threat model. In
model-level DP, a weaker adversary sees only the trained model released by the analyzer after the
protocol execution is complete; we refer to this as the model-threat model. These threat models are
typically not differentiated in prior work on shuffled DP, since they often coincide; however, in our
case, the trained model would leak less privacy than the communication used to learn it.


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: Shuffled DP KDE protocol from bitsums
Global initialization // all data here is public       Analyzer // runs after the shuffler
   input: shuffled DP bitsum protocol Π;                  input: shuffled sequence of messages Γ
                                                                                               e
            (Q, R, S)-LSQ family Q; integer                        from n users
            I>0                                           for (i, j) ∈ [I] × [Q] do
   for i = 1, . . . , I do                                    e ij ← empty sequence
                                                              Γ
       (fi , gi ) ← independent sample from Q
         // using shared/public randomness                for message (γ, (i, j)) in Γ
                                                                                     e do
       for j = 1, . . . , Q do                                append γ to Γij
                                                                            e
            Πij ← independent instance of Π
                                                          for (i, j) ∈ [I] × [Q] do
    publish: (fi , gi ) for all i = 1, . . . , I              Beij ← run the analyzer of Πij on Γ
                                                                                                e ij
Randomizer // each user runs this locally with                Feij ← (2B eij − n)R
 private randomness
    input: private data point x ∈ Rd                      publish: Feij for all i, j
    for (i, j) ∈ [I] × [Q] do                    KDE Query // runs on the analyzer’s
        bij ← Bernoulli(0.5(1 + (fi (x))j /R))    published output arbitrarily many times
        Γij ← run the randomizer of Πij on bij      input: query point y ∈ Rd
        for message γ in Γij do                              1
                                                                PI PQ e
                                                    return: nI    i=1    j=1 Fij · (gi (y))j
             send (γ, (i, j)) to the shuffler


Bit-width and discretization. Kairouz et al. (2021a) emphasize that in practice, the shuffler imple-
mentation often requires modular arithmetics for cryptographic secure aggregation. Therefore, the
shuffled DP protocol’s numerical values must be discretized, and its bit precision (called bit-width)
needs to be explicitly bounded. Neglecting to account for the bit-width may lead to impractical
communication costs and to larger errors (due to discretization) than a real-valued analysis predicts.
We will therefore incorporate discretization into our protocol and account for it in the error analysis.

3.2   S HUFFLED DP KDE FROM B ITSUM P ROTOCOLS

We now present the theoretical backbone of our private learning approach, a shuffled DP protocol
for KDE. We start by defining the KDE problem in the shuffled DP model.
Definition 3.1 (shuffled DP KDE). In the shuffled DP KDE problem, a dataset X ∈ (Rd )n of n
points in Rd is distributed across n users, one point per user. The goal is to devise a shuffled DP
protocol ΠKDE in which the analyzer releases a function description K(·),
                                                                     e     required to be (ε, δ)-DP
w.r.t. X. The supremum root mean square error (abbrev. supRMSE) of the protocol is defined as
                                                s
                                                                            2
                    supRMSE(ΠKDE ) := sup E K(y)        e    − KDEX (y)         .
                                            y∈Rd

Our main technical result is the following theorem, which is a reduction from KDE to bitsum pro-
tocols in the shuffled DP model, for kernels with the LSQ property defined in Definition 2.1. The
resulting shuffled DP KDE protocol is given in Algorithm 1.
Theorem 3.2. Let k be a β-approximate (Q, R, S)-LSQable kernel (cf. Definition 2.1). Suppose we
have an unbiased (ε0 , δ0 )-DP bitsum protocol Π in the shuffled DP model, with RMSE EΠ . Then, for
every δ ′ > 0 and integer I > 0, Algorithm 1 is a shuffled DP KDE    pprotocol, which is (ε, δ)-DP in
the communication-threat
                p           model, where ε = ε0 S(e ε0 S
                                                         −1)I +ε 0 S  2I ln(1/δ ′ ) and δ = ISδ0 +δ ′ ,
with supRMSE 4β 2 + I −1 · 16R4 S (S + (EΠ /n)2 ). The protocol has optimal bit-width 1.
Note that ε, δ take the familiar “advanced composition” form (Dwork et al., 2014) of I instances of
an (ε0 S, δ0 S)-DP mechanism. The proof of Theorem 3.2 goes by showing that the LSQ coordinates
can be discretized essentially without loss of accuracy, and invoking the bitsum protocol on the dis-
cretized coordinates, using a careful probabilistic analysis to bound the overall supRMSE from their
individual RMSEs. It is given in full in Appendix A.1. Appendix A.1.7 also discusses additional
variants of Theorem 3.2, for bitsum protocols whose error guarantee is given in other terms than the
RMSE (like Cheu et al. (2019)), or that achieve pure DP (like Ghazi et al. (2020a; 2023)).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As a concrete instantiation of Theorem 3.2, we get the following result for the Gaussian kernel, by
plugging the shuffled DP protocol from Ghazi et al. (2020b) as the bitsum protocol, and random
Fourier features (Rahimi & Recht, 2007) as the LSQ family. The proof is in Appendix A.2. For
completeness, the protocol for this special case is fully detailed in Algorithm 2 in the appendix.
Theorem 3.3 (shuffled DP Gaussian KDE). There are constants    p     C, C ′ > 0 such that the following
holds. Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and ε ≤ C log(1/δ). For every α ≥ C ′ log(1/δ)/(εn), there is an (ε, δ)-DP
Gaussian KDE protocol in the shuffled DP model (under the communication-threat model) with n
users and inputs from Rd , which has: supRMSE α, user running time min(O(d/α2 ), Õ(d + 1/α4 )),
expected communication of Õ(1/α2 ) bits per user, expected analyzer running time O(n/α2 ), KDE
query time min(O(d/α2 ), Õ(d + 1/α4 )), and optimal bit-width 1.

3.3   P RIVATE L EARNING , C LASSIFICATION AND C LASS D ECODING

We now describe our private learning approach for classification and class decoding. Recall that
each user holds a private data point x ∈ Rd and a corresponding label c ∈ [m].
Learning. The learner will aim to learn a KDE function representation per class, using the shuffled
DP protocol from Theorem 3.2. As discussed in Section 3.1, this requires knowing in advance the
number of participating users per class. We therefore start with a preliminary communication round
designated to privately obtain these counts. This could be done with an off-the-shelf shuffled DP
histogram protocol (e.g., Ghazi et al. (2020b)); however, this again requires prior knowledge of the
total number of users. To avoid this chicken-and-egg issue, we will use vanilla local DP for the
preliminary communication round. It is a stronger form of privacy that requires no prior knowledge,
and its accuracy, while degraded, is still sufficient for the simple task of private user counts.
Formally, let ε0 , δ0 , εlbl > 0 be privacy parameters. Learning proceeds as follows. First, each user
locally protects her label c and publishes a privatized label c̃, using m-ary randomized response
(Kairouz et al., 2014; 2016). Thus, c̃ is set to c with probability eεlbl /(eεlbl − 1 + m), and to a
uniformly random label from [m] \ {c} otherwise. This ensures that c̃ is εlbl -DP, without shuffling.
Based on the published labels, the learner groups the users into their reported classes, and publishes
the count of users ñc̃ in each reported class c̃ ∈ [m]. These counts are εlbl -DP by post-processing,
and thus safe to publish. The users in each reported class then execute the shuffled DP KDE protocol
in Algorithm 1, using ε0 , δ0 as the privacy parameters for each instance of the bitsum protocol Π.
The learner acts as the analyzer in all these protocols, and through them learns an approximate KDE
function Ke c (·) for each label c ∈ [m]. From Theorem 3.2 and from basic DP composition, we have
the following privacy guarantee:
Corollary 3.4. The above learning protocol is (ε, δ)-DP in the model-threat model, and (ε+εlbl , δ)-
DP in the communication-threat model, where ε, δ are given by ε0 , δ0 as stated in Theorem 3.2.

Classification. The learner classifies a test point y ∈ Rd as the class where its private density
estimate is maximized, namely as cy = argmaxc∈[m] K     e c (y). We refer to this as the highest density
class (HDC) classifier. It can be viewed as generalizing the k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier,
where the density of y w.r.t. class c is measured by the number of its k-nearest neighbors labeled c,
and of the nearest class center (NCC) classifier (Papyan et al., 2020), where the density is measured
by the distance between y to the mean of all data points labeled c. Note that the kNN classifier is
incompatible with DP, since its output relies on a small number of training points, while the NCC
classifier is a special case of HDC, which we include in the experiments in the next section.
Private class decoding. To illustrate class decoding, Suppose that the data points are embeddings
of text documents (even though the notion extends to other data modalities as well). Let V ⊂ Rd be
a fixed public “vocabulary”, say the embeddings of all words in an English dictionary. To “decode”
a class c, the learner returns the top few vocabulary words v ∈ V that maximize Ke c (v). The goal is
for those words to capture and convey the semantic meanings of texts from class c.
To underline the distinction between classification and class decoding: classification relies on the
ability of the collection of functions {Ke c }c∈[m] to produce meaningfully rankable scores over the
different classes for a fixed input y ∈ Rd ; class decoding relies on the ability of each fixed function
Ke c to produce meaningfully rankable scores over a large collection of inputs V ⊂ Rd . In general, we


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expect a learned representation of a class to encompass its semantic meaning and to be decodable.
The particular challenge in shuffled DP is that the representation was learned without observing any
raw training example from the class, i.e., prior to imposing differential privacy on the training data.

4       E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our method with several combinations of kernels and bitsum protocols. Our code is
enclosed in the supplementary material and available online.
Datasets. We use three textual datasets and one image dataset:
• DBPedia-14 (Zhang et al., 2015): Text documents containing summaries of Wikipedia articles.
  Training examples: 560K, test examples: 70K, classes: 14, task: topic classification.
• AG news (Zhang et al., 2015): Text documents containing news articles. Training examples:
  120K, test examples: 7.6K, classes: 4, task: topic classification.
• SST2 (Socher et al., 2013): Sentences extracted from movie reviews. Training examples: 67.3K,
  test examples: 1.82K, classes: 2, task: sentiment classification (positive/negative).
• CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009): Images from different object categories. Training examples: 50K,
  test examples: 10K, classes: 10, task: depicted object classification.
The datasets are embedded in Rd using standard pretrained models. The textual datasets are embed-
ded into 768 dimensions with the SentenceBERT “all-mpnet-base-v2” model (Reimers & Gurevych,
2019). CIFAR-10 is embedded into 6144 dimensions with the SimCLR “r152 3x sk1” model (Chen
et al., 2020b), pre-trained on Imagenet (these are the same embeddings used in Backurs et al. (2024)
for their central DP experiment). All embedding vectors are normalized to unit length. We note
that the datasets are not included in the pretraining set of the respective embedding models used to
embed them, ensuring that the pretraining set does not leak privacy in our experiments.
Kernels. We experiment with two kernels that fit into the framework of Theorem 3.2:
                                           2
                                                                                 √
• Gaussian: k(x, y) = exp(−∥x − y∥2 ). As noted in Section 2.3, it is (1,          2, 1)-LSQable by
  letting the functions in Q be random Fourier features, leading to Theorem 3.3.
                                              T
• IP: The inner product kernel k(x, y) = x y. Since our embeddings are normalized, it is trivially
                                    √
  (d, 1, d)-LSQable. It is also (1, d, 1)-LSQable by standard dimensionality reduction arguments
                                                                                                     ′
  (see Appendix A.3), which leads to better parameters
                                             1
                                                P         T       T  1
                                                                         PNote that for a subset X
                                                           in Theorem 3.2.
  of training points, the IP KDE at y is |X ′ | x∈X ′ | y x = y ( |X ′ | x∈X ′ x). Thus, the HDC
  classifier labels y by the most similar class mean, as the NCC classifier discussed in Section 3.3.
To equalize the computational costs of the two kernels, we set the number of repetitions I in Algo-
rithm 1 to d (the embedding dimension). Since the embeddings have unit length, there is no need to
clip the vectors at a hyperparameter (as in Kairouz et al. (2021a); Backurs et al. (2024)) for the IP
kernel, nor to optimize a bandwidth for the Gaussian kernel (it is just set to 1).
Bitsum protocols. We use three shuffled DP bitsum protocols from the literature, each optimal in a
different measure — efficiency, accuracy and privacy, respectively (see also Appendix B.1):
• RR: The classical randomized response protocol, as adapted to shuffled DP by Cheu et al. (2019).
  This protocol has optimal communication efficiency of a single one-bit message per user.1
• 3NB: The correlated noise protocol of Ghazi et al. (2020b), which has asymptotically optimal
  accuracy. We call it 3NB since it relies on three samples from a negative binomial distribution.2
                                                                                             3
• Pure: The pure DP (δ = 0) protocol of Ghazi et al. (2023). The other protocols use δ > 0.

Privacy parameters. We follow the guidelines given in Ponomareva et al. (2023), who cite current
machine learning deployments of DP as using ε generally between 5 to 15, and advocate for ε ≤ 10
as an acceptable privacy regime. We use ε ∈ (0, 10) to protect the training point x ∈ Rd with
(ε, δ)-shuffle DP, and εlbl ∈ {3, 5, 7, 10} to protect the label c ∈ [m] with (εlbl , 0)-local DP. We use
δ = 10−6 for DBPedia-14 and AG news, and δ = 10−5 for SST2 and CIFAR-10, accounting for the
    1
     See Section 4.2 for a detailed discussion on communication costs.
    2
     See ψ1 , ψ2 , ψ3 in Algorithm 2 in the appendix.
   3
     To maintain purity in Algorithm 1 when composing instances of Pure, they are composed with “basic”
(pure) rather than “advanced” (approximate) DP composition (Dwork et al., 2014). See Appendix A.1.7.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Figure 1: Classification results with εlbl = 5

different dataset sizes. For RR and 3NB, the δ “budget” in Theorem 3.2 is split equally between the
advanced composition parameter δ ′ and the total IQδ0 term of the bitsum protocol instances.

4.1   P RIVATE C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS

We evaluate the HDC classification accuracy for each combination of kernel and bitsum protocol,
{Gaussian, IP} × {RR, 3NB, Pure}, on each the dataset. Figure 1 shows results for εlbl = 5 (solid
lines). Results for other values of εlbl are similar and appear in the appendix (Figures 5 to 8).
As points of reference, we include the following two baselines for each kernel:
• (ε, δ)-central DP (dotted lines): HDC with the bitsum protocols in Algorithm 1 replaced by the
  standard Gaussian DP mechanism (see Section A in Dwork et al. (2014)).
• No privacy (dash-dot lines): HDC with the bitsum protocols replaced by exact summation.

In the appendix (Figure 4), we also include an ablation against a local DP baseline.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Figure 2: Empirical communication


                                 Figure 3: Gaussian KDE accuracy

The results exhibit consistent behavior. Without privacy, the IP kernel outperforms the Gaussian
kernel in all settings. This corroborates the known effectiveness of the NCC classifier on neural
embeddings (see Papyan et al. (2020)). Moreover, central DP closely matches the corresponding
non-DP downstream accuracy already at small values of ε, which corroborates a similar empirical
finding reported in Backurs et al. (2024).
Under shuffled DP, however, this behavior varies in different settings. The Gaussian kernel is more
resilient to errors than IP, and thus matches its central DP and non-DP HDC performance at broader
parameter regimes. As a result, it often achieves better overall accuracy than IP, even though its
baseline (non-DP) accuracy is lower. This phenomenon is more expressed the more error-prone the
setting is – both with lower privacy budgets (lower ε), and when the bitsum protocol is less optimized
for accuracy (i.e., RR and Pure vs. 3NB). The upshot is that the shuffled DP model, due its more
delicate interplay between communication, privacy and accuracy compared to the central DP and
non-DP settings, may require different and more error-resilient mechanisms for better downstream
performance, particularly under tighter privacy and communication constraints.

4.2   C OMMUNICATION C OST

The communication cost of our learning protocol depends on that of the bitsum protocol used within
it. Specifically, for both the Gaussian and IP kernels, the communication cost is as follows:
• With RR: each user sends exactly d messages.
• With 3NB: the number of messages sent by each user is a random variable (different per user),
  with expectation (1 + o(1))d. (The o(1) term vanishes as either n or ε grows.)
• With Pure: the number of messages sent by each user is a random variable (different per user),
  with expectation O(d2 log(n)/ε0 ).
With all three protocols, each message is of size ⌈log2 (d)⌉ + 1 bits.
Figure 2 displays the empirical number of messages on each dataset, for RR (whose communication
is constant, as per above) and 3NB (whose communication is a random variable). Note while the
cost of 3NB is asymptotically near-similar to RR, in practice its cost can be a few times larger, which
may be significant in applications. Pure sends orders of magnitude more messages (as per above),
which may render it impractical in tight communication settings, and cannot fit on the same plots.

4.3   P RIVATE KDE RESULTS

We also directly evaluate Theorem 3.3 for the standalone task of private Gaussian KDE (without
subsequent classification). The results are shown in Figure 3, with accuracy measured over 1K
random queries from the query set of each dataset. They show that the KDE error generally tracks
with the downstream classification accuracy reported above, with 3NB being the most accurate
variant with error vanishing nearly as fast as central DP, followed by RR and Pure.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 1: Private class decoding results with ε ≈ 3.2 and εlbl = 5

 Dataset      Class        Bitsum Gaussian KDE class decoding                  IP KDE class decoding
                           RR     vendors, gencorp, servicers                  firesign, wnews, usos
 DBPedia-14
              Company      3NB    molycorp, newscorp, mediacorp                companys, alicorp, interactivecorp
                           Pure   ameritech, alicorp, newscorp                 alibabacom, oscorp, companies
                           RR     biopic, movie, screenplay                    kaptai, kakhi, kaloi
              Film         3NB    filmography, vanya, ghostbusters             movie, filmography, screenplay
                           Pure   filme, movie, videodrome                     movie, film, filmmakers
                           RR     vizner, runnerups, dietrichson               ongeri, grandi, zarate
 AG news
              Sports       3NB    injury, semifinalists, finalists             semifinalists, championship, standings
                           Pure   pensford, rematches, undefeated              chauci, teammates, nith
                           RR     repurchases, downtrend, equitywatch          sneed, timesnews, anxiousness
              Business     3NB    enrononline, investcorp, comcorp             stockholders, nasdaq, marketwatchcom
                           Pure   corporations, consolidations, consolidated   merger, divestiture, stockholders
                           RR     beguile, inception, shallow                  manipulating, uncouple, dissects
 SST2
              Negative     3NB    melodrama, rawness, blandness                comedy, tastelessness, uneasiness
                           Pure   chumminess, meaningfulness, mootness         absurdities, chastisement, absurdity
                           RR     kindliness, pleasantness, entertaining       enjoyments, academie, amusements
              Positive     3NB    salacious, movie, majestic                   salaciousness, theatricality, memorability
                           Pure   spiritedness, spirited, perspicacious        exorcisms, fairytales, revisiting


4.4     P RIVATE C LASS D ECODING R ESULTS

We perform class decoding, as described in Section 3.3, on the three textual datasets. As the public
vocabulary V we use GloVe 6B (Pennington et al., 2014), consisting of 400K words extracted from
public sources. Rather than using the embeddings from Pennington et al. (2014), we embed the
terms in Rd with the same pre-trained SentenceBERT model used to embed the datasets. Then,
for each class c ∈ [m] of each dataset, we rank all vocabulary terms according to their density as
reported by the function K e c (·) privately learned by our shuffled KDE protocol for that class, and
report the top-3 scoring terms. We repeat this for every combination of kernel and bitsum protocol.
We make no attempt at quantifying a measure of class decoding performance, since semantic re-
latedness is inherently somewhat subjective, and may furthermore depend on external knowledge
(for example, when the “artist” or “athlete” classes are decoded into names of specific artists or
athletes). Rather, our goal in this experiment to is gain qualitative insight into what the shuffled DP
KDE protocol succeeds in learning, despite its lack of access to unprotected training examples, and
to complement the quantitative classification accuracy results.
Table 1 includes decoding results with ε ≈ 3.2 and εlbl = 5 (the ε values are slightly different across
the datasets and bitsum protocols, due to the use of different δ values and composition theorems, as
detailed earlier in this section). It only includes some classes from each dataset, due to space limits;
results for all classes, and for other values of ε, are in the appendix.
Qualitatively, in settings where classification accuracy is nontrivial (per Figure 1), the class decod-
ing results in Table 1 also yield vocabulary words that are aligned with the topic of the class. This
demonstrates that the class representations learned by shuffled DP KDE protocol capture the seman-
tic meaning of the classes, and preserve the ability to rank not only inter-class similarities (as needed
for classification), but also intra-class similarities (as needed for decoding a specific class).


5     C ONCLUSION

We showed how to use shuffled DP for “one-shot” data collection and learning from an undeter-
mined pool of uncommitted end users, in contrast to prior work on ML with shuffled DP, which
mostly focused on collaborative distributed training across committed parties over time. Due to the
desirable accuracy of shuffled DP, our method is able to learn intricate data semantics while ad-
hering to a distributed notion of privacy. Our experimental results highlight practical downstream
considerations related to the delicate interplay between privacy, accuracy and communication cost.
Future work would explore further ways to deploy shuffled DP in ML pipelines, and extend to more
challenging settings, such as privately and continuously monitoring end user data over time.


                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful feedback. Work supported by Len Blavatnik and the
Blavatnik Family foundation and by an Alon Scholarship of the Israeli Council for Higher Education.
Author is also with Amazon. This work is not associated with Amazon.

R EFERENCES
Nir Ailon and Bernard Chazelle. The fast johnson–lindenstrauss transform and approximate nearest
  neighbors. SIAM Journal on computing, 39(1):302–322, 2009.
Francesco Alda and Benjamin IP Rubinstein. The bernstein mechanism: Function release under
  differential privacy. In Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Differential Privacy Team at Apple.      Learning with privacy at scale.
  2017.              URL  https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/
  learning-with-privacy-at-scale.
Arturs Backurs, Zinan Lin, Sepideh Mahabadi, Sandeep Silwal, and Jakub Tarnawski. Efficiently
  computing similarities to private datasets. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2024.
Victor Balcer and Albert Cheu. Separating local & shuffled differential privacy via histograms.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.06879, 2019.
Victor Balcer, Albert Cheu, Matthew Joseph, and Jieming Mao. Connecting robust shuffle privacy
  and pan-privacy. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
  (SODA), pp. 2384–2403. SIAM, 2021.
Borja Balle, James Bell, Adria Gascón, and Kobbi Nissim. Improved summation from shuffling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11225, 2019a.
Borja Balle, James Bell, Adrià Gascón, and Kobbi Nissim. The privacy blanket of the shuffle model.
  In Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2019: 39th Annual International Cryptology Conference,
  Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18–22, 2019, Proceedings, Part II 39, pp. 638–667. Springer,
  2019b.
Borja Balle, James Bell, Adria Gascón, and Kobbi Nissim. Private summation in the multi-message
  shuffle model. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
  nications Security, pp. 657–676, 2020a.
Borja Balle, Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Om Thakkar, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. Pri-
  vacy amplification via random check-ins. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:4623–4634, 2020b.
Andrea Bittau, Úlfar Erlingsson, Petros Maniatis, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, David Lie,
  Mitch Rudominer, Ushasree Kode, Julien Tinnes, and Bernhard Seefeld. Prochlo: Strong privacy
  for analytics in the crowd. In Proceedings of the 26th symposium on operating systems principles,
  pp. 441–459, 2017.
Alisa Chang, Badih Ghazi, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Locally private k-means in one
  round. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1441–1451. PMLR, 2021.
Lijie Chen, Badih Ghazi, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. On distributed differential privacy
  and counting distinct elements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09604, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020b.
Albert Cheu and Chao Yan. Pure differential privacy from secure intermediaries. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.10032, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Cheu and Maxim Zhilyaev. Differentially private histograms in the shuffle model from fake
  users. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 440–457. IEEE, 2022.
Albert Cheu, Adam Smith, Jonathan Ullman, David Zeber, and Maxim Zhilyaev. Distributed dif-
  ferential privacy via shuffling. In Advances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2019: 38th Annual In-
  ternational Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Darmstadt,
  Germany, May 19–23, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 38, pp. 375–403. Springer, 2019.
Albert Cheu, Matthew Joseph, Jieming Mao, and Binghui Peng. Shuffle private stochastic convex
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09805, 2021.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Xingyu Zhou. Shuffle private linear contextual bandits. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.05567, 2022.
Benjamin Coleman and Anshumali Shrivastava. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
  Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pp. 3252–3265, 2021.
Bolin Ding, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Sergey Yekhanin. Collecting telemetry data privately. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference (TCC), pp. 265–284. Springer,
  2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.

Úlfar Erlingsson, Vasyl Pihur, and Aleksandra Korolova. Rappor: Randomized aggregatable
   privacy-preserving ordinal response. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC conference on
   computer and communications security, pp. 1054–1067, 2014.

Úlfar Erlingsson, Vitaly Feldman, Ilya Mironov, Ananth Raghunathan, Kunal Talwar, and
   Abhradeep Thakurta. Amplification by shuffling: From local to central differential privacy via
   anonymity. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
   rithms, pp. 2468–2479. SIAM, 2019.
Vitaly Feldman, Audra McMillan, and Kunal Talwar. Hiding among the clones: A simple and nearly
  optimal analysis of privacy amplification by shuffling. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 954–964. IEEE, 2022.
Vitaly Feldman, Audra McMillan, and Kunal Talwar. Stronger privacy amplification by shuffling
  for rényi and approximate differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM
  Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 4966–4981. SIAM, 2023.
Badih Ghazi, Noah Golowich, Ravi Kumar, Rasmus Pagh, and Ameya Velingker. Private heavy
  hitters and range queries in the shuffled model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.11358, 2019.
Badih Ghazi, Noah Golowich, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Rasmus Pagh, and Ameya Vel-
  ingker. Pure differentially private summation from anonymous messages. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.01919, 2020a.
Badih Ghazi, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, and Rasmus Pagh. Private counting from anonymous
  messages: Near-optimal accuracy with vanishing communication overhead. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 3505–3514. PMLR, 2020b.
Badih Ghazi, Noah Golowich, Ravi Kumar, Rasmus Pagh, and Ameya Velingker. On the power
  of multiple anonymous messages: Frequency estimation and selection in the shuffle model of
  differential privacy. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryp-
  tographic Techniques, pp. 463–488. Springer, 2021a.
Badih Ghazi, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Rasmus Pagh, and Amer Sinha. Differentially pri-
  vate aggregation in the shuffle model: Almost central accuracy in almost a single message. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3692–3701. PMLR, 2021b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Badih Ghazi, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Pure-dp aggregation in the shuffle model: Error-
  optimal and communication-efficient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17634, 2023.
Antonious Girgis, Deepesh Data, and Suhas Diggavi.      Renyi differential privacy of
  the subsampled shuffle model in distributed learning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
  imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 29181–29192. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
  file/f44ec26e2ac3f1ab8c2472d4b1c2ea86-Paper.pdf.
Antonious Girgis, Deepesh Data, Suhas Diggavi, Peter Kairouz, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Shuf-
  fled model of differential privacy in federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2521–2529. PMLR, 2021b.
Antonious M Girgis, Deepesh Data, Suhas Diggavi, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Peter Kairouz.
  On the renyi differential privacy of the shuffle model. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC
  Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 2321–2341, 2021c.
Dov Gordon, Jonathan Katz, Mingyu Liang, and Jiayu Xu. Spreading the privacy blanket: Dif-
  ferentially oblivious shuffling for differential privacy. In International Conference on Applied
  Cryptography and Network Security, pp. 501–520. Springer, 2022.
Slawomir Goryczka and Li Xiong. A comprehensive comparison of multiparty secure additions
  with differential privacy. IEEE transactions on dependable and secure computing, 14(5):463–
  477, 2015.
Rob Hall, Alessandro Rinaldo, and Larry Wasserman. Differential privacy for functions and func-
  tional data. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(Feb):703–727, 2013.
Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: towards removing the curse of
  dimensionality. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pp. 604–613, 1998.
Yuval Ishai, Eyal Kushilevitz, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Amit Sahai. Cryptography from anonymity. In
  2006 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’06), pp. 239–
  248. IEEE, 2006.
Peter Kairouz, Sewoong Oh, and Pramod Viswanath. Extremal mechanisms for local differential
  privacy. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Peter Kairouz, Keith Bonawitz, and Daniel Ramage. Discrete distribution estimation under local
  privacy. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2436–2444. PMLR, 2016.
Peter Kairouz, Ziyu Liu, and Thomas Steinke. The distributed discrete gaussian mechanism for
  federated learning with secure aggregation. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5201–5212. PMLR, 2021a.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and trends® in machine learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021b.
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam
  Smith. What can we learn privately? SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(3):793–826, 2011.
Antti Koskela, Mikko A Heikkilä, and Antti Honkela. Tight accounting in the shuffle model of
  differential privacy. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop Privacy in Machine Learning, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Ruixuan Liu, Yang Cao, Hong Chen, Ruoyang Guo, and Masatoshi Yoshikawa. Flame: Differen-
  tially private federated learning in the shuffle model. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 8688–8696, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020.
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
   representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
   processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543, 2014.
Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Alex Kurakin, Zheng Xu, Carson Denison, H Brendan
  McMahan, Sergei Vassilvitskii, Steve Chien, and Abhradeep Guha Thakurta. How to dp-fy ml:
  A practical guide to machine learning with differential privacy. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 77:1113–1201, 2023.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Mary Scott, Graham Cormode, and Carsten Maple. Applying the shuffle model of differential pri-
 vacy to vector aggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05464, 2021.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1170.
Jay Tenenbaum, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, and Uri Stemmer. Differentially private multi-
  armed bandits in the shuffle model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  24956–24967, 2021.
Jay Tenenbaum, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, and Uri Stemmer. Concurrent shuffle differen-
  tial privacy under continual observation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  33961–33982. PMLR, 2023.
Tal Wagner, Yonatan Naamad, and Nina Mishra. Fast private kernel density estimation via locality
  sensitive quantization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 35339–
  35367. PMLR, 2023.
Ziteng Wang, Chi Jin, Kai Fan, Jiaqi Zhang, Junliang Huang, Yiqiao Zhong, and Liwei Wang.
  Differentially private data releasing for smooth queries. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
  17(51):1–42, 2016.
Stanley L Warner. Randomized response: A survey technique for eliminating evasive answer bias.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60(309):63–69, 1965.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun.        Character-level convolutional networks
  for text classification. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28,
  2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/
  file/250cf8b51c773f3f8dc8b4be867a9a02-Paper.pdf.
Mingxun Zhou and Elaine Shi. The power of the differentially oblivious shuffle in distributed privacy
 mechanisms. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2022.
Xingyu Zhou and Sayak Ray Chowdhury. On differentially private federated linear contextual ban-
  dits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13945, 2023.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOFS
A.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

We restate the theorem for convenience:
Theorem A.1 (Theorem 3.2, restated). Let k be a β-approximate (Q, R, S)-LSQable kernel (cf. Def-
inition 2.1). Suppose we have an unbiased (ε0 , δ0 )-DP bitsum protocol Π in the shuffled DP model,
with RMSE EΠ . Then, for every δ ′ > 0 and integer I > 0, Algorithm 1 is a shuffled DP KDE
                                                                                        ε0 S
     p which is (ε, δ)-DP in the communication-threat
protocol,                                               p model, where ε = ε0 S(e            − 1)I +
                 ′                   ′                            −1
ε0 S 2I ln(1/δ ) and δ = ISδ0 + δ , with supRMSE 4β + I · 16R S (S + (EΠ /n)2 ). The
                                                             2             4
protocol has optimal bit-width 1.

The proof proceeds in three steps: (i) discretize the LSQ coordinates of fi (x) locally at each user
from [−R, R] to {−R, R}, using randomized rounding to maintain the LSQ property; (ii) use the
bitsum protocol to estimate the sum of each discretized coordinate (with shifting and scaling to turn
bitsums into ±R-sums); (iii) use the LSQ property together with the RMSE bound of the given
bitsum protocol to bound the total error of any output KDE estimate.

A.1.1    D ISCRETIZATION
We will index the users in the protocol by u = 1, . . . , n. Fix i ∈ [I]. Let (fi , gi ) be the pair sampled
from Q in the global initialization step of Algorithm 1, and recall that fi , gi : Rd → [−R, R]Q .
Consider a user u ∈ [n] with input xu ∈ Rd . In the randomizer of Algorithm 1, for every j ∈ [Q],
the user samples bij ∼ Bernoulli((fi (xu )j + R)/2R) using private randomness, independently of
the other users and of the other coordinates. To refer to local samples of different users, in this proof
                        (u)
we will denote bij by bij .
         (u)                           (u)     (u)
Define f¯i     ∈ {−R, R}Q by letting f¯ij = (2bij − 1)R for every j.
Claim A.2. For every i ∈ [I], u ∈ [n] and y ∈ Rd ,
                                            h             i
                                               (u)
                        E(fi ,gi ),{b(u) }Q (f¯i )T gi (y) − k(x, y) ≤ β,
                                       ij   j=1


where the expectation is over both the sampling of (fi , gi ) ∼ Q in the global initialization part and
                  (u)
the sampling of {bij : j ∈ [Q]} in the randomizer part of Algorithm 1.

                                              (u)
Proof. It is immediate to check that Eb(u) [f¯ij | fi ] = fi (xu )j for every j, hence,
                                            ij
                               h              i             h         h                         ii
                                   (u)                                    (u)
             E(fi ,gi ),{b(u) } (f¯i )T gi (y) = E(fi ,gi ) E{b(u) } (f¯i )T gi (y) | (fi , gi )
                          ij                                     ij

                                                = E(fi ,gi ) fi (x)T gi (y) ,


and the claim follows from the LSQ property (Definition 2.1).

A.1.2      I NSTANCES OF THE B ITSUM P ROTOCOL
                                       Pn      (u)              Pn      (u)
Fix (i, j) ∈ [I] × [Q]. Let F̄ij = u=1 f¯ij and Bij = u=1 bij . The shuffled DP protocol
in Algorithm 1 executes an independent instance of the given shuffled DP bitsum protocol Π to
estimate Bij , and this estimate is denoted by Beij in the analyzer in Algorithm 1. We will denote this
instance of Π by Πij . Recall that Π is an unbiased bitsum protocol and has RMSE EΠ . Since Bij
itself is a random variable determined by the sampling of (fi , gi ) ∼ Q and on the local randomized
rounding by the users, conditioning on these, we have
              eij − Bij | (fi , gi ), Bij ] = 0
        EΠij [B                                   and             eij − Bij |2 | (fi , gi ), Bij ] = EΠ
                                                           EΠij [|B                                   2
                                                                                                        .

The analyzer computes and publishes Feij = (2Beij − n)R. Considering this as an estimate of F̄ij ,
we denote
                                       Eij := Feij − F̄ij .


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claim A.3. {Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij }i,j are independent random variables, and each satisfies
                                                           h                        i
                                                                  2
          EΠij [Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij ] = 0     and    EΠij |Eij | | (fi , gi ), Bij = (2R · EΠ )2 .



Proof. Probabilistic independence holds since we use independent randomness in the instance Πij
                                                                               (u)     (u)
of Π for different pairs i, j. For the first and second moments, recall that f¯ij = (2bij − 1)R for
every user u, which implies F̄ij = (2Bij − n)R when summing over the users. Also recall from
above that Feij = (2Beij − n)R. Thus,

                                                h                             i
           EΠij [Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij ] = EΠij Feij − F̄ij | (fi , gi ), Bij
                                                h                                             i
                                         = EΠij (2B eij − n)R − (2Bij − n)R | (fi , gi ), Bij
                                                     h                             i
                                         = 2R · EΠij B eij − Bij | (fi , gi ), Bij

                                       = 0,

and

            h                        i                   2
                   2
        EΠij |Eij | | (fi , gi ), Bij = EΠij Feij − F̄ij | (fi , gi ), Bij

                                                                              2
                                       = EΠij (2B eij − n)R − (2Bij − n)R | (fi , gi ), Bij

                                                                  2
                                       = (2R)2 · EΠij Beij − Bij | (fi , gi ), Bij

                                        = (2R · EΠ )2 .


A.1.3     B OUNDING THE SUP RMSE

To bound the supRMSE of Algorithm 1, fix y ∈ Rd . The KDE query part of the protocol uses the
                                                         1
                                                             PI PQ e
analyzer’s published output to estimate KDEX (y) by nI         i=1   j=1 Fij gi (y)j . We now bound
the RMSE of this estimate. Substituting Eij := Feij − F̄ij , we have
                                                            
                                                         2
                                 I Q
                               1 XX
        E  KDEX (y) −                        Feij gi (y)j 
                                                          
                              nI i=1 j=1
                                                                                             
                                                                                          2
                                        Q
                                      I X                                  Q
                                                                         I X
                           1          X              1                   X
         = E  KDEX (y) −            F̄ij gi (y)j +            Eij gi (y)j 
                                                                          
                          nI i=1 j=1                nI i=1 j=1
                                                                                                   
                                                                 2                                  2
                                      I Q                                         I X Q
                                    1 XX                                     1  X
         ≤ 2E  KDEX (y) −                        F̄ij gi (y)j        + 2E             Eij gi (y)j  .   (2)
                                                                                                    
                                   nI i=1 j=1                                 nI i=1 j=1


We handle the two summands in turn.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.1.4   F IRST S UMMAND : D ISCRETIZED LSQ A PPROXIMATION E RROR

For every i, let F̄i ∈ RQ denote the vector with coordinates F̄ij . Recalling that F̄ij =
                                                                                                                  Pn      ¯(u)
                                                                                                                      u=1 fij ,
               Pn ¯(u)
we have F̄i =    u=1   f . We can thus write,
                         i
                                                          
                                                       2                                                     2
                                                                                                                  
                         I Q                                                                  I
                       1 XX                                                                 1 X
 E  KDEX (y) −                     F̄ij gi (y)j  = E  KDEX (y) −                                 F̄iT gi (y) 
                                                
                       nI i=1 j=1                                                          nI i=1

                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                  
                                                                       I
                                                                 1 X                1 T
                                                               = 2E        KDEX (y) − F̄i gi (y)    . (3)
                                                                I     i=1
                                                                                     n

Denote the random variables,
                                                                          1 T
                                    Zi := KDEX (y) −                       F̄ gi (y),
                                                                          n i
and for every u ∈ [n],
                                                           (u)
                                    Zi,u := k(xu , y) − (f¯i )T gi (y).
                       Pn                                                               PI
Observe that Zi = n1 u=1 Zi,u , and that the rightmost side of Equation (3) is I12 E[| i=1 Zi |2 ].
Due to the probabilistic independence of samples for different values i ∈ [I], we can expand this as
                                 2
                                  
                           XI           XI            I X
                                                      X
                      E      Zi  =        E[Zi2 ] +        E[Zi ] · E[Zi′ ]
                             i=1                 i=1                     i=1 i′ ̸=i
                                                 I
                                                 X                   I X
                                                                     X
                                         ≤             E[Zi2 ] +                  |E[Zi ]| · |E[Zi′ ]|.                     (4)
                                                 i=1                 i=1 i′ ̸=i


Claim A.4. For every i we have |E[Zi ]| ≤ β and E[Zi2 ] ≤ (β + 2R2 S)2 .


Proof. For the first boundP                               A.2 can be rewritten as |E[Zi,u ]| ≤ β for
                          in the claim, observe that ClaimP
                            n                              n
every i, u. Since Zi = n1 u=1 Zi,u , we get |E[Zi ]| ≤ n1 u=1 E|Zi,u | ≤ β.
For the second bound in the claim, recall that by Definition 2.1, for every supported function pair
(f, g) in the LSQ family Q, and every x, y ∈ Rd , we have that f (x) and g(y) have coordinates
in [−R, R], and have at most S non-zero coordinates each. Thus, |f (x)T g(y)| ≤ R2 S. By re-
               (u)
calling that f¯i was generated from fi (xu ) by rounding its coordinates to {−R, R}, this implies
                       (u)
in particular that |(f¯i )T gi (y)| ≤ R2 S for every u. Moreover, since by Definition 2.1 we have
|k(x, y) − E(f,g)∼Q [f (x)T g(y)]| ≤ β, this also implies that |k(x, y)| ≤ R2 S + β. Therefore,
unconditionally,
                                             n
                                     1X
                             |Zi | ≤       |Zi,u |
                                     n u=1
                                       n
                                                            (u)
                                       X
                                   =         k(xu , y) − (f¯i )T gi (y)
                                       u=1
                                             n
                                       1 X                    (u)

                                   ≤         |k(xu , y)| + (f¯i )T gi (y)
                                       n u=1
                                   ≤ β + 2R2 S,

which implies in particular E[Zi2 ] ≤ (β + 2R2 S)2 .


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now have,
                                                                          
                                                                       2
                                           I Q
                                         1 XX
                   E  KDEX (y) −                       F̄ij gi (y)j 
                                                                    
                                        nI i=1 j=1

                                                            2
                                                               
                            I
                     1 X                      1 T
                   = 2E         KDEX (y) − F̄i gi (y)                                       Equation (3)
                    I      i=1
                                              n
                                   2
                                    
                            I
                     1     X
                   = 2E       Zi                                                       definition of Zi
                    I      i=1
                                                                 
                          I             I X
                     1  X              X
                   ≤ 2      E[Zi2 ] +       |E[Zi ]| · |E[Zi′ ]|.                          Equation (4)
                    I                  i=1 ′
                         i=1                    i ̸=i
                     1
                          I(β + 2R2 S)2 + I(I − 1)β 2

                   ≤                                                                              Claim A.4
                     I2
                     8R4 S 2
                   ≤         + 2β 2 .
                        I

This is our bound for the first summand in Equation (2).

A.1.5    S ECOND S UMMAND : T OTAL B ITSUM P ROTOCOL E RROR
For i ∈ [I], let Yi be the random variable
                                                    Q
                                                    X
                                            Yi =          Eij gi (y)j .
                                                    j=1

                                                        1 2
                                                               PI
Note that the second summand in Equation (2) equals 2( nI ) E[( i=1 Yi )2 ].
By Claim A.3, {Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij }i,j are independent random variables. Each Yi , when conditioned
on (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] , is a linear combination of a subset of these random variables and the subsets
are disjoint for i ̸= i′ , hence {Yi | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] }i∈[I] are also independent random variables.
Furthermore, for every i ∈ [I] we have
                                                                                                             
                                                                   X Q

    E{Πij }j∈[Q]
                    Yi | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] = E{Πij }       
                                                               j∈[Q]
                                                                        Eij gi (y)j | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] 
                                                                       j=1
                                                    Q
                                                    X
                                                =         gi (y)j EΠij [Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij ]
                                                    j=1

                                                = 0,
and
                                                                         2                          
                                                             Q
                                                           X
E{Πij }j∈[Q] Yi2 | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] = E{Πij }j∈[Q] 

                                                               Eij gi (y)j  | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] 
                                                                                                       
                                                                       j=1

                                                Q
                                                X
                                                      (gi (y)j )2 EΠij Eij
                                                                        2
                                            =                              | (fi , gi ), Bij
                                                j=1
                                                Q
                                                X
                                            =         (gi (y)j )2 (2REΠ )2 ,
                                                j=1



                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                      h                        i
                                                             2
having used EΠij [Eij | (fi , gi ), Bij ] = 0 and EΠij |Eij | | (fi , gi ), Bij = (2R · EΠ )2 from
Claim A.3. Since by Definition 2.1 gi (y) has at most S non-zero entries and each is bounded in
absolute value by R,
                     E{Πij }j∈[Q] |Yi |2 | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q] ≤ 4SR4 · EΠ
                                                                             2

                                                                               .
Therefore,
                                         
                                             I
                                                        !2                                   
                                             X
                     E{Πij }i∈[I],j∈[Q]           Yi         | {(fi , gi ), Bij }i∈[I],j∈[Q] 
                                             i=1
                          I
                          X
                                E{Πij }j∈[Q] Yi2 | (fi , gi ), {Bij }j∈[Q]

                      =
                          i=1
                      ≤ I · 4SR4 · EΠ
                                    2
                                      .

Now we can bound the second summand in Equation (2) as
                                           
                                              I
                                                   !2 
   2                                         X
         E{(fi ,gi ),Bij ,Πij }i∈[I],j∈[Q]      Yi 
  n2 I 2                                     i=1
                                                        
                                                            I
                                                                  !2                                 
         2                                                 X
  = 2 2 E{(fi ,gi ),Bij }i∈[I],j∈[Q] E{Πij }i∈[I],j∈[Q]      Yi    | {(fi , gi ), Bij }i∈[I],j∈[Q] 
      n I                                                  i=1

        8SR4 EΠ
              2
   ≤       2
                .
          n I
A.1.6     F INISHING THE P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2
Accuracy: By putting together the bounds
                                   r     on both summands in Equation (2), we get that the RMSE

                                                4      E2
of estimating KDEX (y) is at most 4β 2 + 16RI S S + nΠ2 . Since this holds for every y ∈ Rd ,
this is a bound on the supRMSE.
Privacy: for every i ∈ [I] and j ∈ [Q], let Oij denote the output of the shuffler in protocol instance
Πij . The fact that Πij is an instance of the (ε0 , δ0 )-DP protocol Π means (by the definition of the
shuffled DP model) that Oij is (ε0 , δ0 )-DP w.r.t. the collection of user inputs.
First, fix i ∈ [I]. Recall the sparsity property of LSQ (Definition 2.1), namely that each fi has at
most S non-zero entries per user. This means that if the input of one user is omitted from the dataset,
the inputs of at most S of the Q protocols {Πij }Q   j=1 are changed. Since these protocol instances
use independent randomness, then by standard (“basic”) DP composition arguments (Dwork et al.,
2014), the collection {Oij }Qj=1 is (ε0 S, δ0 S)-DP. In other words, the protocol Ψi obtained by com-
posing the protocols {Πij }Q j=1 is (ε0 S, δ0 S)-DP in the shuffled model (see Cheu et al. (2019) for
the definition of protocol composition in the shuffled DP model).
Now, by “advanced” composition for shuffled DP protocols (Lemma 3.6 in Cheu et al. (2019)) over
the I protocols {Ψi }, we get that the collection of shuffler outputs {Oij : (i, j) ∈ [I] × [Q]} is
(ϵ, δ)-DP, with ϵ, δ as stated in Theorem 3.2. Since the analyzer in Algorithm 1 is a post-processing
of these shuffler outputs, the protocol in Algorithm 1 is (ϵ, δ)-DP in the shuffled model.
Efficiency: The computational parameters of Algorithm 1 is straightforward to calculate from those
of the bitsum protocol Π and the LSQ family Q: the global initialization samples I pairs (fi , gi )
from Q; each user evaluates fi (x) on her input x for every i; the users, the shuffler and the analyzer
perform IQ instances of Π, thus incurring IQ times its computational and communication cost; the
the final KDE evaluation part evaluates gi on the query y for every i ∈ [I].

A.1.7     VARIANTS OF T HEOREM 3.2
The foregoing proof of Theorem 3.2 can be adapted in various ways to accommodate bitsum proto-
cols with different properties than those stated in the theorem. For example,


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2: Shuffled DP Gaussian KDE protocol, based on either RR or 3NB bitsum protocol
Global initialization // all data here is public      Analyzer // runs after the shuffler; analyzer is
   input: integer I > 0;                               the same for both RR and 3NB bitsum
   parameters for RR bitsum: pRR ∈ (0, 1);             protocols
   parameters for 3NB bitsum: r, r′ , p, p′ > 0           input: shuffled sequence of messages Γe
    for i = 1, . . . , I do                                       from n users
        // i.i.d. samples using shared/public             for i = 1, . . . , I do
          randomness:                                         Bei ← 0
        ωi ∼ N (0, Id ) // d-dim normal r.v.
        βi ∼ Uniform[0, 2π)                               for message (γ, i) in Γ e do
                                                              Bei ← B ei + γ
    publish: ωi and βi for all i
                                                   for i = 1, . . . , I do
Randomizer // each user runs this locally with         Fei ← 2B  ei − n
 private randomness
    input: private data point x ∈ Rd               publish: Fei for all i
    for i = 1, . . . , √
                       I do
                                                KDE Query // runs on the analyzer’s
        φi ← cos( 2ωiT x + βi )                  published output arbitrarily many times
        bi ∼ Bernoulli((1 + φi )/2)
                                                   input: query point y ∈ Rd √
        if bitsum protocol is RR then                       2
                                                                PI e                 T
             bi ← flip with probability pRR        return: nI        i=1 Fi · cos( 2ωi y + βi )
             send (bi , i) to the shuffler
        if bitsum protocol is 3NB then
             ψ1 ∼ NegativeBinomial(r, p)
             ψ2 ∼ NegativeBinomial(r, p)
             ψ3 ∼ NegativeBinomial(r′ , p′ )
             for j = 1, . . . , bi + ψ1 + ψ3 do
                 send (1, i) to the shuffler
             for j = 1, . . . , ψ2 + ψ3 do
                 send (−1, i) to the shuffler



• If the accuracy guarantee of Π is given in terms of absolute error rather than RMSE (as in Cheu
  et al. (2019)), the proof can be repeated with bounding the supremum absolute error of Algo-
  rithm 1 instead of its supRMSE (this yields a very similar and somewhat simpler version of the
  proof given above).
• If Π has a pure DP guarantee, the advanced composition step in the privacy analysis from Ap-

           √ can be replaced by standard pure composition, resulting in ε = ISε0 (compare this
  pendix A.1.6
  to ε ∼ ISε0 in Theorem 3.2) and δ = p       0. In the analogous instantiation of Theorem 3.3, the
                                                                     √
  lower bound on the error α changes from log(1/δ)/(εn) to 1/ εn.
• If Π is not unbiased, the proof (specifically Appendix A.1.5) can be slightly modified to accom-
  modate its bias, resulting in a corresponding term in the final supRMSE bound.

A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3

We restate Theorem 3.3 and prove it as a corollary of Theorem 3.2. The corresponding protocol for
Gaussian KDE is Algorithm 2 with the choice of 3NB as the bitsum protocol.4
                                                                   ′
Theorem A.5 (Theorem 3.3, restated). There are constants
                                                           ′
                                                             p C, C > 0 such that the following
holds. Let δ ∈ (0, 1) and ε ≤ C log(1/δ). For every α ≥ C log(1/δ)/(εn), there is an (ε, δ)-DP
Gaussian KDE protocol in the shuffled DP model (under the communication-threat model) with n
users and inputs from Rd , which has: supRMSE α, user running time min(O(d/α2 ), Õ(d + 1/α4 )),
expected communication of Õ(1/α2 ) bits per user, expected analyzer running time O(n/α2 ), KDE
query time min(O(d/α2 ), Õ(d + 1/α4 )), and optimal bit-width 1.
  4
    For completeness, Algorithm 2 also specifies how to use RR as the bitsum protocol. The flip probability
pRR should be set according to Lemma 4.8 in Chen et al. (2020a).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                               √
Proof. Recall that the Gaussian kernel has an LSQ family with β = 0, Q = S = 1, R = 2 by
random Fourier features. For clarity, we mostly suppress constants in this proof. For the given ε, δ, α
in Theorem 3.3, we set the parameters in Theorem 3.2 as follows:


                           1                 ε              δ
                    I=⌈       ⌉ ; ε0 = p            ; δ0 =    ; δ ′ = δ/2.
                           α2            I log(1/δ)        2I



Privacy: It can be easily checked that plugging the above setting of parameters into the composed
privacy parameters in Theorem 3.2 yields an (ε, δ)-DP guarantee in the shuffled model, provided
that the given bitsum protocol Π is (ε0 , δ0 )-DP.
To this end, we use the 3NB bitsum protocol from Ghazi et al. (2020b) as Π, since it has near-optimal
accuracy with low communication overhead. 3NB has four parameters r, r′ , p, p′ (see Algorithm 2)
that Ghazi et al. (2020b) show how to set to ensure the protocol is (ε0 , δ0 )-DP in the shuffled model.
Namely, they prove that setting r = 1/n, p = e−0.99ε0 , r′ = 3(1 + log(2e0.99ε0 /δ0 )), p′ =
e−Θ(1)·ε0 /(ε0 +log(1/δ0 )) guarantees 3NB is (O(ε0 ), O(δ0 ))-DP, and the constants can be scaled so it
is (ε0 , δ0 )-DP.
                                                                               p
Accuracy: The 3NB protocol is unbiased and has RMSE Θ(1/ε 0 ) = Θ( log(1/δ)/(αε)). Plug-
                                                                     p
ging this into the supRMSE in Theorem 3.2, we get supRMSE O             α2 (1 + log(1/δ)/(αεn)2 ) in
Algorithm 2. By the bound on α in the statement of Theorem 3.3, this supRMSE is at most O(α),
and we can scale the constants to get supRMSE α.
Efficiency: We recall that in the 3NB protocol from Ghazi et al. (2020b), each user runs in O(1) time
and sends an expected nunber of 1 + o(1) messages of O(1) bits each, which the analyzer iterates
over in time O(n). Since we have I = O(1/α2 ) instances of this protocol, each message needs
to include O(log(1/α)) additional bits to identify which protocol instance it belongs to, yielding
O(log(1/α)/α2 ) expected bits of communication per user, and expected analyzer running time
O(n/α2 ).
Each user also needs to compute the inner product ωiT x for every i ∈ [I]. Similarly, the KDE query
algorithm needs to compute ωiT y for every i ∈ [I]. This takes time O(d) per inner product, for a
total of O(dI) = O(d/α2 ) time. If d ≫ 1/α2 , this time bound can be improved by using the faster
preprocessing result of Backurs et al. (2024), who showed that one can first do a random projection
of x (for each user input x) and y (for each KDE query y) onto O(log2 (1/α)/α2 ) dimensions, and
thus only distort the final DP KDE error up to a multiplicative constant (that can again be scaled).
As shown by Backurs et al. (2024), the random projection can be done in time Õ(d + 1/α2 ) by the
fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform (Ailon & Chazelle, 2009), and then each of the I = O(1/α2 )
inner products takes time Õ(1/α2 ), for a total of Õ(d+1/α4 ) time per user and per KDE query.



A.3   I NNER P RODUCT LSQ

The inner product kernel k(x, y) = xT y is trivially (d, 1, d)-LSQable for unit length embeddings, by
                                                                                                      d
                             √a single pair of functions (f, g) such that both are the identity over R .
letting the LSQ family include
We now observe it is also (1, d, 1)-LSQable. This allows better control over the privacy parameters
and computational cost of the protocol in Theorem 3.2, since they depend on the parameters S and
Q (respectively) of the (Q, R, S)-LSQ family.
To sample a pair (f, g) ∼ Q, we sample a vector (σ1 , . . . , σd ) ∈ {−1, 1}d of i.i.d. uniformly random
                                                                                            Pd
signs, and let both f and g be the function Rd → R that maps x = (x1 , . . . , xi ) to i=1 σi xi . It
is straightforward to check that E[f (x)T g(y)] = xT y for every x, y ∈ Rd . To determine√the upper
                                                                      Pd
bound R on the only coordinate of f (x), we observe, |f (x)| = | i=1 σi xi | ≤ ∥x∥1 ≤ d∥x∥2 =
√
   d, since x is unit length (in Euclidean norm).


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     M ORE ON S HUFFLED DP S UMMATION

B.1   B ITSUM P ROTOCOLS

In this section we describe some common techniques behind shuffled DP bitsum protocols, including
the ones we use in our experiments (RR, 3NB and Pure).
One bitsum protocol is the classical randomized response (RR) (Warner, 1965): each user i locally
flips her bit bi with some probability, and sends the resulting bit to the shuffler. The analyzer received
the anonymized received bits from the shuffler, and simply releases their sum. While originally
introduced for local DP, Cheu et al. (2019) showed that in the shuffled DP model, the flip probability
can be significantly smaller, leading to much better accuracy.
Another popular technique for shuffled DP bitsums, which is the one underlying 3NB and Pure, is
noise divisibility (Goryczka & Xiong, 2015; Balle et al., 2019b; 2020a; Ghazi et al., 2020b;a; 2021b;
Kairouz et al., 2021a). EachP user i locally adds noise νi , sampled from a distribution carefully chosen
so that the aggregate noise i νi from all users, after shuffling, is distributed in a way that ensures
central DP. Thus, the shuffled DP protocol simulates central DP, by having each user contribute a
piece of the total “divisible” requisite noise.
To be concrete, we describe the single-distribution protocol from Ghazi et al. (2020b). In this pro-
tocol, each user i samples a non-negative integer noise random variable νi , and sends to the shuffler
a stream of bi + νi identical content-less messages (where bi is user i’s private bit). The analyzer
receives the unified streams of messages from all users after shuffling. Since the messages are iden-
tical and are now
                P stripped of both content and sender identities, the only information they convey
is
P  their count     i (bi + νi ),Pwhich is released as the bitsum estimate. This equals the true bitsum
   i bi plusPa total noise of i νi . Thus, to ensure shuffled DP, it suffices
                                                                      P       for the νi s to be such that
their sum i νi is distributed in a way that ensures central DP for i bi . Ghazi et al. (2020b) show
this can be achieved by either a Poisson or a negative binomial distribution. The 3NB and Pure
bitsum protocols are more involved applications of this basic technique, designed to achieve better
accuracy, lower communication cost, and (in the case of Pure) a pure DP guarantee.

B.2   B ITSUMS VS . R EAL S UMS

As mentioned in Section 2.4, there is also ample work on shuffled DP protocol for real number
summation (abbrev. realsum), where each user holds an input number in a bounded range (say,
[−1, 1]). In this appendix we expand on the choice to base our approach on bitsum rather than
realsum protocols. The answer has two parts: (1) why there is little potential gain in real summation,
(2) why there is substantial advatnage in bit summation.
Little gain in realsums. Ostensibly, Algorithm 1 and Theorem 3.2 could have used realsum in-
stead of bitsum protocols, obviating the need to discretizate the LSQ coordinates with randomized
rounding. When summing ℓ real numbers in [−1,  √ 1], discretization with randomized rounding gen-
erally leads to a Hoeffding-like error of order ℓ, which our protocol incurs. There are parameter
regimes where shuffled DP realsum protocols are more accurate than bitsum protocols, avoiding this
Hoeffding-like error, and thus it may seem like an avenue to improve Theorem 3.2.
However, this is in fact not the case. In our protocol, summation serves as a subroutine. The true sum
is not the target quantity; rather, the true sum is a random variable (sampled according to the LSQ
family), which only approximates the target quantity against which error is measured (the true KDE).
This LSQ approximation already incurs the Hoeffding-like error (it is “built-into” LSQ). Thus, if the
discretized bitsums were to be replaced with a shuffled DP realsum protocol, the final KDE error
would still be dominated by the Hoeffding-like error, and any improvement would be restricted to
low-order terms. Improving the final KDE error asymptotically, if this is indeed possible, would
require a different approach than LSQ to private KDE, and we are currently not aware of a way to
improve the KDE error in the shuffled DP model.
Advangate of bitsums. At the same time, discretization has its own important advantages in shuffled
DP and distributed learning. This was discussed in Section 3.1. To recap, in practical applications
of shuffled DP, numerical values need to be discretized, and their bit-width bounded, in order to
properly control their accuracy and communication cost. This was among the main motivations of


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kairouz et al. (2021a) in developing their Distributed Discrete Gaussian (DDG) protocol for shuffled
DP realsum, rather than using prior protocols for this task. The DDG facilitates bounding the bit-
width (though it is not as low as 1), and its error analysis accounts for discretization errors. Our
approach, which does not need to solve generic real summation, but only the specific case of KDE,
attains the optimal bit-width of 1 by using binary discretization followed by bit summation, and our
error analysis too accounts for the discretization error.

C    F ULL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Ablation: Local DP. Figure 4 displays a comparison of our shuffled DP method with local DP.
The local DP baseline is obtained by taking our private KDE protocol (Theorem 3.2), and replacing
the shuffled DP bitsum with classical randomized response, which satisfies local DP. For the most
direct comparison, the local DP plots are displayed compared to the RR plots (i.e., the leftmost
column) in Figure 1.
We recall that the difference between the methods is that in classical local DP RR (the dashed lines
in the plot) (Warner, 1965), each user locally flips her bit with probability that depends on the desired
privacy parameter ε, but is independent of the overall number of user in the protocol (local DP RR
makes no assumptions on other participating users). In contrast, in shuffled DP RR (the solid plots)
(Cheu et al., 2019), each user flips her bit with probability that depends both on ε and on the total
number of participating user n; the larger n is, the smaller the flip probability needs to be, since
in shuffled DP, the user assumes her bit would also be anonymized and “hidden” among the bits
received from the other n − 1 users.
The results in Figure 4 show that as expected, shuffled DP attains considerably higher downstream
accuracy than local DP.

Ablation: Effect of εlbl . Tables 2 to 5 show the effect of varying εlbl on various settings on the
four datasets, respectively.

Additional parameter settings. Figures 5 to 8 display private classification accuracy results for
εlbl = 10, 7, 5, 3 respectively (Figure 7 repeats Figure 1 from the main paper for convenience).
Tables 6 to 8 present private class decoding results with εlbl = 5 and ε ≈ 5.7, 4.4, 3.2 respectively
(Table 8 is the full version of Table 1 from the main paper).


Figure 4: Classification accuracy comparison with a local DP baseline (overlaid on the shuffled DP
RR plots with εlbl = 5, from the leftmost column in Figure 1).

                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 2: Effect of εlbl on accuracy, DBPedia-14.


                                    % Classification accuracy (±std) with εlbl :

  Kernel    Bitsum   ε       ∞          7            5            3           1

            RR       2       75.5±1.1   76.1±1.8     73.6±1.1     57.1±2.6    15.2±1.0

            RR       4.5     79.7±1.3   79.3±1.9     76.1±0.9     61.9±2.5    15.9±0.7

            RR       7       79.5±1.5   79.1±0.8     77.4±1.7     63.6±1.5    17.6±0.7
 Gaussian
            3NB      2       79.2±1.6   79.6±1.6     79.4±0.8     65.0±1.0    15.8±1.0

            3NB      4.5     80.3±1.5   78.4±0.9     76.9±1.1     64.7±1.3    15.9±1.4

            3NB      7       80.0±0.8   79.1±1.0     77.5±0.8     65.2±2.1    17.0±1.9

            RR       2       27.0±0.8   27.3±4.9     23.0±1.8     15.4±1.8    7.8±1.2

            RR       4.5     50.5±3.5   51.3±1.6     46.2±3.1     30.0±2.8    10.7±2.0

            RR       7       65.4±2.1   66.7±2.0     63.0±1.6     45.2±3.3    12.0±1.8
    IP
            3NB      2       92.7±0.1   92.8±0.2     92.5±0.2     91.0±0.4    58.9±1.4

            3NB      4.5     93.1±0.1   93.1±0.0     93.1±0.1     92.5±0.3    72.2±1.2

            3NB      7       93.1±0.2   93.1±0.2     93.1±0.1     92.6±0.2    72.9±1.7


                            Table 3: Effect of εlbl on accuracy, AG News.


                                    % Classification accuracy (±std) with εlbl :

  Kernel    Bitsum   ε       ∞          7            5            3           1

            RR       2       60.5±3.6   60.4±2.4     61.7±0.8     57.2±2.4    36.3±2.2

            RR       4.5     66.8±1.1   66.7±1.7     66.8±1.4     61.8±2.8    37.1±1.0

            RR       7       67.7±0.8   67.9±1.6     67.9±1.4     62.9±2.7    40.7±1.6
 Gaussian
            3NB      2       68.2±1.2   69.5±1.4     67.0±1.0     63.4±2.3    41.7±0.9

            3NB      4.5     68.7±1.1   69.1±1.2     68.5±1.1     63.3±2.5    41.0±2.6

            3NB      7       67.8±2.2   68.2±0.7     68.7±1.3     62.8±1.7    40.5±2.0

            RR       2       30.3±5.8   33.5±1.7     35.7±2.7     31.1±2.0    25.4±3.0

            RR       4.5     45.5±3.7   41.4±6.1     42.2±7.6     43.6±4.6    28.9±6.0

            RR       7       50.5±3.7   48.8±4.8     50.9±4.4     41.9±3.9    31.5±3.3
    IP
            3NB      2       84.9±0.1   84.9±0.3     85.0±0.5     84.1±0.8    73.9±1.5

            3NB      4.5     85.9±0.4   85.9±0.4     85.6±0.3     85.6±0.2    79.5±1.6

            3NB      7       86.2±0.2   86.1±0.2     85.9±0.3     85.9±0.3    79.9±1.4



                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Table 4: Effect of εlbl on accuracy, SST2.


                                   % Classification accuracy (±std) with εlbl :

  Kernel    Bitsum   ε      ∞          7            5            3           1

            RR       2      68.2±2.9   66.7±3.3     69.0±2.8     69.1±1.7    61.2±3.7

            RR       4.5    70.0±4.0   72.8±1.8     70.3±2.6     71.4±2.7    57.9±4.9

            RR       7      73.1±1.3   74.3±2.5     72.9±3.2     72.1±1.2    61.9±1.8
 Gaussian
            3NB      2      72.6±1.1   71.8±4.1     71.1±2.7     70.8±2.9    64.6±2.4

            3NB      4.5    71.5±3.7   74.1±2.0     72.2±1.0     71.5±2.2    61.1±4.6

            3NB      7      70.0±4.8   70.9±1.7     72.7±2.8     71.1±3.3    63.6±2.4

            RR       2      27.0±0.8   27.3±4.9     23.0±1.8     15.4±1.8    7.8±1.2

            RR       4.5    50.5±3.5   51.3±1.6     46.2±3.1     30.0±2.8    10.7±2.0

            RR       7      65.4±2.1   66.7±2.0     63.0±1.6     45.2±3.3    12.0±1.8
    IP
            3NB      2      92.7±0.1   92.8±0.2     92.5±0.2     91.0±0.4    58.9±1.4

            3NB      4.5    93.1±0.1   93.1±0.0     93.1±0.1     92.5±0.3    72.2±1.2

            3NB      7      93.1±0.2   93.1±0.2     93.1±0.1     92.6±0.2    72.9±1.7


                           Table 5: Effect of εlbl on accuracy, CIFAR-10


                                   % Classification accuracy (±std) with εlbl :

  Kernel    Bitsum   ε      ∞          7            5            3           1

            RR       1.5    24.1±1.8   21.6±1.6     21.4±1.6     16.9±2.4    11.6±0.6

            RR       3      34.8±3.7   34.0±2.4     36.1±2.2     27.5±0.9    11.3±1.2

            RR       4.7    46.7±0.2   45.2±2.1     44.3±4.0     36.8±2.0    16.7±1.3
 Gaussian
            3NB      1.5    73.4±1.0   71.3±2.0     72.9±1.6     67.8±1.3    39.3±5.4

            3NB      3      73.1±0.9   72.2±1.5     71.9±2.2     67.7±1.2    42.8±3.5

            3NB      4.7    71.5±1.7   73.3±1.6     72.8±1.6     70.4±1.3    40.8±4.1

            RR       1.5    11.4±1.6   10.7±1.4     10.6±2.1     12.0±1.6    10.3±2.0

            RR       3      11.1±2.6   9.1±2.0      10.6±1.9     9.3±1.3     10.0±1.8

            RR       4.7    12.0±1.7   8.6±1.8      10.7±1.8     8.7±1.8     9.8±1.5
    IP
            3NB      1.5    18.8±3.3   19.6±0.9     17.9±3.8     13.8±4.2    12.3±3.0

            3NB      3      30.4±4.0   28.7±2.4     26.6±5.1     24.4±2.2    12.2±2.1

            3NB      4.7    36.8±7.8   37.1±5.9     37.8±2.8     25.3±3.6    13.2±3.8



                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 5: Classification results with εlbl = 10


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Figure 6: Classification results with εlbl = 7


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Figure 7: Classification results with εlbl = 5 (this is a copy of Figure 1 for convenience)


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Figure 8: Classification results with εlbl = 3


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 6: Private class decoding results with εlbl = 5 and ε ≈ 5.7

 Dataset      Class        Bitsum Gaussian KDE class decoding                      IP KDE class decoding
                           RR     seacorp, gencorp, southcorp                      xuande, xinmi, xue
              Company      3NB    europacorp, telekomunikasi, southcorp            companys, railcorp, interactivecorp
                           Pure   storebrand, railcorp, onbancorp                  companys, companies, nokiacorp
                           RR     mandolinist, bosacki, cofounder                  ricketson, attributor, vijayendra
              Artist       3NB    author, novelist, writer                         author, musician, biographically
                           Pure   raymonde, bertogliati, bonifassi                 author, roberthoudin, musician
 DBPedia-14
                           RR     legislator, politician, mulroney                 cabinetmaker, chatham, provost
              Office
                           3NB    ministerpresident, legislator, pastpresident     ministerpresident, legislator, congressperson
              holder
                           Pure   legislator, reelections, senatorial              ministerpresident, governorsgeneral, legislator
                           RR     proctorville, connellsville, fargomoorhead       friedrichwilhelmsuniversitt, nordwestmecklen-
              Building                                                             burg, brandenburgbayreuth
                           3NB    galehouse, hyannisport, beaconhouse              churchville, reisterstown, jeffersontown
                           Pure   headquarters, northcote, northvale               holyroodhouse, reisterstown, beaconhouse
                           RR     szewczenko, przodkowo, wodiczko                  manasse, jeram, esfahan
              Village      3NB    khuzistan, wojciechowice, szczawnica             khairabad, kyrghyzstan, kishanganj
                           Pure   kleveland, kurdamir, diyarbakirspor              kyrghyzstan, khairabad, yusefabad
                           RR     araucariaceae, rubiaceae, araceae                succulents, cunoniaceae, chaetophoraceae
              Plant        3NB    celastraceae, rubiaceae, cactaceae               chenopodiaceae, chaetophoraceae, araucari-
                                                                                   aceae
                           Pure   sapindaceae, violaceae, chenopodiaceae           chenopodiaceae, loranthaceae, gesneriaceae
                           RR     screenplay, movie, filmore                       dishonoring, dishonor, inglorious
              Film         3NB    toyland, musketeers, imdb                        movie, screenplay, biopic
                           Pure   screenplay, casablanca, filmmakers               movie, sicario, screenplay
                          RR      schoolcollege, secondaryschool, boardingschool   humboldtuniversitt, everetts, aleksandrw
              Educational
                          3NB     bryancollege, boardingschool, schoolship         schoolcollege, boardingschool, polytechnic
              institution
                          Pure    boardingschool, publicschool, allschool          schoolcollege, boardingschool, polytechnic
                           RR     ajanovic, jovanovski, miloevi                    bohuslav, denverbased, petersen
              Athlete      3NB    sportsperson, gillenwater, khairuddin            sportsperson, footballer, handballer
                           Pure   alifirenko, kovalenko, ilyushenko                laliashvili, jamalullail, footballer
              Mean         RR     warship, troopships, aircrafts                   curtisswright, veteran, pilotless
              of           3NB    fleetness, warship, shipmasters                  warship, frigate, torpedoboat
              transport    Pure   warship, battleships, sailed                     warship, landcruiser, torpedoboat
                           RR     beringen, freshwater, merideth                   bernardini, intermountain, varangians
              Natural
                           3NB    villeurbanne, riverina, curwensville             river, danube, rivermaya
              place
                           Pure   fergushill, danube, waldenburg                   floodplain, river, rivermaya
                           RR     coraciidae, caeciliidae, cicadellidae            columbellidae, marginellidae, caractacus
              Animal       3NB    carangidae, fasciolariidae, scolopacidae         leiothrichidae, marginellidae, phasianellidae
                           Pure   coccinellidae, coraciidae, cardinalidae          dendrobatidae, margaritidae, catostomidae
                           RR     discography, vocals, stereophonics               album, korn, groupie
              Album        3NB    album, instrumentals, tracklist                  album, discography, tracklist
                           Pure   discography, pledgemusic, vocals                 album, discography, allmusic
                           RR     biographies, storybook, author                   booksurge, huilai, huizhou
              Written
                           3NB    bibliography, biographies, autobiography         nonfiction, author, biographies
              work
                           Pure   wittgenstein, werman, fangoria                   nonfiction, author, bibliography
                           RR     winningest, standings, playoff                   mccolm, mccartt, inconclusive
              Sports       3NB    huels, kurkjian, darrington                      playoff, championship, standings
 AG news
                           Pure   gallardo, unfit, basketball                      playoff, postseason, runsgriffey
                           RR     theba, buybacks, kulikowski                      surcharging, nonhazardous, surcharges
              Business     3NB    retrials, clawbacks, revaluation                 nasdaq, enron, divestitures
                           Pure   nasdaq, exxonmobil, exxon                        nasdaq, divestitures, nyse
                           RR     terrorist, bombings, ilghazi                     ppas, atpranking, deng
              World        3NB    hostages, baghdadi, nabaa                        terrorists, militants, qaeda
                           Pure   qaeda, iraqstld, antifur                         qaeda, ceasefire, intifadas
                           RR     ibm, loango, launchpads                          ough, iebc, oul
              Sci/Tech     3NB    microsoft, viacom, protv                         microsoft, ibm, lucenttech
                           Pure   edgeware, proximity, shareware                   ibm, infotrends, suntec
                           RR     overstating, dreadful, awfulness                 gameplay, tactics, underplaying
 SST2
              Negative     3NB    derailments, vagueness, breakage                 blandness, dramaturgy, comedy
                           Pure   perversities, sentimentalism, overthinking       tragedy, blandness, melodrama
                           RR     fervor, phenomenom, pageantry                    embeddable, imbedding, embed
              Positive     3NB    cinema, screenplays, films                       evocative, salaciousness, theatricality
                           Pure   majestically, dramatization, shrewdness          memorability, evocative, masterpieces


                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 7: Private class decoding results with εlbl = 5 and ε ≈ 4.4

 Dataset      Class        Bitsum Gaussian KDE class decoding                  IP KDE class decoding
                           RR     companys, manufacturera, comcorp             airgroup, aerosystems, bluepoint
              Company      3NB    manufactories, subsidiaries, originators     companys, railcorp, baycorp
                           Pure   railcorp, companys, comapny                  companys, companies, manufactories
                           RR     singer, musician, ewan                       marxer, auditioner, surinder
              Artist       3NB    balladeer, musician, artiste                 author, musician, novelist
                           Pure   author, artist, composers                    author, biographically, musician
 DBPedia-14
                           RR     mcclelland, mclellan, dreiberg               janetta, janette, jadakiss
              Office
                           3NB    representant, representan, representantes    legislator, ministerpresident, congressperson
              holder
                           Pure   bashiruddin, ministerpresident, lazarescu    politician, ministerpresident, liberhan
                           RR     woodville, marksville, douglassville         poteet, hocutt, chestnutt
              Building     3NB    stationhouse, randallstown, dovercourt       churchville, chapeltown, beaconhouse
                           Pure   headquarter, hyattsville, weaverville        holyroodhouse, fenchurch, charleswood
                           RR     krakowiak, krzynowoga, lubliniec             kieslowski, radiolocation, blenkiron
              Village      3NB    kyrghyzstan, khazakstan, diyarbakir          kyrghyzstan, khairabad, khuzistan
                           Pure   taleyarkhan, voivodeship, mieszkowice        khuzestan, kyrghyzstan, diyarbakir
                           RR     saxifragaceae, loranthaceae, sapotaceae      lauraceae, loganiaceae, annonaceae
              Plant        3NB    orobanchaceae, mycenaceae, bromeliaceae      chenopodiaceae, araucariaceae, loranthaceae
                           Pure   chenopodiaceae, podocarpaceae, cactaceae     cupressaceae, rubiaceae, chaetophoraceae
                           RR     biopic, imdb, screenplay                     dollywood, isoroku, rakotomanana
              Film         3NB    biopic, movie, silmarillion                  movie, screenplay, biopic
                           Pure   biopic, cinemax, films                       movie, sicario, biopic
                          RR      ucda, madrassa, polytechnic                  write, reflectometry, chathams
              Educational
                          3NB     schoolcollege, polytechnic, fachhochschule   schoolcollege, boardingschool, polytechnic
              institution
                          Pure    eduniversal, universits, universitat         schoolcollege, boardingschool, publicschool
                           RR     borgne, romanowski, brzezinski               sobolewski, khatemi, wlosowicz
              Athlete      3NB    laliashvili, gianluigi, pirlo                sportsperson, handballer, ivanovic
                           Pure   pejaevi, milanovic, tomashova                konashenkov, laliashvili, kalynychenko
              Mean         RR     battleships, navymarine, landcruiser         pinezhsky, pisetsky, ilyinsky
              of           3NB    spitfires, troopships, maersk                warship, landcruiser, frigate
              transport    Pure   warship, frigate, torpedo                    warship, frigate, landcruiser
                           RR     krauchanka, gaucelm, kotonowaka              halethorpe, mapplethorpe, chloropaschia
              Natural
                           3NB    danube, tributary, vilfredo                  river, rivermaya, rivervale
              place
                           Pure   soligorsk, vassilakis, nordgau               floodplain, danube, river
                           RR     coraciidae, glareolidae, phyllostomidae      mollusc, motacillidae, molluscan
              Animal       3NB    paludomidae, acrolepiidae, discodorididae    leiothrichidae, marginellidae, catostomidae
                           Pure   marginellidae, riodinidae, orthogoniinae     mantellidae, catostomidae, coraciidae
                           RR     album, vanilli, europop                      melancholy, poetica, majra
              Album        3NB    allmusic, remixes, remixed                   album, discography, allmusic
                           Pure   housemusic, tracklist, musicology            album, discography, tracklist
                           RR     booknotes, pulitzerprize, apocryphally       terrors, sarkies, dementyeva
              Written
                           3NB    novelistic, magazine, novelist               nonfiction, author, novelist
              work
                           Pure   authorites, novelette, novelist              nonfiction, bibliography, author
                           RR     lose, playoff, sportschannel                 eddard, frankenfish, paeonian
              Sports       3NB    cbssportscom, hof, injuries                  playoff, semifinalists, championship
 AG news
                           Pure   byrd, garvin, deq                            injury, guardino, tiedown
                           RR     gencorp, walkout, comstock                   citywest, epson, arkwright
              Business     3NB    opec, sirri, toyota                          nasdaq, stockholders, divestitures
                           Pure   nonactors, goldcorp, archconfraternity       outbids, stockpiling, outselling
                           RR     collusion, dahle, kejie                      yawner, oswalt, russ
              World        3NB    islamiah, taliban, hurghada                  hamas, qaeda, taliban
                           Pure   bomb, nomination, warmongering               baghdadi, occupiers, militants
                           RR     baidu, microsoft, tencent                    multicamera, intercambio, videoconferences
              Sci/Tech     3NB    ibm, httpwwwdaimlerchryslercom, computer-    microsoft, ibm, lucenttech
                                  ware
                           Pure   infotrends, ati, infogear                    redesigns, ibm, lucenttech
                           RR     portrayal, dreariness, bleakness             repeated, twicetobeat, ringed
 SST2
              Negative     3NB    murkiness, unexciting, vapidity              comedy, dramaturgy, dramaturgical
                           Pure   dramaturgy, portrayals, dramatising          unpleasantries, unpleasantness, deadness
                           RR     reworded, comedies, critiques                rastignac, ruderman, gritschuk
              Positive     3NB    memorability, rausing, miserables            masterpieces, salaciousness, evocative
                           Pure   intiative, artistical, screenplays           vividness, evocative, presence


                                                                 31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Table 8: Private class decoding results with εlbl = 5 and ε ≈ 3.2 (full version of Table 1)

 Dataset      Class       Bitsum Gaussian KDE class decoding                     IP KDE class decoding
                          RR     vendors, gencorp, servicers                     firesign, wnews, usos
              Company     3NB    molycorp, newscorp, mediacorp                   companys, alicorp, interactivecorp
                          Pure   ameritech, alicorp, newscorp                    alibabacom, oscorp, companies
                          RR     author, aristizabal, levesongower               catalani, macki, bacashihua
              Artist      3NB    artist, lyricists, musician                     author, musician, roberthoudin
                          Pure   author, originator, mikhaylovsky                musician, artist, jacquesfranois
 DBPedia-14
                          RR     louislegrand, legislator, lawmaker              sulphide, exclude, sulked
              Office
                          3NB    patiashvili, kumaritashvili, biographers        ministerpresident, legislator, congressperson
              holder
                          Pure   polinard, bobrzaski, politician                 ministerpresident, politician, polian
                          RR     reisterstown, benenson, hellertown              opened, mastered, poegaslavonia
              Building    3NB    frenchtown, brookeville, kenansville            beaconhouse, manorville, reisterstown
                          Pure   huntingtonwhiteley, wrightstown, randallstown   hyattsville, roxboro, reisterstown
                          RR     lalganj, balrampur, manikganj                   baluchestan, jagiellonia, nidderdale
              Village     3NB    pazardzhik, tzintzuntzan, khuzistan             kyrghyzstan, kalinske, kalinski
                          Pure   poniewozik, mieszkowice, czerniewice            kazemabad, diyarbakir, khoramabad
                          RR     chaetophoraceae, gentianaceae, rutaceae         chilensis, surinamensis, tampines
              Plant       3NB    cupressaceae, chaetophoraceae, podocarpaceae    chenopodiaceae, araucariaceae, loranthaceae
                          Pure   asclepiadaceae, cupressaceae, gentianaceae      chaetophoraceae, chenopodiaceae, araucari-
                                                                                 aceae
                          RR     biopic, movie, screenplay                       kaptai, kakhi, kaloi
              Film        3NB    filmography, vanya, ghostbusters                movie, filmography, screenplay
                          Pure   filme, movie, videodrome                        movie, film, filmmakers
                          RR     schoolcollege, boardingschool, allschool        eastern, marykane, kbe
              Educational
                          3NB    boardingschool, schoolcollege, publicschool     schoolcollege, boardingschool, polytechnic
              institution
                          Pure   schoolcollege, polytechnic, qschool             schoolcollege, publicschool, boardingschool
                          RR     kovaleski, kaessmann, miroshnichenko            torstensson, torstenson, torlakson
              Athlete     3NB    fabianski, tarnowski, bochenski                 sportsperson, laliashvili, konashenkov
                          Pure   rightfielder, leftfielder, konashenkov          lukasiewicz, sportsperson, marcinkiewicz
              Mean        RR     warship, frigate, steamships                    latrodectus, laax, herx
              of          3NB    landcruiser, warship, landships                 warship, frigate, landcruiser
              transport   Pure   battlecruiser, warship, hmso                    warship, landcruiser, connaught
                          RR     tributary, riverina, river                      bimota, miercoles, mientras
              Natural
                          3NB    langenlonsheim, nordwestmecklenburg, schwe-     rivermaya, river, danube
              place
                                 infurt
                          Pure   riverbeds, azkoitia, zaporozhian                lakernotes, river, riverina
                          RR     carangidae, caeciliidae, arctiidae              taricani, tardio, kambona
              Animal      3NB    leiothrichidae, coleoptera, acrolepiidae        marginellidae, limoniidae, catostomidae
                          Pure   coraciidae, poeciliidae, acrolepiidae           caeciliidae, heliozelidae, lasiocampidae
                          RR     discography, sevenfold, album                   roadster, approximant, pantocrator
              Album       3NB    discography, album, allmusic                    album, discography, allmusic
                          Pure   discography, album, allmusic                    album, decemberists, song
                          RR     nonfiction, encyclopedia, nonfictional          sociolinguist, becc, sociolegal
              Written
                          3NB    author, magazine, novelist                      nonfiction, author, biographies
              work
                          Pure   reganbooks, novelettes, fourbook                synopsis, nonfiction, biographies
                          RR     vizner, runnerups, dietrichson                  ongeri, grandi, zarate
              Sports      3NB    injury, semifinalists, finalists                semifinalists, championship, standings
 AG news
                          Pure   pensford, rematches, undefeated                 chauci, teammates, nith
                          RR     repurchases, downtrend, equitywatch             sneed, timesnews, anxiousness
              Business    3NB    enrononline, investcorp, comcorp                stockholders, nasdaq, marketwatchcom
                          Pure   corporations, consolidations, consolidated      merger, divestiture, stockholders
                          RR     iraqi, hamas, darfur                            tym, asg, tyo
              World       3NB    hezbollah, hamas, iraqstld                      hamas, terrorists, baghdadi
                          Pure   kutayev, qaeda, yanukovych                      shamkir, barricading, samaritans
                          RR     snopes, cyberworks, hacktivists                 meanings, collegefootballnewscom, multipolar-
              Sci/Tech                                                           ity
                          3NB    ibm, thermedics, flextech                       microsoft, ibm, accenture
                          Pure   feedbacks, companywide, eurogroup               movedtech, techcrunch, swindlers
                          RR     beguile, inception, shallow                     manipulating, uncouple, dissects
 SST2
              Negative    3NB    melodrama, rawness, blandness                   comedy, tastelessness, uneasiness
                          Pure   chumminess, meaningfulness, mootness            absurdities, chastisement, absurdity
                          RR     kindliness, pleasantness, entertaining          enjoyments, academie, amusements
              Positive    3NB    salacious, movie, majestic                      salaciousness, theatricality, memorability
                          Pure   spiritedness, spirited, perspicacious           exorcisms, fairytales, revisiting


                                                               32
