Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF
C IRCUIT D ISCOVERY FOR I NNER I NTERPRETABILITY
 Federico Adolfi                                  Martina G. Vilas
 ESI Neuroscience, Max-Planck Society             Department of Computer Science
 & University of Bristol                          Goethe University Frankfurt
 fede.adolfi@bristol.ac.uk                        martinagvilas@em.uni-frankfurt.de

 Todd Wareham
 Department of Computer Science
 Memorial University of Newfoundland
 harold@mun.ca


                                            A BSTRACT

         Many proposed applications of neural networks in machine learning, cogni-
         tive/brain science, and society hinge on the feasibility of inner interpretability via
         circuit discovery. This calls for empirical and theoretical explorations of viable al-
         gorithmic options. Despite advances in the design and testing of heuristics, there
         are concerns about their scalability and faithfulness at a time when we lack under-
         standing of the complexity properties of the problems they are deployed to solve.
         To address this, we study circuit discovery with classical and parameterized com-
         putational complexity theory: (1) we describe a conceptual scaffolding to reason
         about circuit finding queries in terms of affordances for description, explanation,
         prediction and control; (2) we formalize a comprehensive set of queries for mech-
         anistic explanation, and propose a formal framework for their analysis; (3) we use
         it to settle the complexity of many query variants and relaxations of practical in-
         terest on multi-layer perceptrons. Our findings reveal a challenging complexity
         landscape. Many queries are intractable, remain fixed-parameter intractable rela-
         tive to model/circuit features, and inapproximable under additive, multiplicative,
         and probabilistic approximation schemes. To navigate this landscape, we prove
         there exist transformations to tackle some of these hard problems with better-
         understood heuristics, and prove the tractability or fixed-parameter tractability of
         more modest queries which retain useful affordances. This framework allows us to
         understand the scope and limits of interpretability queries, explore viable options,
         and compare their resource demands on existing and future architectures.



1   I NTRODUCTION

As artificial neural networks (ANNs) grow in size and capabilities, Inner Interpretability — an
emerging field tasked with explaining their inner workings (Räuker et al., 2023; Vilas et al., 2024a)
— attempts to devise scalable, automated procedures to understand systems mechanistically. Many
proposed applications of neural networks in machine learning, cognitive and brain sciences, and
society, hinge on the feasibility of inner interpretability. For instance, we might have to rely on
interpretability methods to improve system safety (Bereska & Gavves, 2024), detect and control
vulnerabilities (Garcı́a-Carrasco et al., 2024), prune for efficiency (Hooker et al., 2021), find and
use task subnetworks (Zhang et al., 2024), explain internal concepts underlying decisions (Lee et al.,
2023), experiment with neuro-cognitive models of language, vision, etc. (Lindsay, 2024; Lindsay
& Bau, 2023; Pavlick, 2023), describe determinants of ANN-brain alignment (Feghhi et al., 2024;
Oota et al., 2023), improve architectures, and extract domain insights (Räuker et al., 2023). We
will have to solve different instances of these interpretability problems, ideally automatically, for
increasingly large models. We therefore need efficient interpretability procedures, and this requires
empirical and theoretical explorations of viable algorithmic options.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Circuit discovery and its challenges. Since top-down approaches to inner interpretability (see Vilas
et al., 2024a) work their way down from high-level concepts or algorithmic hypotheses (Lieberum
et al., 2023), there is interest in a complementary bottom-up methodology: circuit discovery (see
Shi et al., 2024; Tigges et al., 2024). It starts from neuron- and circuit-level isolation or description
(e.g., Hoang-Xuan et al., 2024; Lepori et al., 2023) and attempts to build up higher-level abstrac-
tions. The motivation is the circuit hypothesis: models might implement their capabilities via small
subnetworks (Shi et al., 2024). Advances in the design and testing of interpretability heuristics (see
Shi et al., 2024; Tigges et al., 2024) come alongside interest in the automation of circuit discovery
(e.g., Conmy et al., 2023; Ferrando & Voita, 2024; Syed et al., 2023) and concerns about its feasibil-
ity (Voss et al., 2021; Räuker et al., 2023). One challenge is scaling up methods to larger networks,
more naturalistic datasets, and more complex tasks (e.g., Lieberum et al., 2023; Marks et al., 2024),
given their manual-intensive search over large spaces (Voss et al., 2021). A related issue is that
current heuristics, though sometimes promising (e.g., Merullo et al., 2024), often yield discrepant
results (see e.g., Shi et al., 2024; Niu et al., 2023; Zhang & Nanda, 2023). They often find circuits
that are not functionally faithful (Yu et al., 2024a) or lack the expected affordances (e.g., effects on
behavior; Shi et al., 2024). This questions whether certain localization methods yield results that
inform editing (Hase et al., 2023), and vice versa (Wang & Veitch, 2024). More broadly, we run into
‘interpretability illusions’ (Friedman et al., 2024) when our simplifications (e.g., circuits) mimic the
local input-output behavior of the system but lack global faithfulness (Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020).
Exploring viable algorithmic options. These challenges come at a time when, despite emerging
theoretical frameworks (e.g., Vilas et al., 2024a; Geiger et al., 2024), there are notable gaps in the
formalization and analysis of the computational problems that interpretability heuristics attempt to
solve (see Wang & Veitch, 2024, §8). Issues around scalability of circuit discovery and faithfulness
have a natural formulation in the language of Computational Complexity Theory (Arora & Barak,
2009; Downey & Fellows, 2013). A fundamental source of breakdown of scalability — which lack
of faithfulness is one manifestation of — is the intrinsic resource demands of interpretability prob-
lems. In order to design efficient and effective solutions, we need to understand the complexity
properties of circuit discovery queries and the constraints that might be leveraged to yield the de-
sired results. Although experimental efforts have made promising inroads, the complexity-theoretic
properties that naturally impact scalability and faithfulness remain open questions (see e.g., Suber-
caseaux, 2020, §6C). We settle them here by complementing these efforts with a systematic study
of the computational complexity of circuit discovery for inner interpretability. We present a frame-
work that allows us to (a) understand the scope and limits of interpretability queries for descrip-
tion/explanation and prediction/control, (b) explore viable options, and (c) compare their resource
demands among existing and future architectures.
1.1   C ONTRIBUTIONS
       • We present a conceptual scaffolding to reason about circuit finding queries in terms of
         affordances for description, explanation, prediction and control.
       • We formalize a comprehensive set of queries that capture mechanistic explanation, and
         propose a formal framework for their analysis.
       • We use this framework to settle the complexity of many query variants, parameterizations,
         approximation schemes and relaxations of practical interest on multi-layer perceptrons,
         relevant to various architectures such as transformers.
       • We demonstrate how our proof techniques can also be useful to draw links between inter-
         pretability and explainability by using them to improve existing results on the latter.
1.2   OVERVIEW OF RESULTS
       • We uncover a challenging complexity landscape (see Table 4) where many queries are
         intractable (NP-hard, Σp2 -hard), remain fixed-parameter intractable (W[1]-hard) when con-
         straining model/circuit features (e.g., depth), and are inapproximable under additive, mul-
         tiplicative, and probabilistic approximation schemes.
       • We prove there exist transformations to potentially tackle some hard problems (NP- vs. Σp2 -
         complete) with better-understood heuristics, and prove the tractability (PTIME) or fixed-
         parameter tractability (FPT) of other queries of interest, and we identify open problems.
       • We describe a quasi-minimality property of ANN circuits and exploit it to generate tractable
         queries which retain useful affordances as well as efficient algorithms to compute them.
       • We establish a separation between local and global query complexity. Together with quasi-
         minimality, this explains interpretability illusions of faithfulness observed in experiments.

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.3       R ELATED WORK
This paper gives the first systematic exploration of the computational complexity of inner inter-
pretability problems.1 An adjacent area is the complexity analysis of explainability problems (Bas-
san & Katz, 2023; Ordyniak et al., 2023). It differs from our work in its focus on input queries
— aspects of the input that explain model decisions — as we look at the inner workings of neural
networks via circuit queries. Barceló et al. (2020) study the explainability of multi-layer percep-
trons compared to simpler models through a set of input queries. Bassan et al. (2024) extend this
idea with a comparison between local and global explainability. None of these works formalize or
analyze circuit queries (although Subercaseaux, 2020, identifies it as an open problem); we adapt
the local versus global distinction in our framework and show how our proof techniques can tighten
some results on explainability queries. Ramaswamy (2019) and Adolfi & van Rooij (2023) explore
a small set of circuit queries and only on abstract biological networks modeled as general graphs,
which cannot inform circuit discovery in ANNs. Efforts in characterizing the complexity of learning
neural networks (e.g., Song et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Livni et al., 2014) might eventually con-
nect to our work, although a number of differences between the formalizations makes results in one
area difficult to predict from those in the other. Likewise, efforts to settle the complexity of finding
small circuits consistent with a truth table (Hitchcock & Pavan, 2015) are currently too general to be
applicable to interpretability problems. More generally, we join efforts to build a solid theoretical
foundation for interpretability (Bassan & Katz, 2023; Geiger et al., 2024; Vilas et al., 2024a).

2       M ECHANISTIC UNDERSTANDING OF NEURAL NETWORKS
Mechanistic understanding is a contentious topic (Ross & Bassett, 2024), but for our purposes it
will suffice to adopt a pragmatic perspective. In many cases of practical interest, we want our inter-
pretability methods to output objects that allow us to, in some limited sense, (1) describe or explain
succinctly, and (2) control or predict precisely. Such objects (e.g., circuits) should be ‘efficiently
queriable’; they are often referred to as “a way of making an explanation tractable” (Cao & Yamins,
2023). Roughly, this means that we would like short descriptions (e.g., small circuits) with use-
ful affordances (e.g., to readily answer questions and perform interventions of interest). Circuits
have the potential to fulfill these criteria (Olah et al., 2020). Here we preview some special circuits
with useful properties which we formalize and analyze later on. Table 1 maps the main circuits we
study to their corresponding affordances for description, explanation, prediction and control. Formal
definitions of circuit queries are given alongside results in Section 4 (see also Appendix).

             Table 1: Circuit affordances for description, explanation, prediction, and control.
                                                               Affordance
Circuit
                                 Description / Explanation                        Prediction / Control
Sufficient Circuit Which neurons suffice in isolation to cause Inference in isolation. Minimal: ablating
                   a behavior? Minimum: shortest description. any neuron breaks behavior of the circuit.
Quasi-minimal      Which neurons suffice in isolation to cause Ablating the breaking point breaks behavior
Sufficient Circuit  a behavior and which is a breaking point?                  of the circuit.
Necessary Circuit Which neurons are part of all circuits for a  Ablating the neurons breaks behavior of
                        behavior? Key subcomputations?             any sufficient circuit in the network.
Circuit Ablation & Which neurons are necessary in the current    Ablating/Clamping the neurons breaks
Clamping                  configuration of the network?                  behavior of the network.
Circuit Robustness      How much redundancy supports a          Ablating any set of neurons of size below
                      behavior? Resilience to perturbations.        threshold does not break behavior.
Patched Circuit     Which neurons drive a behavior in a given Patching neurons changes network behavior
                      input context, i.e., are control nodes?    for inputs of interest. Steering; Editing.
Quasi-minimal        Which neurons can drive a behavior in a Patching neurons causes target behavior for
Patched Circuit     given input context and which neuron is a    inputs of interest; Unpatching breaking
                                 breaking point?                       point breaks target behavior.
Gnostic Neurons     Which neurons respond preferentially to a       Concept editing; guided synthesis.
                                 certain concept?


    1
        This work expands on FA’s PhD dissertation at University of Bristol (Adolfi, 2023; Adolfi et al., 2024).


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3   I NNER INTERPRETABILITY QUERIES AS COMPUTATIONAL PROBLEMS
We model post-hoc interpretability queries on neural networks as computational problems in order
to analyze their intrinsic complexity properties. These circuit queries also formalize criteria for
desired circuits, including those appearing in the literature, such as ‘faithfulness’, ‘completeness’,
and ‘minimality’ (Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024a).
Query variants: coverage, size and minimality. The coverage of a circuit is the domain over
which it behaves in a certain way (e.g., faithful to the model’s prediction). Local circuits do so over
a finite set of known inputs and global circuits do so over all possible inputs. The size of a circuit is
the number of neurons. Some circuit queries require circuits of bounded size whereas others leave
the size unbounded. A circuit with a certain property (e.g., local sufficiency) is minimal if there is
no subset of its neurons that also has that property (cf. minimum size among all such circuits present
in the network; see Figure 1).


Figure 1: Relationships between circuit types. Sufficient Circuits (SCs) are faithful to the model.
The entire network is a trivial SC. Necessary Circuits (NCs) are units shared by all minimal SCs.
Quasi-minimal SCs contain a known breaking point (here, NC) and unknown superfluous units.

To fit our comprehensive suite of problems, we explain how to generate problem variants and later
on only present one representative definition of each.
  Problem 0. P R O B L E M N A M E (PN)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, CoverageIN, SizeIN.
   Output: A Property circuit C of M, SizeOUT, s.t. CoverageOUT C(x) = M(x), Suffix.
Problem 0 and Table 2 illustrate how to generate problem variants using a template, and
ProblemName = S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT as an example (e.g., the Coverage[IN/OUT] variables
specify parts of the input/output description that vary according to whether the requested circuit
must have global or local faithfulness). Problem definitions will be given for search (return spec-
ified circuits) or decision (answer yes/no circuit queries) versions. Others, including optimization
(return maximum/minimum-size circuits), can be generated by assigning variables. Problems pre-
sented later on are obtained similarly. We also explore various parameterizations, approximation
schemes, and relaxations that we explain in the following sections as needed.

                    Table 2: Generating query variants from problem templates.
                                                    Query variants
Description
variables                           Local                                     Global
                    Bounded        Unbounded      Optimal       Bounded       Unbounded      Optimal
CoverageIN    an input x    an input x  an input x        “ ”        “ ”                       “ ”
CoverageOUT        “ ”         “ ”         “ ”             ∀x         ∀x                        ∀x
SizeIN      int. u ≤ |M|       “ ”         “ ”     int. u ≤ |M|      “ ”                       “ ”
SizeOUT      size |C| ≤ u      “ ”       min. size size |C| ≤ u      “ ”                     min. size
Property    minimal / “ ” minimal / “ ”    “ ”     minimal / “ ” minimal / “ ”                 “ ”
Suffix        if it exists,    “ ”         “ ”       if it exists,   “ ”                       “ ”
             otherwise ⊥                            otherwise ⊥



                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   C OMPLEXITY ANALYSES
Classical and parameterized complexity. We prove theorems about interpretability queries build-
ing on techniques from classical (Garey & Johnson, 1979) and parameterized complexity (Downey
& Fellows, 2013). Given our limited knowledge of the problem space of interpretability, worst-case
analysis is appropriate to explore which problems might be solvable without requiring any addi-
tional assumptions (e.g., Bassan et al., 2024; Barceló et al., 2020), and experimental results suggest
it captures a lower bound on real-world complexity (e.g., Friedman et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Yu
et al., 2024a). Here we give a brief, informal overview of the main concepts underlying our analyses
(see Appendix for extensive formal definitions). We will explore beyond classical polynomial-time
tractability (PTIME) by studying fixed-parameter tractability (FPT), a more novel and finer-grained
look at the sources of complexity of problems to test aspects that possibly make interpretability
feasible in practice. NP-hard queries are considered intractable because they cannot be computed
by polynomial-time algorithms. A relaxation is to allow unreasonable (e.g., exponential) resource
demands to be confined to problem parameters that can be kept small in practice. Parameterizing
a given ANN and requested circuit leads to parameterized problems (see Table 3 for problem pa-
rameters we study later). Parameterized queries in the class FPT admit fixed-parameter tractable
algorithms. W-hard queries (by analogy: to FPT as NP-hard is to PTIME), however, do not. We
study counting problems via analogous classes #P and #W[1]. We also investigate completeness for
NP and classes higher up the polynomial hierarchy such as Σp2 and Πp2 to identify aspects of hard
problems that make them even harder, and to explore the possibility to tackle hard interpretability
problems with better-understood methods for well-known NP-complete problems (de Haan & Szei-
der, 2017). Most proofs involve reductions between computational problems which establish the
complexity status of interpretability queries based on the known complexity of canonical problems
in other areas.
                            Table 3: Model and circuit parameterizations.
              Parameter                           Model (given)       Circuit (requested)
              Number of layers (depth)                 L̂                        ˆ
                                                                                 l
              Maximum layer width                     L̂w                      ˆ
                                                                               lw
              Total number of units2           Û = |M| ≤ L̂ · L̂w          |C| = û
              Number of input units                   ÛI                      ûI
              Number of output units                  ÛO                     ûO
              Maximum weight                          Ŵ                        ŵ
              Maximum bias                             B̂                       b̂

Approximation. Although sometimes computing optimal solutions is intractable, it is conceivable
we could devise tractable interpretability procedures to obtain approximate solutions that are useful
in practice. We consider 5 notions of approximation: additive, multiplicative, and three probabilis-
tic schemes (A = {c, PTAS, 3PA}; see Appendix for formal definitions). Additive approximation
algorithms return solutions at most a fixed distance c away from optimal (e.g., from the minimum-
sized circuit), ensuring that errors cannot get impractically large (c-approximability). Multiplicative
approximation returns solutions at most a factor of optimal away. Some hard problems allow for
polynomial-time multiplicative approximation schemes (PTAS) where we can get arbitrarily close
to optimal solutions as long as we expend increasing compute time (Ausiello et al., 1999). Finally,
we consider three types of probabilistic polynomial-time approximability (henceforth 3PA) that may
be acceptable in situations where always getting the correct output for an input is not required: al-
gorithms that (1) always run in polynomial time and produce the correct output for a given input in
all but a small number of cases (Hemaspaandra & Williams, 2012); (2) always run in polynomial
time and produce the correct output for a given input with high probability (Motwani & Raghavan,
1995); and (3) run in polynomial time with high probability but are always correct (Gill, 1977).
Model architecture. The Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is a natural first step in our exploration
because (a) it is proving useful as a stepping stone in current experimental (e.g., Lampinen et al.,
2024) and theoretical work (e.g., Rossem & Saxe, 2024; McInerney & Burke, 2023); (b) it exists as
a leading standalone architecture (Yu et al., 2024b), as the central element of all-MLP architectures
(Tolstikhin et al., 2021), and as a key component of state-of-the-art models such as transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017); (c) it is of active interest to the interpretability community (e.g., Geva et al.,
2022; 2021; Dai et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2024; 2022; Niu et al., 2023; Vilas et al., 2024b; Hanna


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2023); and (d) we can relate our findings in inner interpretability to those in explainability,
which also begins with MLPs (e.g., Barceló et al., 2020; Bassan et al., 2024). Although MLP blocks
can be taken as units to simplify search, it is recommended to investigate MLPs by treating each
neuron as a unit (e.g., Gurnee et al., 2023; Cammarata et al., 2020; Olah et al., 2017), as it better
reflects the semantics of computations in ANNs (Lieberum et al., 2023, sec. 2.3.1). We adopt this
perspective in our analyses. We write M for an MLP model and M(x) for its output on input
vector x. Its size |M| is the number of neurons. A circuit C is a subset of |C| neurons which induce
a (possibly end-to-end) subgraph of M (see Appendix for formal definitions).
4     R ESULTS & D ISCUSSION : THE COMPLEXITY OF CIRCUIT QUERIES
In this section we present each circuit query with its computational problem and a discussion of the
complexity profile we obtain across variants, relaxations, and parameterizations. For an overview of
the results for all queries, see Table 4. Proofs of the theorems can be found in the Appendix.
4.1   S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT
Sufficient circuits (SCs) are sets of neurons connected end-to-end that suffice, in isolation, to re-
produce some model behavior over an input domain (see faithfulness; Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2024a). They are conceptually related to the desired outcome of zero-ablating components that do
not contribute to the behavior of interest (small, parameter-efficient subnetworks). Zero-ablation as
a method (e.g., to find sufficient circuits) has been criticized on the grounds that the patched value
(zero) is somewhat arbitrary and therefore can mischaracterize the functioning of the neuron/circuit
when operating in the context of the rest of the network during inference. This gives rise to alterna-
tive methods such as activation patching with activation means or specific input activations, which
we study later. SCs remain relevant as, despite valid criticisms of zero-ablation (e.g., Conmy et al.,
2023), circuit discovery through pruning might be justified at least in some cases (Yu et al., 2024a).
  Problem 1. B OUNDED L OCAL S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT (BLSC)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, an input vector x, and an integer u ≤ |M|.
   Output: A circuit C in M of size |C| ≤ u, such that C(x) = M(x), if it exists, otherwise ⊥.
We find that many variants of SC are NP-hard (see Table 4). Counterintuitively, this intractability
does not depend straightforwardly on parameters such as network depth (W[1]-hard relative to P).
Therefore, hardness is not mitigated by keeping models shallow. Given this barrier, we explore
the possibility of obtaining approximate solutions but find that hard SC variants are inapproximable
relative to all schemes in Section 3.1. An alternative is to consider the membership of these problems
in a well-studied class whose solvers are better understood than interpretability heuristics (de Haan
& Szeider, 2017). We prove that local versions of SC are NP-complete. This implies there exist
efficient transformations from instances of SC to those of the satisfiability problem (SAT; Biere
et al., 2021), opening up the possibility to borrow techniques that work reasonably well in practice
for SAT that might be suitable for some versions of neural network problems. Interestingly, this is
not possible for the global version, which we prove is complete for a class higher up the complexity
hierarchy (Σp2 -complete). This result establishes a formal separation between local and global query
complexity that partly explains ‘interpretability illusions’ (Friedman et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024a),
which we conjecture holds for other queries we investigate later. These illusions come about when
an interpretability abstraction (e.g., a circuit) seems empirically faithful to its target (e.g., model
behavior) by some criterion (e.g., ‘local’ tests on a dataset), but actually lacks faithfulness in the way
it generalizes to other criteria (e.g., tests of its ‘global’ behavior outside the original distribution).
Next we explore whether we could diagnose if SCs with some desired property (e.g., minimality)
are abundant, which would be informative of the ability of heuristic search to stumble upon one
of them. We analyze various queries where the output is a count of SCs (i.e., counting problems).
We find that both local and global, bounded and unbounded variants are #P-complete and remain
intractable (#W[1]-hard) when parameterized by many network features including depth (Table 3).
The hardness profile of SC over all these variants calls for exploring more substantial relaxations. We
introduce the notion of quasi-minimality for this purpose (similar to Ramaswamy, 2019) and later
demonstrate its usefulness beyond this particular problem. Any neuron in a minimal/minimum SC is
a breaking point in the sense that removing it will break the target behavior. In quasi-minimal SCs
we are merely guaranteed to know at least one neuron that causes this breakdown. By introducing
this relaxation, which gives up some affordances but retains others of interest, we get a feasible
interpretability query.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Problem 2. U NBOUNDED Q UASI - MINIMAL L OCAL S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT (UQLSC)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, and an input vector x.
   Output: A circuit C in M and a neuron v ∈ C s.t. C(x) = M(x) and [C \ {v}](x) ̸= M(x).
UQLSC is in PTIME. We describe an efficient algorithm to compute it which can be heuristically
biased towards finding smaller circuits and combined with techniques that exploit weights and gra-
dients (see Appendix).
4.2   G NOSTIC N EURON
Gnostic neurons, sometimes called ‘grandmother neurons’ in neuroscience (Gale et al., 2020) and
‘concept neurons’ or ‘object detectors’ in AI (e.g., Bau et al., 2020), are one of the oldest and still
current interpretability queries of interest (see also ‘knowledge neurons’; Niu et al., 2023).
 Problem 3. B OUNDED G NOSTIC N EURONS (BGN)
  Input: A multi-layer perceptron M and two sets of input vectors X and Y, an integer k,
           and an activation threshold t.
  Output: A set of neurons V in M of size |V | ≥ k such that ∀v∈V it is the case that ∀x∈X ,
           M(x) produces activations Avx ≥ t and ∀y∈Y : Avy < t, if it exists, else ⊥.
BGN is in PTIME. Alternatives might require GNs to have some behavioral effect when intervened;
such variants would remain tractable.
4.3   C IRCUIT A BLATION AND C LAMPING
The idea that some neurons perform key subcomputations for certain tasks naturally leads to the
hypothesis that ablating them should have downstream effects on the corresponding model behav-
iors. Searching for neuron sets with this property has been one strategy (i.e., zero-ablation) to get at
important circuits (Wang & Veitch, 2024). The circuit ablation (CA) problem formalizes this idea.
 Problem 4. B OUNDED L OCAL C IRCUIT A BLATION (BLCA)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, an input vector x, and an integer u ≤ |M|.
   Output: A neuron set C in M of size |C| ≤ u, s.t. [M \ C](x) ̸= M(x), if it exists, else ⊥.
A difference between CAs and minimal SCs is that the former can be interpreted as a possibly non-
minimal breaking set in the context of the whole network whereas the latter is by default a minimal
breaking set when the SC is taken in isolation. In this sense, CA can be seen as a less stringent
criterion for circuit affordances. A related idea is circuit clamping (CC): fixing the activations of
certain neurons to a level that produces a change in the behavior of interest.
 Problem 5. B OUNDED L OCAL C IRCUIT C LAMPING (BLCC)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, vector x, value r, and an integer u s.t. 1 < u ≤ |M|.
   Output: A subset of neurons C in M of size |C| ≤ u, such that for the M∗ induced by
            clamping all c ∈ C to value r, M∗ (x) ̸= M(x), if it exists, otherwise ⊥.
Despite these more modest criteria, we find that both the local and global variants of CA and CC
are NP-hard, fixed-parameter intractable W[1]-hard relative to various parameters, and inapprox-
imable in all 5 senses studied. However, we prove these problems are NP-complete, which opens up
practical options not available for other problems we study (see remarks in Section 4.1).
4.4   C IRCUIT PATCHING
A critique of zero-ablation is the arbitrariness of the value, leading to alternatives such as mean-
ablation (e.g., Wang et al., 2022). This contrasts studying circuits in isolation versus embedded in
surrounding subnetworks. Activation patching (Ghandeharioun et al., 2024; Zhang & Nanda, 2023;
Hanna et al., 2024) and path patching (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023) try to pinpoint which activations
play an in-context role in model behavior, which inspires the circuit patching (CP) problem.
 Problem 6. B OUNDED L OCAL C IRCUIT PATCHING (BLCP)
  Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, an integer k, an input vector y, and a vector set X .
  Output: A subset C in M of size |C| ≤ k, such that for the M∗ induced by patching C with
           activations from M(y) and M \ C with activations from M(x), M∗ (x) = M(y)
           for all x ∈ X , if it exists, otherwise ⊥.
We find that local/global variants are intractable (NP-hard) in a way that does not depend on pa-
rameters such as network depth or size of the patched circuit (W[1]-hard), and are inapproximable
({c, PTAS, 3PA}-inapprox.). Although we also prove the local variant of CP is NP-complete and


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


therefore approachable in practice with solvers for hard problems not available for the global vari-
ants (see remarks in Section 4.1), these complexity barriers motivate exploring further relaxations.
With some modifications the idea of quasi-minimality can be repurposed to do useful work here.
 Problem 7. U NBOUNDED Q UASI - MINIMAL L OCAL C IRCUIT PATCHING (UQLCP)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, an input vector y, and a set X of input vectors.
   Output: A subset C in M and a neuron v ∈ C, such that for the M∗ induced by patching C
             with activations from M(y) and M \ C with activations from M(x),
             ∀x∈X : M∗ (x) = M(y), and for M′ induced by patching identically
             except for v ∈ C, ∃x∈X : M′ (x) ̸= M(y).
In this way we obtain a tractable query (PTIME) for quasi-minimal patching, sidestepping barriers
while retaining some useful affordances (see Table 1). We present an algorithm to compute UQLCP
efficiently that can be combined with strategies exploiting weights and gradients (see Appendix).

             Table 4: Classical and parameterized complexity results by problem variant.
Classical & parameterized queries3                          Problem variants
P = PM ∪ PC
PM = {L̂, ÛI , ÛO , Ŵ , B̂}                     Local                        Global
       ˆ  ˆ
PC = {l, lw , û, ûI , ûO , ŵ, b̂} Decision/Search Optimization  Decision/Search   Optimization
S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT (SC)                   NP-complete       A-inapprox.     Σp2 -complete          A-inapprox.
                            P-SC             W[1]-hard        A-inapprox.      W[1]-hard             A-inapprox.
                       Minimal SC           NP-complete            ?         ∈ Σp2 NP-hard                ?
                    P-Minimal SC             W[1]-hard             ?           W[1]-hard                  ?
            Unbounded Minimal SC                 ?                                   ?
                                                                 N                                      N
          P-Unbounded Minimal SC                 ?                                   ?
                                                                     A                                      A
       Unbounded Quasi-Minimal SC             PTIME                                  ?
                       Count SC             #P-complete                          #P-hard
                     P-Count SC             #W[1]-hard                          #W[1]-hard
                                                                 N                                      N
                Count Minimal SC            #P-complete                          #P-hard
                                                                     A                                      A
              P-Count Minimal SC            #W[1]-hard                          #W[1]-hard
      Count Unbounded Minimal SC            #P-complete                          #P-hard
G NOSTIC N EURON (GN)                         PTIME              N/A                 ?                  N/A
C IRCUIT A BLATION (CA)                     NP-complete       A-inapprox.    ∈ Σp2 NP-hard           A-inapprox.
         {L̂, ÛI , ÛO , Ŵ , B̂, û}-CA    W[1]-hard        A-inapprox.      W[1]-hard             A-inapprox.
C IRCUIT C LAMPING (CC)                     NP-complete       A-inapprox.    ∈ Σp2 NP-hard           A-inapprox.
             {L̂, ÛO , Ŵ , B̂, û}-CC      W[1]-hard        A-inapprox.      W[1]-hard             A-inapprox.
C IRCUIT PATCHING (CP)                      NP-complete       A-inapprox.    ∈ Σp2 NP-hard           A-inapprox.
             {L̂, ÛO , Ŵ , B̂, û}-CP      W[2]-hard        A-inapprox.      W[2]-hard             A-inapprox.
     Unbounded Quasi-Minimal CP               PTIME              N/A               ?                    N/A
N ECESSARY C IRCUIT (NC)                ∈ Σp2 NP-hard         A-inapprox.    ∈ Σp2 NP-hard           A-inapprox.
           {L̂, ÛI , ÛO , Ŵ , û}-NC   W[1]-hard           A-inapprox.      W[1]-hard             A-inapprox.
C IRCUIT ROBUSTNESS (CR)                  coNP-complete           ?         ∈ Πp2 coNP-hard              ?
         {L̂, ÛI , ÛO , Ŵ , B̂, û}-CR coW[1]-hard             ?           coW[1]-hard                ?
                              {|H|}-CR        FPT                FPT               ?                     ?
                         {|H|, ÛI }-CR       FPT                FPT              FPT                   FPT
S UFFICIENT R EASONS (SR)               ∈ Σp2 NP-hard 3PA-inapprox.                          N
             {L̂, ÛO , Ŵ , B̂, û}-SR   W[1]-hard   3PA-inapprox.                              A


    3
      Circuits are bounded-size unless otherwise stated. Each cell contains the complexity of the problem variant
in terms of classical and FP (in)tractability, membership in complexity classes, and (in)approximability (A =
{c, PTAS, 3PA}). ‘?’ marks potentially fruitful open problems. ‘N/A’ stands for not applicable.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.5   N ECESSARY C IRCUIT
The criterion of necessity is a stringent one, and consequently necessary circuits (NCs) carry power-
ful affordances (see Table 1). Since neurons in NCs collectively interact with all possible sufficient
circuits for a target behavior, they are candidates to describe key task subcomputations and interven-
ing on them is guaranteed to have effects even in the presence of high redundance. This relates to
the notion of circuit overlap and therefore to efforts in identifying circuits shared by various tasks
(e.g., Merullo et al., 2024), and the link between overlap and faithfulness (e.g., Hanna et al., 2024).
 Problem 8. B OUNDED G LOBAL N ECESSARY C IRCUIT (BGNC)
  Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, and an integer k.
  Output: A subset S of neurons in M of size |S| ≤ k, such that S ∩ C =      ̸ ∅ for every circuit C
           in M that is sufficient relative to all possible input vectors, if it exists, otherwise ⊥.
Unfortunately both local and global versions of NC are NP-hard (in Σp2 ; Table 4), remain intractable
even when keeping parameters such as network depth, number of input and output neurons, and
others small (Table 3), and does not admit any of the available approximation schemes (Section 3.1).
Tractable versions of NC are unlikely unless substantial restrictions or relaxations are introduced.
4.6   C IRCUIT ROBUSTNESS
A behavior of interest might be over-determined or resilient in the sense that many circuits in the
model implement it and one can take over when the other breaks down. This is related to the notion
of redundancy used in neuroscience (e.g., Nanda et al., 2023). Intuitively, when a model implements
a task in this way, the behavior should be more robust to a number of perturbations. The possibility of
verifying this property experimentally motivates the circuit robustness (CR) problem, and a related
interpretability effort is diagnosing nodes that are excluded by circuit discovery procedures but still
have an impact on behavior (false negatives; Kramár et al., 2024).
  Problem 9. B OUNDED L OCAL C IRCUIT ROBUSTNESS (BLCR)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, a subset H of M, an input vector x, and an integer k
             with 1 ≤ k ≤ |H|.
   Output: <YES> if for each H ′ ⊆ H, with |H ′ | ≤ k, M(x) = [M \ H ′ ](x), else <NO>.
We find that Local CR is coNP-complete while Global CR is in Πp2 and coNP-hard. It remains
fixed-parameter intractable (coW[1]-hard) relative to model parameters (Table 3). Pushing further,
we explore parameterizing CR by {|H|} and prove fixed-parameter tractability of {|H|}-CR which
holds both for the local and global versions. There exist algorithms for CR that scale well as long as
|H| is reasonable; a scenario that might be useful to probe robustness in practice. This wraps up our
results for circuit queries. We briefly digress into explainability before discussing some implications.
4.7   S UFFICIENT R EASONS
Understanding the sufficient reasons (SR) for a model decision in terms of input features consists
of knowledge of values of the input components that are enough to determine the output. Given a
model decision on an input, the most interesting reasons are those with the least components.
 Problem 10. B OUNDED L OCAL S UFFICIENT R EASONS (BLSR)
   Input: A multi-layer perceptron M, an input vector x of length |x| = ûI , and an integer k
           with 1 ≤ k ≤ ûI .
   Output: A subset xs of x of size |xs | = k, such that for every possible completion xc of xs
           M(xc ) = M(x), if it exists, otherwise ⊥.
To demonstrate the usefulness of our framework beyond inner interpretability, we show how it links
to explainability. Using our techniques for circuit queries, we significantly tighten existing results
for SR (Barceló et al., 2020; Wäldchen et al., 2021) by proving that hardness (NP-hard, W[1]-hard,
3PA-inapprox.) holds even when the model has only one hidden layer.

5     I MPLICATIONS , LIMITATIONS , AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We presented a framework based on parameterized complexity to accompany experiments on inner
interpretability with theoretical explorations of viable algorithms. With this grasp of circuit query
complexity, we can understand the challenges of scalability and the mixed outcomes of experiments
with heuristics for circuit discovery. There is ample complexity-theoretic evidence that there is a
limit (often underestimated) to how good the performance of heuristics on intractable problems can


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


be (Hemaspaandra & Williams, 2012). We can explain ‘interpretability illusions’ (Friedman et al.,
2024) due to lack of faithfulness, minimality (e.g., Shi et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024a) and other affor-
dances (Wang & Veitch, 2024; Hase et al., 2023), in terms of the kinds of circuits that our current
heuristics are well-equipped to discover. For instance, consider the algorithm for automated circuit
discovery proposed by Conmy et al. (2023), which eliminates one network component at a time if
the consequence on behavior is reasonably small. Since this algorithm runs in polynomial time, it is
not likely to solve the problems proven hard here, such as M INIMAL S UFFICIENT C IRCUIT. How-
ever, one reason we observe interesting results in some cases is because it is well-equipped to solve
Q UASI -M INIMAL C IRCUIT problems. As our conceptual and formal analyses show, quasi-minimal
circuits can mimic various desirable aspects of sufficient circuits (Table 1), and the former can be
found tractably (results for Problem 2 and Problem 7). At the same time, understanding these prop-
erties of circuit discovery heuristics helps us explain observed discrepancies: why we often see (1)
lack of faithfulness (i.e., global coverage is out of reach for QMC algorithms), (2) non-minimality
(i.e., QM circuits can have many non-breaking points), and (3) large variability in performance
across tasks and analysis parameters (e.g., Shi et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023).
Although we find that many queries of interest are intractable in the general case (and empirical
results are in line with this characterization), this should not paralyze efforts to interpret neural net-
work models. As our exploration of the current complexity landscape shows, reasonable relaxations,
restrictions and problem variants can yield tractable queries for circuits with useful properties. Con-
sider a few out of many possible avenues to continue these explorations.
(i) Study query parameters. Faced with an intractable query, we can investigate which parameters
of the problem (e.g., network or circuit aspects) might be responsible for its core hardness. If these
problematic parameters can be kept small in real-world applications, this yields a fixed-parameter
tractable query. We have explored some, but more are possible as any aspect of the problem can
be parameterized. A close dialogue between theorists and experimentalists is important for this,
as empirical regularities suggest which parameters might be fruitful to explore theoretically, and
experiments test whether theoretically conjectured parameters can be kept small in practice.
(ii) Generate novel queries. Our formalization of quasi-minimal circuit problems illustrates the
search for viable algorithmic options with examples of tractable problems for inner interpretabil-
ity. When the use case is well defined, efficient queries that return circuits with useful affordances
for applications can be designed. Alternative circuits might also mimic the affordances for predic-
tion/control of ideal circuits while avoiding intractability.
(iii) Explore network output as axis of approximation. Some of our constructions use binary in-
put/output (following previous work; e.g., Bassan et al., 2024; Barceló et al., 2020). Although con-
tinuous output does not necessarily matter complexity-wise (see Appendix for [counter]examples),
this is an interesting direction for future work, as it opens the door to studying the network output as
an axis of approximation, which in turn might be a useful relaxation.
(iv) Design more abstract queries. A different path is to design queries that partially rely on mid-
level abstractions (Vilas et al., 2024a) to bridge the gap between circuits and human-intelligible
algorithms (e.g., key-value mechanisms; Geva et al., 2022; Vilas et al., 2024b).
(v) Characterize actual network structure. It is in principle possible that some real-world, trained
neural networks possess internal structure that is benevolent to general (ideal) circuit queries (e.g.,
redundancy; see Appendix). In such optimistic scenarios, general-purpose heuristics might work
well. The empirical evidence available to date, however, speaks against this. In any case, it will
always be important to characterize any such structure to use it explicitly to design algorithms with
useful guarantees.
(vi) Compare resource demands of interpretability/explainability across architectures. Our
results for inner interpretability complement those of explainability (e.g., Barceló et al., 2020; Bas-
san et al., 2024; Wäldchen et al., 2021). These aspects can be studied together for different ar-
chitectures to assess their intrinsic interpretability. To some extent our results already transfer to
some cases of interest. Since the transformer architecture contains MLPs, the complexity status
of our circuit queries bears on neuron-level circuit discovery efforts in transformers (e.g., Large
Language/Vision/Audio models).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ronald de Haan for comments on proving membership using alternating quantifier formu-
las.

R EFERENCES
Federico Adolfi. Computational Meta-Theory in Cognitive Science: A Theoretical Computer Sci-
  ence Framework. PhD thesis, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK, 2023.
Federico Adolfi and Iris van Rooij. Resource demands of an implementationist approach to cogni-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Cognitive Modeling, 2023.
Federico Adolfi, Martina G. Vilas, and Todd Wareham. Complexity-Theoretic Limits on the
  Promises of Artificial Neural Network Reverse-Engineering. Proceedings of the Annual Meet-
  ing of the Cognitive Science Society, 46(0), 2024.
Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach. Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge ; New York, 2009. ISBN 978-0-521-42426-4.
Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy. Proof verifica-
  tion and the hardness of approximation problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45(3):501–555,
  1998.
Giorgio Ausiello, Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela, Pierluigi Crescenzi, Giorgio Gambosi, Marco Pro-
  tasi, and Viggo Kann. Complexity and Approximation. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Hei-
  delberg, 1999. ISBN 978-3-642-63581-6 978-3-642-58412-1.
Pablo Barceló, Mikaël Monet, Jorge Pérez, and Bernardo Subercaseaux. Model Interpretability
  through the lens of Computational Complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 33, pp. 15487–15498. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Shahaf Bassan and Guy Katz. Towards Formal XAI: Formally Approximate Minimal Explanations
  of Neural Networks. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems:
  29th International Conference, TACAS 2023, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on
  Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2023, Paris, France, April 22–27, 2023, Proceedings,
  Part I, pp. 187–207, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2023. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-031-30822-2.
Shahaf Bassan, Guy Amir, and Guy Katz. Local vs. Global Interpretability: A Computational Com-
  plexity Perspective. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3133–3167. PMLR, 2024.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio Torralba.
  Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30071–30078, 2020.
Leonard Bereska and Stratis Gavves. Mechanistic interpretability for AI safety - a review. Trans-
  actions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. Survey Certification, Expert
  Certification.
Armin Biere, Marijn J. H. Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh (eds.). Handbook of Satisfia-
  bility. Number Volume 336,1 in Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. IOS Press,
  Amsterdam Berlin Washington, DC, second edition edition, 2021. ISBN 978-1-64368-160-3.
Nick Cammarata, Shan Carter, Gabriel Goh, Chris Olah, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Chelsea
  Voss, Ben Egan, and Swee Kiat Lim. Thread: Circuits. Distill, 5(3):e24, 2020.
Rosa Cao and Daniel Yamins. Explanatory models in neuroscience, Part 2: Functional intelligibility
  and the contravariance principle. Cognitive Systems Research, pp. 101200, 2023.
Sitan Chen, Adam R. Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Learning Deep ReLU Networks Is Fixed-Parameter
   Tractable. (arXiv:2009.13512), 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yijia Chen and Bingkai Lin. The Constant Inapproximability of the Parameterized Dominating Set
  Problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(2):513–533, 2019.

Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards Automated Circuit Discovery for Mechanistic Interpretability. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:16318–16352, 2023.

Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge Neu-
  rons in Pretrained Transformers. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, 2022. Association for Computational
  Linguistics.

Ronald de Haan and Stefan Szeider. Parameterized complexity classes beyond para-NP. Journal of
  Computer and System Sciences, 87:16–57, 2017.

R. G. Downey and M. R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Monographs in Computer Science.
  Springer New York, New York, NY, 1999. ISBN 978-1-4612-6798-0 978-1-4612-0515-9.

Rod G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fundamentals of Parameterized Complexity. Texts in
  Computer Science. Springer, London [u.a.], 2013. ISBN 978-1-4471-5559-1.

Ebrahim Feghhi, Nima Hadidi, Bryan Song, Idan A. Blank, and Jonathan C. Kao. What Are Large
  Language Models Mapping to in the Brain? A Case Against Over-Reliance on Brain Scores.
  (arXiv:2406.01538), 2024.

Javier Ferrando and Elena Voita. Information Flow Routes: Automatically Interpreting Language
  Models at Scale. (arXiv:2403.00824), 2024.

Jörg Flum and Martin Grohe. Parameterized Complexity Theory. Texts in Theoretical Computer
   Science. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2006. ISBN 978-3-540-29953-0.

Lance Fortnow. The status of the P versus NP problem. Communications of the ACM, 52(9):78–86,
  2009.

Dan Friedman, Andrew Lampinen, Lucas Dixon, Danqi Chen, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Inter-
  pretability Illusions in the Generalization of Simplified Models. (arXiv:2312.03656), 2024.

Ella M. Gale, Nicholas Martin, Ryan Blything, Anh Nguyen, and Jeffrey S. Bowers. Are there any
  ‘object detectors’ in the hidden layers of CNNs trained to identify objects or scenes? Vision
  Research, 176:60–71, 2020.

Jorge Garcı́a-Carrasco, Alejandro Maté, and Juan Trujillo. Detecting and Understanding Vulnera-
  bilities in Language Models via Mechanistic Interpretability. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 385–393, 2024.

Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. Computers and intractability. W.H. Freeman, 1979.

William I. Gasarch, Mark W. Krentel, and Kevin J. Rappoport. OptP as the normal behavior of
 NP-complete problems. Mathematical Systems Theory, 28(6):487–514, 1995.

Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang,
  Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. Causal
  Abstraction: A Theoretical Foundation for Mechanistic Interpretability. (arXiv:2301.04709),
  2024.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers Are
 Key-Value Memories. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
 tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 2021. Association for
 Computational Linguistics.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers
 Build Predictions by Promoting Concepts in the Vocabulary Space. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
 Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2022. Association
 for Computational Linguistics.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Avi Caciularu, Adam Pearce, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. Patchscopes: A
  Unifying Framework for Inspecting Hidden Representations of Language Models. In Proceedings
  of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15466–15490. PMLR, 2024.
John Gill. Computational Complexity of Probabilistic Turing Machines. SIAM Journal on Comput-
  ing, 6(4):675–695, 1977.
Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. Localizing Model
  Behavior with Path Patching. (arXiv:2304.05969), 2023.
Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bertsi-
 mas. Finding Neurons in a Haystack: Case Studies with Sparse Probing. Transactions on Machine
 Learning Research, 2023.
Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?:
 Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. In Thirty-Seventh Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. Have Faith in Faithfulness: Going Beyond
 Circuit Overlap When Finding Model Mechanisms. (arXiv:2403.17806), 2024.
Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Been Kim, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Does Localization Inform Edit-
  ing? Surprising Differences in Causality-Based Localization vs. Knowledge Editing in Language
  Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:17643–17668, 2023.
Lane A. Hemaspaandra and Ryan Williams. SIGACT News Complexity Theory Column 76: An
  atypical survey of typical-case heuristic algorithms. ACM SIGACT News, 43(4):70–89, 2012.
John M. Hitchcock and A. Pavan. On the NP-Completeness of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem.
  LIPIcs, Volume 45, FSTTCS 2015, 45:236–245, 2015.
Nhat Hoang-Xuan, Minh Vu, and My T. Thai. LLM-assisted Concept Discovery: Automatically
  Identifying and Explaining Neuron Functions. (arXiv:2406.08572), 2024.
Sara Hooker, Aaron Courville, Gregory Clark, Yann Dauphin, and Andrea Frome. What Do Com-
  pressed Deep Neural Networks Forget? (arXiv:1911.05248), 2021.
Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. Towards Faithfully Interpretable NLP Systems: How Should
  We Define and Evaluate Faithfulness? In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel
  Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 4198–4205, Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
N. Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming. Combinatorica, 4(4):
  373–395, 1984.
János Kramár, Tom Lieberum, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. AtP*: An efficient and scalable method
   for localizing LLM behaviour to components. (arXiv:2403.00745), 2024.
MW Krentel. The complexity of optimization functions. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
 36(3):490–509, 1988.
Andrew Kyle Lampinen, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, and Katherine Hermann. Learned feature represen-
  tations are biased by complexity, learning order, position, and more. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2024.
Jae Hee Lee, Sergio Lanza, and Stefan Wermter. From Neural Activations to Concepts: A Survey
  on Explaining Concepts in Neural Networks. (arXiv:2310.11884), 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael A. Lepori, Thomas Serre, and Ellie Pavlick. Uncovering Causal Variables in Transformers
 using Circuit Probing. (arXiv:2311.04354), 2023.

Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Neel Nanda, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and
  Vladimir Mikulik. Does Circuit Analysis Interpretability Scale? Evidence from Multiple Choice
  Capabilities in Chinchilla. (arXiv:2307.09458), 2023.

Grace W Lindsay. Grounding neuroscience in behavioral changes using artificial neural networks.
  Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 2024.

Grace W. Lindsay and David Bau. Testing methods of neural systems understanding. Cognitive
  Systems Research, 82:101156, 2023.

Roi Livni, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. On the Computational Efficiency of Training
  Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2014.

Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J. Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse Feature Circuits: Discovering and Editing Interpretable Causal Graphs in Language Mod-
  els. (arXiv:2403.19647), 2024.

Andrew McInerney and Kevin Burke. Feedforward neural networks as statistical models: Improving
  interpretability through uncertainty quantification. (arXiv:2311.08139), 2023.

Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J. Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-
  Editing Memory in a Transformer. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in GPT. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, pp. 17359–17372, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates
  Inc. ISBN 978-1-71387-108-8.

Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Circuit Component Reuse Across Tasks in Trans-
  former Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.

Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge ; New York, 1995. ISBN 978-0-521-47465-8.

Vedant Nanda, Till Speicher, John Dickerson, Krishna Gummadi, Soheil Feizi, and Adrian Weller.
  Diffused redundancy in pre-trained representations. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
  K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, pp. 4055–4079. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.

Jingcheng Niu, Andrew Liu, Zining Zhu, and Gerald Penn. What does the Knowledge Neuron
   Thesis Have to do with Knowledge? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
   resentations, 2023.

Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature Visualization. Distill, 2(11):e7,
  2017.

Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter.
  Zoom In: An Introduction to Circuits. Distill, 5(3):e00024.001, 2020.

Subba Reddy Oota, Emin Çelik, Fatma Deniz, and Mariya Toneva. Speech language models lack
  important brain-relevant semantics. (arXiv:2311.04664), 2023.

Sebastian Ordyniak, Giacomo Paesani, and Stefan Szeider. The Parameterized Complexity of Find-
  ing Concise Local Explanations. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3312–3320, Macau, SAR China, 2023. International Joint
  Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. ISBN 978-1-956792-03-4.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.H. Papadimitriou and M. Yannakakis. Optimization, approximation, and complexity classes. Jour-
  nal of Computer and System Sciences, 43:425–440, 1991.
Ellie Pavlick. Symbols and grounding in large language models. Philosophical Transactions of the
  Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 381(2251):20220041, 2023.
J. Scott Provan and Michael O. Ball. The Complexity of Counting Cuts and of Computing the
   Probability that a Graph is Connected. SIAM Journal on Computing, 12(4):777–788, 1983.
Venkatakrishnan Ramaswamy. An Algorithmic Barrier to Neural Circuit Understanding. bioRxiv,
  2019. doi: 10.1101/639724.
Tilman Räuker, Anson Ho, Stephen Casper, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Toward Transparent AI: A
   Survey on Interpreting the Inner Structures of Deep Neural Networks. In 2023 IEEE Conference
   on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML), pp. 464–483. IEEE Computer Society,
   2023. ISBN 978-1-66546-299-0.
Lauren N. Ross and Dani S. Bassett. Causation in neuroscience: Keeping mechanism meaningful.
  Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 25(2):81–90, 2024.
Loek Van Rossem and Andrew M. Saxe. When Representations Align: Universality in Repre-
  sentation Learning Dynamics. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 49098–49121. PMLR, 2024.
Marcus Schaefer and Christopher Umans. Completeness in the polynomial-time hierarchy: A com-
 pendium. SIGACT News, 33(3):32–49, 2002.
Claudia Shi, Nicolas Beltran-Velez, Achille Nazaret, Carolina Zheng, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, An-
  drew Jesson, Maggie Makar, and David Blei. Hypothesis Testing the Circuit Hypothesis in LLMs.
  In ICML 2024 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024.
Le Song, Santosh Vempala, John Wilmes, and Bo Xie. On the Complexity of Learning Neural
  Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2017.
Bernardo Anı́bal Subercaseaux. Model Interpretability through the Lens of Computational Com-
  plexity. PhD thesis, Universidad de Chile, 2020.
Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. Attribution Patching Outperforms Automated Circuit
  Discovery. In NeurIPS Workshop on Attributing Model Behavior at Scale, 2023.
Curt Tigges, Michael Hanna, Qinan Yu, and Stella Biderman. LLM Circuit Analyses Are Consistent
  Across Training and Scale. (arXiv:2407.10827), 2024.
Seinosuke Toda. PP is as Hard as the Polynomial-Time Hierarchy. SIAM Journal on Computing, 20
  (5):865–877, 1991.
Ilya O Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
   terthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, Mario Lucic, and
   Alexey Dosovitskiy. MLP-Mixer: An all-MLP Architecture for Vision. In 35th Conference on
   Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), volume 34, pp. 24261–24272. Curran
   Associates, Inc., 2021.
Leslie G. Valiant. The Complexity of Enumeration and Reliability Problems. SIAM Journal on
  Computing, 8(3):410–421, 1979.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Martina G. Vilas, Federico Adolfi, David Poeppel, and Gemma Roig. Position: An Inner Inter-
 pretability Framework for AI Inspired by Lessons from Cognitive Neuroscience. In Proceedings
 of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 49506–49522. PMLR, 2024a.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Martina G. Vilas, Timothy Schaumlöffel, and Gemma Roig. Analyzing vision transformers for im-
 age classification in class embedding space. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, pp. 40030–40041, Red Hook, NY, USA,
 2024b. Curran Associates Inc.
Chelsea Voss, Nick Cammarata, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Ben Egan,
  Swee Kiat Lim, and Chris Olah. Visualizing Weights. Distill, 6(2):e00024.007, 2021.
Stephan Wäldchen, Jan Macdonald, Sascha Hauch, and Gitta Kutyniok. The computational com-
  plexity of understanding binary classifier decisions. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
  70:351–387, 2021.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. In-
  terpretability in the Wild: A Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 Small. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Zihao Wang and Victor Veitch. Does Editing Provide Evidence for Localization? In ICML 2024
  Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024.
Harold T. Wareham. Systematic Parameterized Complexity Analysis in Computational Phonology.
  PhD thesis, University of Victoria, Canada, 1999.
Todd Wareham. Creating teams of simple agents for specified tasks: A computational complexity
  perspective. (arXiv:2205.02061), 2022.
Lei Yu, Jingcheng Niu, Zining Zhu, and Gerald Penn. Functional Faithfulness in the Wild: Circuit
  Discovery with Differentiable Computation Graph Pruning. (arXiv:2407.03779), 2024a.
Runpeng Yu, Weihao Yu, and Xinchao Wang.              KAN or MLP: A Fairer Comparison.
  (arXiv:2407.16674), 2024b.
Enyan Zhang, Michael A. Lepori, and Ellie Pavlick. Instilling Inductive Biases with Subnetworks.
  (arXiv:2310.10899), 2024.
Fred Zhang and Neel Nanda. Towards Best Practices of Activation Patching in Language Models:
  Metrics and Methods. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.


                                                16
