Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A3D: D OES D IFFUSION D REAM ABOUT 3D A LIGN -
MENT ?

 Savva Ignatyev∗1 Nina Konovalova∗2 Daniil Selikhanovych1 Oleg Voynov1,2
 Nikolay Patakin2 Ilya Olkov1 Dmitry Senushkin2 Alexey Artemov3
 Anton Konushin2 Alexander Filippov4 Peter Wonka5 Evgeny Burnaev1,2
 1
   Skoltech, Russia 2 AIRI, Russia 3 Medida AI, Israel
 4
   AI Foundation and Algorithm Lab, Russia 5 KAUST, Saudi Arabia
 *Savva Ignatyev and Nina Konovalova contributed equally
 Corresponding author: Savva Ignatyev (e-mail: savva.ignatyev@skoltech.ru)


Figure 1: Our method A3D enables conditioning text-to-3D generation process on a set of text
prompts to jointly generate a set of 3D objects with a shared structure (top). This enables a user
to make “hybrids” combined of different parts from multiple aligned objects (middle), or perform
text-driven structure-preserving transformation of an input 3D model (bottom).


                                           A BSTRACT

        We tackle the problem of text-driven 3D generation from a geometry alignment
        perspective. Given a set of text prompts, we aim to generate a collection of objects
        with semantically corresponding parts aligned across them. Recent methods based
        on Score Distillation have succeeded in distilling the knowledge from 2D diffusion
        models to high-quality representations of the 3D objects. These methods handle
        multiple text queries separately, and therefore the resulting objects have a high
        variability in object pose and structure. However, in some applications, such
        as 3D asset design, it may be desirable to obtain a set of objects aligned with
        each other. In order to achieve the alignment of the corresponding parts of the
        generated objects, we propose to embed these objects into a common latent space
        and optimize the continuous transitions between these objects. We enforce two
        kinds of properties of these transitions: smoothness of the transition and plausibility
        of the intermediate objects along the transition. We demonstrate that both of these
        properties are essential for good alignment. We provide several practical scenarios
        that benefit from alignment between the objects, including 3D editing and object
        hybridization, and experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
        voyleg.github.io/a3d



                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Collections of objects generated with existing text-to-3D methods lack structural consistency
(left, (Shi et al., 2024)). Shapes obtained with existing text-driven 3D editing methods lack text-to-
asset alignment and visual quality (middle, (Chen et al., 2024a)). In contrast, our method enables the
generation of structurally coherent, text-aligned assets with high visual quality (right).


1    I NTRODUCTION

Creating high-quality 3D assets is a time- and labor-intensive process, so even experienced 3D
artists commonly break it down into manageable steps. Prior to shaping an asset, an artist might
conceptualize its design structure to capture geometric proportions and spatial relationships of its
semantically meaningful parts. Then, a series of detailed 3D design instances (e.g., high-resolution
geometry and textures) consistent with an established structure can be produced. Recent 3D generation
research (Poole et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024) promises to significantly reduce the effort
related to manual production of such high-resolution textured shapes, replacing it by an automated
AI-based step controlled with natural language. A text-to-3D generation pipeline could potentially
be utilized to produce a collection of structurally aligned 3D objects, consisting of a common set of
semantic parts and sharing their structure, e.g., the pose or the arrangement of semantic parts.
However, existing 3D generation approaches synthesize objects independently and fail to maintain
structural alignment across them (Figure 2, left). One may attempt to enforce the alignment in a
series of 3D objects by generating an initial one with a text-to-3D pipeline and obtaining the others
with text-driven 3D editing methods (Haque et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024a). Unfortunately, the
latter struggle with the visual quality and sometimes fail to perform the necessary edits appropriately,
resulting in a low degree of the alignment with the text prompt (Figure 2, middle).
To address the limitations of existing approaches, we propose A3D, a method for jointly generating
collections of structurally aligned objects from a collection of respective text prompts. The idea
of our method is to embed a set of 3D objects and transitions between them into a shared latent
space and enforce smoothness and plausibility of these transitions. We take inspiration from the
transition trajectory regularization proposed for 2D GANs (Karras et al., 2020, Sec. 3.2). We
represent each set of 3D objects and the transitions between them with a single Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) and train it with a text-to-image denoising diffusion model via
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole et al., 2023) to simultaneously correspond to the set of text
prompts and enforce the plausibility of the transitions between the objects.
Our method is naturally suited for several different scenarios that require control over the structure
of the generated objects. (1) Generation of multiple structurally aligned 3D objects (Figure 1, top)
enables artists to choose an appropriate 3D asset among a variety of generations, replace 3D objects
within existing scenes, or transfer animations across distinct objects. (2) Combining parts of different
objects into a “hybrid” (Figure 1, middle) allows adjusting constituent elements without affecting
the overall structure of the asset. (3) Structure-preserving transformations of a 3D object (Figure 1,
bottom), let a user design a simplified 3D shape with a particular pose and let the automatic generation
process fill in complex geometric details and texture while preserving the structure.
Sets of objects generated using our method exhibit a high degree of structural alignment and high
visual quality scores, outperforming those obtained with state-of-the-art alternatives. Our method
is easily adopted for the structure-preserving transformation, performing on par with specialized
text-driven 3D editing methods. Further, it is effective in combination with different text-to-3D
generation frameworks. Overall, our work advances the state of the art in text-driven 3D generation
and opens up new possibilities for applications requiring the generation of structurally aligned objects.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED WORK
2.1   T EXT- DRIVEN 3D ASSET GENERATION

Collecting large, high-quality, diverse 3D datasets poses significant challenges, so 3D generation ap-
proaches predominantly leverage 2D priors for training. DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023) introduced
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) that enables training Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall
et al., 2020) with the guidance of pre-trained 2D diffusion models. Subsequent research has refined
this methodology to improve the quality and speed of 3D generation. Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023)
uses a coarse-to-fine optimization strategy to increase the speed and resolution. Fantasia3D (Chen
et al., 2023a) disentangles the geometry and texture training. Several works enhance realism, detail,
and optimization speed by utilizing adversarial training (Chen et al., 2024d), 3D-view conditioned
diffusion models (Liu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023a; 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024; Seo
et al., 2024), and Gaussian splatting-based models (Tang et al., 2024b; Yi et al., 2024). All these
works focus on independent optimization for distinct prompts, resulting in generation of collections
of objects that lack structural alignment, as we show in Figure 2 and in our ablation study. This
misalignment issue persists even in amortized frameworks, where a single generative model is trained
to handle multiple prompts (Tang et al., 2024a; Jun & Nichol, 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Siddiqui
et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024). Due to the mode-seeking nature of SDS (Poole et al., 2023), these
frameworks often produce misaligned objects with the structure sensitive to subtle variations in
the prompt, increasing inconsistency across generated outputs. Unlike the described methods that
optimize 3D objects independently or amortized models trained on large-scale datasets, our method
optimizes a small set of objects jointly, allowing us to achieve structural consistency between objects.

2.2   T EXT- DRIVEN 3D ASSET EDITING

One straightforward way to produce a collection of aligned 3D objects is to generate an initial object
using a text-to-3D pipeline and subsequently modify this object via text-driven 3D editing. Several
methods have been proposed to manipulate NeRF-based scene representations using text as guid-
ance (Haque et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024; Bao et al., 2023; Zhuang et al., 2023). DreamBooth3D (Raj
et al., 2023) and Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) provide the capability to edit personalized objects while
leveraging the underlying 3D structure. FocalDreamer (Li et al., 2024), Progressive3D (Cheng
et al., 2024), and Vox-E (Sella et al., 2023) confine the effect of modifications to specific parts
of the object, thus enhancing control of the editing process. Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023a) and
DreamMesh (Yang et al., 2024) focus on global transformations of one object into another, iteratively
optimizing a 3D model to align with a text prompt via SDS. Iterative optimization with SDS does
not guarantee preservation of the structure of the transformed object, so several techniques were
proposed to improve it. Coin3D (Dong et al., 2024) refines geometric primitives into high-quality
assets by imposing deformation constraints through input masks. GaussianDreamer (Yi et al., 2024)
and LucidDreamer (Liang et al., 2024) show text-driven editing capabilities for Gaussian splats,
which they initialize using a separate pipeline and fine-tune with the help of a diffusion model. Haque
et al. (2023) and Palandra et al. (2024) use the SDS loss in combination with a pre-trained 2D image
editing network InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023). MVEdit (Chen et al., 2024a) goes one step
further by avoiding SDS and proposes a special mechanism that coordinates 2D edits from different
viewpoints. Although some of these methods allow obtaining sets of the aligned objects sequentially,
the editing process is constrained by the configuration of the initially generated object. This limits
the visual quality of the generated sets of objects, as we show in Figure 2 and in our experiments.
In contrast, our method optimizes the whole transition trajectory between the objects, and produces
both structurally consistent and high-quality results. Additionally, our method is easily adapted for
the task of structure-preserving 3D editing, performing on par with specialized methods.

2.3   L ATENT SPACE REGULARIZATION

To achieve the structural alignment between the generated objects, we embed these objects into a
common latent space together with the transition trajectories between them. We draw inspiration
from works on generative modeling of 2D images that show that alignment, disentanglement, and
quality of the generated samples can be improved with regularization of trajectories between them.
For example, Berthelot* et al. (2019) and Sainburg et al. (2018) directly optimize the quality of
the interpolated samples with adversarial training, and StyleGAN (Karras et al., 2020) explicitly


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


regularizes the smoothness of the trajectories by calculating the perceptual path distance in the VGG
feature space. Similarly, we employ a diffusion model as a critic that encourages plausibility of the
samples on the trajectories via SDS, leading to smooth transitions and aligned objects.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   N EURAL RADIANCE FIELDS

Neural radiance field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) is a differentiable volume rendering approach
that represents the scene as a radiance function parameterized with a neural network. This network
maps a 3D point µ ∈ R3 and a view direction d ∈ S2 into a volumetric density τ ∈ R+ and a
view-dependent emitted radiance c ∈ R3 at that spatial location. To render an image, NeRF queries
5D coordinates (µ, d) along camera rays and gathers the output colors and densities using volumetric
rendering. The ray color C is calculated numerically through quadrature approximation:
                P                     Q
          C = i αi Ti ci ,       Ti = j<i 1 − αi ,       αi = 1 − exp(−τi ∥µi − µi+1 ∥),          (1)
where ci and τi are the radiance and density queried at the i’th position along the ray, and αi and Ti
are the transmittance and accumulated transmittance.
Originally, NeRF is iteratively trained from a set of posed images. At each iteration, a batch of
camera rays is randomly sampled from the set of all observed pixels and the photometric deviation
between the colors Ĉk observed along the k’th ray and Ck rendered via Equation (1) is minimized:
                                      Lc = k ∥Ck − Ĉk ∥22 .
                                           P
                                                                                               (2)

3.2   S CORE DISTILLATION SAMPLING

Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) (Poole et al., 2023) was proposed for fitting a NeRF to a text
description of the 3D scene, without any input images, using a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
model. The NeRF is iteratively guided towards consistency with the text prompt by using the diffusion
model as a critic for the rendered images. At each iteration, the image x is rendered for a randomly
sampled camera position. A random Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is added to the image and the
output of the denoising diffusion model E is obtained via ϵ̂ = E(y, t, αt x + σt ϵ), where y is the
embedding of the text prompt, t ∼ U(0, 1) is the diffusion timestep, and αt and σt are weighting
factors. The weights θ of the NeRF network are then updated using the gradient of the SDS loss term:
                                 ∇θ LSDS = Et,ϵ [w(t)(ϵ̂ − ϵ)∂θ x] ,                               (3)
where w(t) is another weighting factor.
Poole et al. (2023) use a NeRF-like network F that maps the 3D point µ into volumetric density τ
and the diffuse RGB reflectance ρ ∈ R3 (albedo), i.e., (τ, ρ) = F (µ; θ). They obtain the emitted
radiance c for Equation (1) via shading with a random lighting:
                            c = ρ ⊙ l(µ, n),      n = −∇µ τ /∥∇µ τ ∥,                          (4)
where l ∈ R3 is the radiance received by the scene at the point µ from the light sources, n is “surface
normal”, and ⊙ is the element-wise product.

4     M ETHOD
Learning implicit 3D representations of the objects separately often produces non-aligned results
(Figure 2). Our method uses a single NeRF-like network to represent a set of aligned objects
together with the transitions between them. For this, we introduce a new input parameter u ∈ RN
that represents a point in a latent space. We optimize the network, guiding it with a text-to-image
diffusion model via SDS loss. The diffusion model is conditioned on a weighted linear combination
of individual text embeddings, where the weight coefficients correspond to the elements of u. At each
iteration, we sample u randomly from the edges of the probability simplex. At the vertices of the
simplex, the SDS loss guides the renders from the network towards consistency with the individual
text prompts. At the edges of the simplex, the loss guides the renders towards image plausibility.
This leads to plausible transitions between the objects in the respective pairs and, as a result, to the
alignment between the objects. The overview of our method is shown in Figure 3.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            “minotaur”
                                                                            “werewolf”
                                                                                ...
                                                                             promptN
                                              render   Diffusion
                                                        U-Net
                                                       SDS loss
                                                                                  Latent simplex

Figure 3: Overview of our method. The NeRF model, conditioned on the latent code u sampled
from the edges of the latent simplex, produces a render. The render is passed to the diffusion model,
conditioned on the linear combination of the embeddings of the text prompts. Finally, the SDS loss is
backpropagated to the NeRF model.


4.1   G ENERATION OF MULTIPLE ALIGNED 3D OBJECTS

We adopt the SDS method for the joint generation of aligned 3D objects from a set of N text prompts.
To do this, we embed all the objects into a common space of 3D reflectance fields represented with a
single neural field. We train our network as a small generative model with the latent space built around
the given set of text  prompts. Specifically, we define the latent code u on the (N − 1)-dimensional
probability simplex u ∈ RN : u1 + · · · + uN = 1, ui ≥ 0 and assign the vertices of this simplex
{ui = 1} to the given textual prompts. We add this latent code as an input parameter to the neural
field. We train it to represent the individual 3D objects at the respective vertices of the simplex and
map the linear interpolations (edges) between the latent codes at the vertices to transitions between
the objects. This allows us to regularize these transitions and achieve structural alignment across the
objects.
Specifically, we iteratively train the network with the SDS loss (Equation (3)). At each iteration,
we sample the latent code u from the vertices and edges of the simplex. We render the image x
following Equations (1) and (4), where the density and albedo now additionally depend on the latent
code (τ, ρ) = F (µ, u; θ). At the vertices of the simplex, we condition the diffusion model on the
text embeddings of the individual prompts {yi }. At the edges, which represent transitions between
the objects, we apply two kinds of regularization inspired by works on training GANs with mixed
latent codes (Berthelot* et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2020).
First, we encourage the network to produce plausible 3D objects for latent codes sampled at the
transition trajectories. We use the text-to-image diffusion model as a critic to evaluate and improve
the plausibility through SDS. For this, we obtain the text embeddings y for the diffusion model as
the sum of the embeddings of the individual prompts weighted with the components of the latent
code y(u) = u1 y1 + · · · + uN yN . For the edges of the latent simplex it corresponds to linearly
interpolating between the pair of embeddings of the individual text prompts. In ablation study, we
show that a similar effect to a lesser extent can be achieved by conditioning the diffusion model on
some general prompt independent of the objects being generated.
Second, we encourage the transitions between the objects to be smooth. We avoid doing this directly
to give our model more flexibility and instead regularize the smoothness of the transitions implicitly.
Specifically, we limit the depth of our neural field network, which limits the Lipschitz norm of the
function parameterized by this network (Miyato et al., 2018), and enforce smoothness of rendered
normal maps with a corresponding loss (see Equation (5)).
These regularization strategies encourage the network to learn a mapping from the edges of the
simplex to meaningful transitions between the individual 3D objects. In our ablation study, we show
that this is crucial for obtaining structurally aligned objects.

4.2   H YBRIDIZATION : COMBINING THE ALIGNED 3D OBJECTS

The neural network trained with our method not only represents multiple aligned 3D objects but
also enables smooth interpolation of the reflectance field between these objects at each point in 3D


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Our method allows us to blend different objects seamlessly. A proper alignment of multiple
3D models provides the ability to replace parts of one object with similar components of the other
objects. We manually select spatial anchor points (left) and assign them to a particular model. The
latent code u is linearly interpolated between anchors at every spatial location, resulting in a smooth
distribution over 3D space (second column). The resulting objects are shown on the right.


space µ independently. This allows for a natural and seamless fusion of objects, blending specific
parts of individual generated objects into new forms, such as a gopher with a head of a kangaroo
shown in Figure 4. To achieve this, the 3D space is partitioned into regions corresponding to specific
objects and the reflectance field is smoothly interpolated across the boundaries of these regions. This
partitioning is defined by a smooth spatial distribution of the latent code u (µ) as illustrated in the
second column of Figure 4. The new hybrid model is rendered following Equations (1) and (4) with
the reflectance field now depending on the spatially varying latent code (τ, ρ) = F (µ, u (µ) ; θ).

4.3   S TRUCTURE - PRESERVING TRANSFORMATION OF 3D MODELS

Our method can be easily adapted for the transformation of a given source 3D model into a target 3D
model described by a text prompt while preserving the original structure, such as pose and proportions.
For this, first, we set up the neural network as described in Section 4.1 for two text prompts N = 2.
In this setup, the latent code u is defined on a one-dimensional segment {u1 ∈ [0, 1]; u2 = 1 − u1 }.
Then, we initialize the network with the input 3D model across the whole latent space uniformly.
This initialization can be done in different ways depending on the representation of the input model.
In our experiments, we obtain the renderings of the input model for a random set of viewpoints and
fit the network to these renderings photometrically by minimizing the loss function in Equation (2).
Afterwards, we select a text prompt describing the input model (chosen manually for simplicity in our
experiments) and assign the endpoints of the latent segment u1 = 1 and u2 = 1 to this prompt and to
the target prompt, respectively. Finally, we train the network with SDS as described in Section 4.1,
additionally keeping the constraint on the photometric consistency with the input model (Equation (2))
at the respective endpoint of the latent segment u1 = 1.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We demonstrate the capabilities of our method in the three scenarios described above. We compare
our method with alternatives quantitatively for the generation of pairs of aligned 3D objects and for
the structure-preserving transformation of 3D models. We discuss the results of the hybridization of
aligned objects generated with our method from the qualitative perspective. We implement of our
method based on MVDream text-to-3D generation model (Shi et al., 2024), that uses an efficient
version of NeRF Instant-NGP (Müller et al., 2022) to represent the 3D scene. In Appendix A, we
show that our method is also effective in combination with a different model RichDreamer (Qiu et al.,
2024) that represents 3D objects using DMTet (Shen et al., 2021). We show additional applications
of our method in Appendix E. We refer the reader to the complete set of animated results of our
experiments on the project page for a more complete picture. In Appendix B.4, we provide the
computational costs and hardware details.
Metrics. We quantify three aspects of the generated pairs of aligned objects and the results of the
structure-preserving transformation. The first one is the degree of alignment between the correspond-
ing structural parts of the objects in a generated pair, or of a source 3D model and its transformed
version. Measuring such alignment directly would require explicit detection of corresponding struc-
tural parts for an arbitrary pair of objects, which is a hard task by itself, even if the objects have
similar structure. Recently, Tang et al. (2023) have proposed a method for finding corresponding
points in pairs of images of arbitrary similar objects by matching features extracted from pretrained


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Table 1: Quantitative comparison for the generation of multiple aligned 3D objects.

                         GPTEval3D, % of comparisons where our method is preferred
                     Text-asset Text-geometry     3D       Texture Geometry Overall                             DIFT distance ↓
                                                                                                       CLIP ↑
                     alignment    alignment   plausibility details  details quality                             % of object size
vs. MVEdit              94           89           76        91       92       89      MVEdit            27.1          5.5
vs. LucidDreamer        61           77           70        56       80       77      LucidDreamer      26.4          11.3
vs. GaussianEditor      99           90           89        76       86       97      GaussianEditor    22.8          2.4
                                                                                      A3D (Ours)        27.7          6.1


2D diffusion models. Based on this method, called DIFT, we define DIFT distance that we use to
measure the structural alignment. To compute this distance for a pair of objects, we render them from
the same viewpoint. We densely sample points on one of the renders and find the corresponding points
on the other one with DIFT. For an ideally aligned pair of objects, a sample and its corresponding
point have identical image coordinates. So, we define the DIFT distance as the average distance
between these coordinates across all samples. We normalize it by the size of the objects in image
space, for better interpretability. We report the value averaged across multiple viewpoints around the
objects and for the points sampled for each of the objects in the pair.
Second, we measure the semantic coherence between a generated object and the respective text
prompt. We measure it following the methodology of GPTEval3D (Mao et al., 2023), that was
shown to align with human perception well. Specifically, we ask a Large Multimodal Model GPT-
4o (OpenAI, 2024) to compare the 3D objects generated with two methods for the same text prompt
and choose the one that is more consistent with the prompt, based on Text-Asset Alignment and
Text-Geometry Alignment. We compare our method against each alternative and report the percentage
of comparisons in which our method is preferred. Additionally, we measure the coherence between
the generated object and the prompt using CLIP similarity (Jain et al., 2022), which is defined as
cosine similarity between the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) embeddings of a render of the object and
the respective text prompt.
Finally, we evaluate the visual quality of the generated objects and the quality of their surface. For
this, we compare the objects generated with two methods using GPTEval3D based on 3D Plausibility,
Texture Details, Geometry Details, and Overall quality.

5.1    G ENERATION OF MULTIPLE ALIGNED 3D OBJECTS

We evaluate our method in the generation of sets of structurally aligned objects on 15 pairs of prompts
describing pairs of objects with similar morphology but different geometry and appearance, such as
a car and a carriage. We include various categories of objects, namely different kinds of animals,
humanoids, plants, vehicles, furniture, and buildings, see the list of prompts in Table 5.
As no existing method targets the generation of aligned 3D objects, we adopt for comparison several
methods of text-driven generation and editing of 3D models. To obtain a pair of aligned objects
with such a method, we generate one of the objects from scratch and transform it into the other
one. We compare with MVEdit (Chen et al., 2024a), LucidDreamer (Liang et al., 2024), and
GaussianEditor (Chen et al., 2024c). MVEdit takes mesh as an input and generates multiple views
of the edited object with InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) diffusion network. Then, the mesh is
optimized photometrically to be consistent with the edited views, iteratively reducing the level of
diffusion noise. LucidDreamer uses Gaussian Splatting and its own version of SDS algorithm inspired
by the works on 2D image editing. GaussianEditor also uses Gaussian Splatting in combination
with methods of 2D generative guidance, in particular Instruct-Pix2Pix, and additionally develops
an anchor loss to control the flexibility of Gaussians. It only performs text-driven editing but not
generation, so we generate the initial 3D objects for this method using MVDream (Shi et al., 2024). In
our ablation study, we also compare with pairs of objects generated using MVDream independently.
We show the quantitative comparison in Table 1 and the qualitative comparison in Figure 5. Our
method generates pairs of objects aligned with the text prompts and with high visual and geometric
quality. It outperforms all the other methods on all evaluation criteria of GPTEval3D and w.r.t. CLIP
similarity. Compared to our method, MVEdit produces less detailed objects. LucidDreamer produces
noisier geometry and often struggles with multi-view inconsistency. GaussianEditor often struggles


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Pairs of objects generated with existing methods and our method. The top two rows show
the results for one pair of prompts written below, the bottom two rows show the results for another
pair of prompts. For each object, we show a color rendering and a rendering of the geometry below it.



to obtain an object corresponding to the prompt. This may be due to Instruct-Pix2Pix (used by this
method) generating inconsistent guidance from different views for synthesized objects, as it was
trained on real-world data.
Pairs of objects generated with our method have a high degree of structural alignment, which is
confirmed by a low DIFT distance, less than one tenth of the size of an object. W.r.t. this metric
our method is only slightly outperformed by MVEdit and GaussianEditor that, while obtaining the
second object in a pair by transforming the first one, often fail to change the geometry of the initial
object. This leads to poor alignment with the text prompt and low quality of the generated objects
overall (see the values of GPTEval3D). Moreover, the other methods, which transform one object in
a pair into the other one, often generate a variant of the initial object with the geometric structure
unsuitable for the other prompt, as in the carriage-car pair produced by MVEdit. This fundamentally
limits the quality of sets of objects generated with this sequential approach. In contrast, our method
jointly optimizes the set of objects so that they simultaneously share the structure and correspond to
their respective text prompts well.


5.2   H YBRIDIZATION : COMBINING THE ALIGNED 3D OBJECTS

We show examples of the hybrid objects combining parts of aligned objects produced by our method,
and illustrate the process of getting these hybrids in Figure 4. In these experiments, for better visibility
we intentionally choose the hyperparameters of our method to increase the visual difference between
the generated objects. To choose which part of each object we want to use, we assign several anchor
points to each object and manually place these points in the common 3D space of the objects. We
define the spatial distribution of the latent code u (µ) at the location µ (described in Section 4.2) via
linear interpolation between the latent codes corresponding to the objects associated with the two
closest anchors.
The examples of hybrids demonstrate that our method generates aligned 3D objects that can be
seamlessly blended in different configurations. The coherent appearance of the hybrid models
demonstrates a high degree of structural alignment across the generated objects. Remarkably, our
method allows us to easily transition between the parts of the objects with different geometries, e.g.,
the necks of the gopher and kangaroo, which have different diameters, or waists of the seahorse and
mermaid, which have fins and hands nearby. This is in contrast to methods that represent 3D objects
with a mesh (e.g., MVEdit), which have to be locally adjusted first to be stitched together.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 2: Quantitative comparison for structure-preserving transformation.

                         GPTEval3D, % of comparisons where our method is preferred
                     Text-asset Text-geometry     3D       Texture Geometry Overall                             DIFT distance ↓
                                                                                                       CLIP ↑
                     alignment    alignment   plausibility details  details quality                             % of object size
vs. MVEdit              76           66           50        80       84       83      MVEdit            27.9          3.7
vs. GaussianEditor      94           94           83        97       97       100     GaussianEditor    24.6          1.8
                                                                                      A3D (Ours)        27.8          7.9


Figure 6: Objects generated with existing methods and our method from an initial 3D model on the
left. Each row shows the results obtained for the text prompt below. For each object, we show a color
rendering and a rendering of the geometry.


5.3    S TRUCTURE - PRESERVING TRANSFORMATION OF 3D MODELS

We evaluate the capability of our method to transform an initial 3D model while preserving its
structure on 26 text prompts. For each prompt we find a coarse initial model with the desired structure
on the web, or use the SMPL parametric human body model (Loper et al., 2023) in a desired pose. In
this way, we obtain, for example, a skeleton from a 3D model of a cat, or a princess on a throne from
a simple model of a sitting woman, see the list of text prompts in Table 6. We compare with the same
text-driven 3D editing methods as in the generation of pairs of objects.
We show the quantitative comparison in Table 2 and the qualitative comparison in Figure 6. Lu-
cidDreamer diverged for half of the scenes, so we only compare with it qualitatively. Our method
generates objects aligned with the text prompts and with high visual and geometric quality, while
preserving the geometric structure of the initial 3D model in terms of pose and proportions. It
generally produces results on par with state-of-art specialized text-driven 3D editing methods, which
is confirmed by the metrics. Our method consistently outperforms MVEdit w.r.t. the asset quality and
alignment with the prompt, by producing more detailed results. Unlike MVEdit, which is restricted
to superficial deformations of the surface, our method is able to add or remove significant parts of the
object requested by the prompt, e.g., adding the throne and crown for the princess, or shrinking the
cat down to its skeleton. This also explains a slightly higher DIFT distance for our method, since
these additional parts do not have the corresponding parts in the initial 3D model. LucidDreamer
produces the objects with inconsistent and distorted geometry. It rarely preserves the pose and overall
structure of the initial 3D model and often struggles with the Janus problem, producing the objects
with multiple faces, limbs, etc. On the other hand, it generates more detailed visual appearance
compared with our method.


6     A BLATION

We compare our method with two branches of baselines for generating pairs of objects. We refer to
these baselines as (A), (B), (C), (E), (F), and to our complete method as (D).


                                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Table 3: Quantitative ablation study.

                                            DIFT distance ↓, percentage of object size
             (A) MVDream, independently generated objects                  30.1
             (B) MVDream + multiple objects in one network                 18.7 (F) A3D, 3-layer MLP          14.3
             (C) A3D, transition plausibility with empty prompt            14.2 (E) A3D, 2-layer MLP          13.5
             (D) A3D, transition plausibility with blended prompt (Ours)    6.1 (D) A3D, 1-layer MLP (Ours)    6.1



In the first branch, we study the effects of embedding a set of objects into a single neural field and the
importance of regularizing plausibility of transition between them. We start with the basic version of
the text-to-3D framework MVDream (Shi et al., 2024) that our method is based on (A). MVDream
generates pairs of objects independently from one another. We modify MVDream to parameterize
two objects with a single neural field without regularizing the transition between them (B). We also
implement a version of our method that regularizes the transitions using a diffusion model conditioned
on an empty text prompt (C), instead of a blending of the input prompts in our full method (D).
In the second branch of comparisons we study the importance of the smoothness of the transitions.
We achieve this by following the reasoning in (Miyato et al., 2018) and limiting the depth of our
neural network. Specifically, in our complete method (D), we parameterize sets of objects with a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) with one hidden layer on top of a feature hash grid. We evaluate two
alternative designs that use MLPs with two and three hidden layers (E, F).
We show the quantitative comparison in Table 3, the qualitative comparison in Figure 8, and provide
more details in Appendix D.1. Our results fully support the motivation behind the components
of our method. MVDream (A) produces pairs of objects with different poses and proportions,
which is confirmed by a high DIFT distance, corresponding to the nearly one third of the size of an
object. Version (B) improves alignment across the objects but still does not lead to similar poses
and proportions. These results show that independent generation of the objects with a single model,
does not guarantee good structural alignment, which can be explained by the mode-seeking nature
of SDS (Poole et al., 2023). Using an empty prompt to enforce plausibility of the transitions (C)
consistently improves the alignment between the corresponding structural parts of the objects, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. This shows that the key property of our method is achieved through
regularization of plausibility of the transitions and not through interpolation between the latent codes
of individual objects. The interpolation that we use in our complete method (D) additionally makes
the objects similar to each other (while sacrificing their realism and making them more stylized if
they are naturally notably different from each other) and further improves the structural alignment
across the objects. Further tuning of the plausibility loss weight allows one to control the degree of
alignment, as we discuss in Appendix D.2. Our experiments with increasing the depth of the network
(D-F) show that enforcing the smoothness of the transition between the objects is essential for the
proper alignment.

7    C ONCLUSIONS
We present A3D, the first method designed to generate a collection of objects structurally aligned with
each other. This is achieved by encouraging the transitions between the objects, jointly embedded
into a shared latent space, to be smooth and meaningful, which is demonstrated to be an essential
property for proper alignment. We show that, when applied to the generation of the structurally
aligned objects our method outperforms the editing-based competitors in terms of the asset quality
and text-object alignment, while keeping the geometric structural alignment on the state-of-art level.
When applied to the 3D editing task, our method provides the results on par with recent methods
specialized in this problem. Our method allows to compose novel objects seamlessly combining
the parts from the different aligned objects in the generated collection. Our approach is limited to
generating static aligned objects, and can not be applied to pose-changing tasks. In future work, we
plan to extend our framework to changing poses and 4D video generation by experimenting with
different regularization techniques for the transitions between objects.


                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the use of the Skoltech supercomputer Zhores (Zacharov et al., 2019) to
obtain the results presented in this paper. The research was partially supported by the funding of the
Skoltech Applied AI center.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Our method is built on MVDream model, so it inherits all the problematic biases and limitations
that this model may have. For example, MVDream fine-tuned the open-source Stable Diffusion 2.1
model (Rombach & Esser) on the Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023) and LAION (Schuhmann et al.,
2022) datasets. The LAION-400M subset of the full LAION-5B was found to contain unwanted
images (Birhane et al., 2021), including inappropriate and abusive depictions. Our method may
have the potential to displace creative workers through automation and increase accessibility for
the creative and gaming industries. There is the risk that our method could be used to produce fake
content.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We build our method based on the official MVDream implementation using threestudio frame-
work (Shi et al., 2023c). We discuss the details of implementation of our method in Appendix B.1,
the details of experiments with the methods that we compare with in Appendix B.3, and describe the
evaluation details in Appendix C.

R EFERENCES
Chong Bao, Yinda Zhang, Bangbang Yang, Tianxing Fan, Zesong Yang, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang,
  and Zhaopeng Cui. Sine: Semantic-driven image-based nerf editing with prior-guided editing field.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  20919–20929, 2023.
David Berthelot*, Colin Raffel*, Aurko Roy, and Ian Goodfellow. Understanding and improving in-
  terpolation in autoencoders via an adversarial regularizer. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1fQSiCcYm.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 18392–18402, 2023.
Hansheng Chen, Ruoxi Shi, Yulin Liu, Bokui Shen, Jiayuan Gu, Gordon Wetzstein, Hao Su, and
  Leonidas Guibas. Generic 3d diffusion adapter using controlled multi-view editing, 2024a.
Hansheng Chen, Ruoxi Shi, Yulin Liu, Bokui Shen, Jiayuan Gu, Gordon Wetzstein, Hao Su, and
  Leonidas Guibas. Mvedit code. https://github.com/Lakonik/MVEdit, 2024b.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and appear-
  ance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 22246–22256, 2023a.
Y. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Cai, L. Yang, H. Liu, and G. Lin.
  Gaussianeditor: Swift and controllable 3d editing with gaussian splatting. In 2024 IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 21476–21485, Los Alamitos,
  CA, USA, jun 2024c. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.02029.
Yiwen Chen, Zilong Chen, Chi Zhang, Feng Wang, Xiaofeng Yang, Yikai Wang, Zhon-
  gang Cai, Lei Yang, Huaping Liu, and Guosheng Lin. Gaussian editor experiment with
  bear. https://github.com/buaacyw/GaussianEditor/blob/master/script/
  edit_n2n_bear_grey.sh, 2023b.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yiwen Chen, Zilong Chen, Chi Zhang, Feng Wang, Xiaofeng Yang, Yikai Wang, Zhongang Cai,
  Lei Yang, Huaping Liu, and Guosheng Lin. Gaussian editor code. https://github.com/
  buaacyw/GaussianEditor, 2023c.
Yiwen Chen, Chi Zhang, Xiaofeng Yang, Zhongang Cai, Gang Yu, Lei Yang, and Guosheng Lin.
  It3d: Improved text-to-3d generation with explicit view synthesis. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 1237–1244, 2024d.
Xinhua Cheng, Tianyu Yang, Jianan Wang, Yu Li, Lei Zhang, Jian Zhang, and Li Yuan. Progressive3d:
  Progressively local editing for text-to-3d content creation with complex semantic prompts. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=O072Rc8uUy.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of anno-
 tated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13142–13153, June 2023.
Wenqi Dong, Bangbang Yang, Lin Ma, Xiao Liu, Liyuan Cui, Hujun Bao, Yuewen Ma, and Zhaopeng
 Cui. Coin3d: Controllable and interactive 3d assets generation with proxy-guided conditioning.
 In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, SIGGRAPH ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024.
 Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400705250. doi: 10.1145/3641519.3657425.
 URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657425.
Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Instruct-
  nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.
Fangzhou Hong, Jiaxiang Tang, Ziang Cao, Min Shi, Tong Wu, Zhaoxi Chen, Tengfei Wang, Liang
  Pan, Dahua Lin, and Ziwei Liu. 3dtopia: Large text-to-3d generation model with hybrid diffusion
  priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02234, 2024.
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided
  object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 867–876, 2022.
Heewoo Jun and Alex Nichol. Shap-e: Generating conditional 3d implicit functions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.02463, 2023.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing
  and improving the image quality of stylegan. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8107–8116, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00813.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. Gaussian splatting
  code. https://github.com/graphdeco-inria/gaussian-splatting, 2023.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Yuhan Li, Yishun Dou, Yue Shi, Yu Lei, Xuanhong Chen, Yi Zhang, Peng Zhou, and Bingbing
  Ni. Focaldreamer: Text-driven 3d editing via focal-fusion assembly. Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(4):3279–3287, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i4.28113.
  URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/28113.
Y. Liang, X. Yang, J. Lin, H. Li, X. Xu, and Y. Chen. Luciddreamer: Towards high-fidelity text-to-3d
   generation via interval score matching. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
   tern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6517–6526, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2024. IEEE Computer Soci-
   ety. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.00623. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
   org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.00623.
Yixun Liang, Xin Yang, Jiantao Lin, Haodong Li, Xiaogang Xu, and Yingcong Chen. Luciddreamer
  code. https://github.com/EnVision-Research/LucidDreamer, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 300–309, 2023.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9298–9309, October 2023.
Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
  Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=MN3yH2ovHb.
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl:
 A skinned multi-person linear model. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries,
 Volume 2, pp. 851–866. 2023.
Lykon. Dreamshaper 8 code. https://huggingface.co/Lykon/dreamshaper-8, 2023.
Zhiyuan Ma, Yuxiang Wei, Yabin Zhang, Xiangyu Zhu, Zhen Lei, and Lei Zhang. Scaledreamer: Scal-
  able text-to-3d synthesis with asynchronous score distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02040,
  2024.
Rui Mao, Guanyi Chen, Xulang Zhang, Frank Guerin, and Erik Cambria. Gpteval: A survey on
  assessments of chatgpt and gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12488, 2023.
Luca Medeiros. Language segment-anything code. https://github.com/luca-medeiros/
  lang-segment-anything, 2024.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization for
  generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1QRgziT-.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics
  primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 41(4):
  1–15, 2022.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Accessed:
  2024-05-26.
Francesco Palandra, Andrea Sanchietti, Daniele Baieri, and Emanuele Rodolà. Gsedit: Efficient
  text-guided editing of 3d objects via gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05154, 2024.
JangHo Park, Gihyun Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. ED-neRF: Efficient text-guided editing of 3d scene
  with latent space neRF. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9DvDRTTdlu.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=FjNys5c7VyY.
Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Xiaodong Gu, Qi Zuo, Mutian Xu, Yushuang Wu, Weihao Yuan,
  Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, and Xiaoguang Han. Richdreamer: A generalizable normal-depth
  diffusion model for detail richness in text-to-3d. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9914–9925, June 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amit Raj, Srinivas Kaza, Ben Poole, Michael Niemeyer, Ben Mildenhall, Nataniel Ruiz, Shiran
 Zada, Kfir Aberman, Michael Rubenstein, Jonathan Barron, Yuanzhen Li, and Varun Jampani.
 Dreambooth3d: Subject-driven text-to-3d generation. ICCV, 2023.
Robin Rombach and Patrick Esser. Stable diffusion v2-1. https://huggingface.co/
  stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Tim Sainburg, Marvin Thielk, Brad Theilman, Benjamin Migliori, and Timothy Gentner. Generative
  adversarial interpolative autoencoding: adversarial training on latent space interpolations encourage
  convex latent distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06650, 2018.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia
  Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models.
  In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.
Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Peter Hedman, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. Vox-e: Text-guided voxel
  editing of 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 430–440, October 2023.
Junyoung Seo, Wooseok Jang, Min-Seop Kwak, Hyeonsu Kim, Jaehoon Ko, Junho Kim, Jin-Hwa
  Kim, Jiyoung Lee, and Seungryong Kim. Let 2d diffusion model know 3d-consistency for robust
  text-to-3d generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UbxWjq0UO2.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Ruoxi Shi, Hansheng Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Linghao Chen,
  Chong Zeng, and Hao Su. Zero123++: a single image to consistent multi-view diffusion base
  model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15110, 2023a.
Ruoxi Shi, Hansheng Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Linghao Chen,
  Chong Zeng, and Hao Su. Zero123++ v1.2 code. https://huggingface.co/sudo-ai/
  zero123plus-v1.2/tree/main, 2023b.
Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream code.
  https://github.com/bytedance/MVDream-threestudio, 2023c.
Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Long Mai, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. MVDream: Multi-view
  diffusion for 3d generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FUgrjq2pbB.
Yawar Siddiqui, Tom Monnier, Filippos Kokkinos, Mahendra Kariya, Yanir Kleiman, Emilien
  Garreau, Oran Gafni, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, Roman Shapovalov, et al. Meta 3d
  assetgen: Text-to-mesh generation with high-quality geometry, texture, and pbr materials. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.02445, 2024.
Jiaxiang Tang, Zhaoxi Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Tengfei Wang, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. Lgm:
   Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.05054, 2024a.
Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaus-
   sian splatting for efficient 3d content creation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UyNXMqnN3c.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Luming Tang, Menglin Jia, Qianqian Wang, Cheng Perng Phoo, and Bharath Hariharan. Emergent
  correspondence from image diffusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  1363–1389, 2023.
Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Yifei Chen, Chendong Xiang, Shuo Chen, Dajiang Yu, Chongxuan Li,
  Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. CRM: Single image to 3d textured mesh with convolutional reconstruction
  model. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 57–74. Springer, 2025.
Haibo Yang, Yang Chen, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Zhineng Chen, Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang, and
  Tao Mei. Dreammesh: Jointly manipulating and texturing triangle meshes for text-to-3d generation.
  In ECCV, 2024.
Jianglong Ye, Peng Wang, Kejie Li, Yichun Shi, and Heng Wang. Consistent-1-to-3: Consistent
   image to 3d view synthesis via geometry-aware diffusion models. In 2024 International Conference
   on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 664–674, 2024. doi: 10.1109/3DV62453.2024.00027.
Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Junjie Wang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian,
  and Xinggang Wang. Gaussiandreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d gaussians by bridging 2d
  and 3d diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6796–6807, June 2024.
Igor Zacharov, Rinat Arslanov, Maksim Gunin, Daniil Stefonishin, Andrey Bykov, Sergey Pavlov,
  Oleg Panarin, Anton Maliutin, Sergey Rykovanov, and Maxim Fedorov. “zhores”-petaflops
  supercomputer for data-driven modeling, machine learning and artificial intelligence installed in
  skolkovo institute of science and technology. Open Engineering, 9(1):512–520, 2019.
Jingyu Zhuang, Chen Wang, Liang Lin, Lingjie Liu, and Guanbin Li. Dreameditor: Text-driven 3d
   scene editing with neural fields. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers, pp. 1–10, 2023.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Quantitative evaluation of the RichDreamer-based implementation of our method for the
generation of multiple aligned 3D objects.

                     Text-asset Text-geometry     3D       Texture Geometry Overall                                       DIFT distance ↓
                                                                                                                 CLIP ↑
                     alignment    alignment   plausibility details  details quality                                       % of object size
vs. MVEdit              86           81           72         80           81   82     MVEdit                      27.1          5.5
vs. LucidDreamer        51           59           66         46           50   53     LucidDreamer                26.4          11.3
vs. GaussianEditor      88           66           71         71           65   72     GaussianEditor              22.8          2.4
                        GPTEval3D, % of comparisons where                             A3D-MVDream (Ours, main)    27.7          6.1
               the RichDreamer-based version of our method is preferred               A3D-RichDreamer (Ours)      28.8          5.8


Figure 7: Pairs of objects generated using the implementation of our method based on Rich-
Dreamer (Qiu et al., 2024). The respective pairs of prompts are shown below. For each object,
we show a color rendering and a rendering of the geometry below it.


A      G ENERATION OF MULTIPLE ALIGNED 3D OBJECTS WITH R ICH D REAMER
To evaluate the generalizability of our approach, we performed additional experiments on the genera-
tion of pairs of aligned objects using an implementation of our method based on the RichDreamer
model (Qiu et al., 2024). RichDreamer employs a hybrid DMTet (Shen et al., 2021) representation for
3D content creation. It additionally integrates a special normal-depth diffusion model alongside the
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) method to refine the geometry. This approach allows for sharper
edges, enhanced surface continuity, and a more realistic object appearance. In addition to improving
geometry, RichDreamer also employs albedo diffusion process for texture learning. The optimization
process is split into three stages. First, the coarse geometry is optimized to establish the basic shape
of the 3D object. Then, this geometry is refined, improving the fidelity and detail of the object surface.
Finally, the texture on the surface is generated.
In Figure 7 we show examples of the pairs of objects generated with this implementation of our
method. In Table 4 we show the quantitative comparison of this implementation with the other
methods. Our results with RichDreamer demonstrate the ability of our method to preserve the quality
when switching the backbone. This version of our method produces the 3D objects with a higher
degree of structural alignment compared with the main version based on the MVDream model. The
reason for this may be that enforcing normal smoothness is easier with an SDF-based rendering
backbone compared with a backbone based on radiance fields. On the other hand, the version of our
method based on RichDreamer produces the results with a lower visual and geometric quality, w.r.t.
GPTEval3D. One reason for this may be that RichDreamer sometimes struggles with generation of
fine structures.

B     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
B.1     I MPLEMENTATION OF OUR METHOD BASED ON MVD REAM

We use the same NeRF architecture and the majority of hyperparameters for training as MVDream
(Shi et al., 2024). The neural density field is parameterized with an MLP network with one hidden
layer, built on top of a hierarchical feature hash grid with the dimension of 32. The grid has 16 levels
starting from the resolution of 8 with 2 features per level. For SDS, we use the multi-view diffusion
model from MVDream, and decrease the level of noise gradually during training.


                                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To implement the transitions, we introduce an additional latent vector u that is concatenated with the
coordinate embedding obtained from the hash grid and passed to the NeRF network. At each training
iteration, we sample the latent vector u randomly from the latent simplex (described in Section 4.1).
With the probability 1 − p, we sample the latent vector from the vertices of the simplex, i.e., optimize
a single object, and with the probability p, we sample the latent vector from the edges of the simplex,
i.e., optimize a transition between two objects. We obtain our main results with p = 0.5. When the
latent vector is sampled from an edge of the simplex, we additionally sample a scalar parameter t
from the uniform distribution t ∼ U(0, 1) and obtain the latent vector u for the current training
iteration via linear interpolation between the latent codes of the individual objects in the pair with
this parameter t.
We employ two types of regularization on the normal maps: the orientation penalty described in (Poole
et al., 2023) and the normal smoothness loss. Given the direction of the normal Ni,j at the pixel with
the indices i, j, the smoothness loss is defined as

                         1             X −1
                                     H−1,W
                                                 |Ni,j+1 − Ni,j | + |Ni+1,j − Ni,j |,               (5)
                  (H − 1)(W − 1)       i=1,j=1

where H and W are the dimensions of the normal map. We gradually increase the weight of the
orientation penalty from 100 to 1000. We set the weight of the normal smoothness loss to the value
of 10.

B.2   I MPLEMENTATION OF OUR METHOD BASED ON R ICH D REAMER

We mostly use the default configuration of RichDreamer, including the details of the architecture
and the optimization process. This involves utilizing an MLP with one hidden layer and 64 neurons
for prediction of the SDF and another MLP with the same structure for prediction of the albedo.
Similarly to the implementation of our method based on MVDream, we employ the latent code u
concatenated with the encoded points from a hash grid as the input to these networks. We initialize
the geometry representation using a uniform sphere with a radius of one, and utilize SDS with Stable
Diffusion 2.1 and a depth-normal diffusion model to improve the accuracy of depth predictions.
For smoother interpolation between prompts, we incorporate normal consistency loss, and after
experimentation, we found that setting the loss coefficient between 3 and 5 yields better results than
the original configuration. To generate textures, we use a material system based on a diffuse and
point-light setup without background. For generating albedo maps, we guide the prediction with an
additional diffusion model.

B.3   D ETAILS OF TESTING THE OTHER METHODS

MVEdit. We used the official implementation of MVEdit (Chen et al., 2024b) with the default
values of all hyperparameters except the denoising strength for text-guided 3D-to-3D pipeline. We
changed this value from the default 0.7 to 0.8 to increase the scale of the changes that the method
makes to the input 3D mesh. In our experiments, this lead to a higher quality of the results produced
by MVEdit.
We obtain pairs of aligned objects with MVEdit in three steps, the first two of which follow the
text-to-3D generation pipeline of MVEdit.

      1. We generate the images of the first object in the pair using the Stable Diffusion 1.5
         model (Lykon, 2023; Rombach et al., 2022) conditioned on the respective text prompt.
      2. We generate the mesh of the first object from these images using the Zero123++ model (Shi
         et al., 2023b;a). This step includes extraction of object masks for the generated images, that
         we obtain using the Language Segment-Anything model (Medeiros, 2024; Kirillov et al.,
         2023).
      3. We obtain the mesh of the second object in the pair by following the text-guided 3D-to-3D
         pipeline of MVEdit initialized with the previously generated mesh of the first object.

For the structure-preserving transformation of 3D models, we follow the text-guided 3D-to-3D
pipeline of MVEdit in the straightforward way.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LucidDreamer. We used the official implementation of LucidDreamer (Liang et al., 2023) with the
default values of all hyperparameters.
We obtain pairs of aligned objects with LucidDreamer in three steps, the first two of which follow the
text-to-3D generation pipeline of LucidDreamer.

      1. We generate a coarse point cloud of the first object in the pair using the Shape-E model
         conditioned on the respective text prompt.
      2. We obtain the Gaussian Splatting representation of the first object by initializing it using the
         point cloud from the previous step and optimizing it using SDS conditioned on the same
         text prompt.
      3. We obtain the Gaussian Splatting representation of the second object in the pair by initializing
         it with the previously generated Gaussian splats of the first object and optimizing it using
         SDS conditioned on the text prompt for the second object.

For the structure-preserving transformation of 3D models, we extract the point cloud from the source
mesh and use this point cloud for initialization of the Gaussian Splatting in the generation pipeline of
LucidDreamer.

GaussianEditor. We used the official implementation of GaussianEditor (Chen et al., 2023c)
with the same values of all hyperparameters that the authors use for their experiment with the bear
scene (Chen et al., 2023b).
GaussianEditor takes as input a Gaussian Splatting representation of the scene and performs the
text-driven editing of this scene. For the generation of pairs of aligned objects, we obtain the input
Gaussian Splatting for the first object in the pair generated using MVDream. For the structure-
preserving transformation of 3D models, we obtain the input Gaussian Splatting for the source mesh.
In both cases, we obtain the second object in the pair or the transformed object with the following
steps.

      1. We obtain the input Gaussian Splatting from 120 renders of the initial object, by following
         the original implementation of Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) with the default
         parameters and 30k training iterations. We render the initial object from 120 camera
         positions evenly located around it and use the known camera parameters during optimization
         of the Gaussian Splatting.
      2. We obtain the second object in the pair by running GaussianEditor with the prompt “Turn
         the prompt 1 into a prompt 2”, where the prompt 1 and prompt 2 describe the initial object
         and the second object in the pair respectively. For structure-preserving transformation we
         use the prompt “Turn it into a target prompt”.

We note that Gaussian Splatting does not provide an explicit representation of the 3D surface, so we
derive the renderings of the surface (e.g., shown on Figure 5) from the renderings of depth maps.

B.4   C OMPUTATIONAL COST

We run all experiments on a single Nvidia A100 GPU. To generate a single object, MVDream, which
we use as the baseline of our method, requires 10k iterations, which corresponds approximately
to 45 minutes. To generate a pair of objects, our method typically requires 20k iterations, which
corresponds to 1.5 hours. The two main steps of our adaptation of MVEdit, namely text-driven 3D
generation to obtain one of the objects in the pair and text-driven editing to obtain the other object,
require 40 minutes in total. To generate a pair of objects, LucidDreamer typically requires 2 hours.
With GaussianEditor, we generate an initial object in the pair using MVDream, which requires 45
minutes, and then edit the first object into the second one, which requires 15 minutes, so the total time
required to generate a pair of objects is 1 hour. Overall, the running time of our method is comparable
with the alternatives.
We have experimented with the generation of up to 5 aligned objects at a time using our method. We
decided not to rely on knowledge sharing and used a simple linear heuristic for scaling the number of
iterations. We add 10k optimization iterations (45 minutes) per object, so that the generation of 5
objects requires 50k iterations, which corresponds to 3 hours and 45 minutes. Informally, we have


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


noticed that sublinear scaling also produces the results of a high quality, so it would also be possible
to use fewer iterations.

C     E VALUATION DETAILS

For evaluation, we place the results of all methods into the same coordinate space. We manually
rotate the results of MVEdit for better consistency with the other methods. We render the results from
120 camera positions evenly located around the object, consistent with the threestudio format (Shi
et al., 2023c).
The results for editing-based competitors are split into two groups. The first group, which corresponds
to the generative part of their pipeline produces “source” 3D objects. The second group consists
of the objects that are obtained by feeding the objects from the first group to the corresponding 3D
editing pipeline. The object and its corresponding transformation could be obtained by taking some
object prompt from the first group and taking its complementary prompt from the pair from the
second group.

DIFT distance. Given a pair of images IA , IB and corresponding masks MA , MB we denote the
DIFT (Tang et al., 2023) mappings from the first image to the second as FA and from the second to
the first as FB . We build two 2D point clouds P A , P B by filtering regular 2D grids of points with
                                                                           1
                                                                              PN ∥FA (PiA )−PiA ∥2
masks MA , MB . We define the DIFT distance as following: SDIF T = 2N           i=1       σP        +
                                                                                               A
∥FB (PiB )−PiB ∥2
      σPB         , where σPA and σPB are the diameters of the 2D pointclouds P A and P B .          We
average the distance across the 120 viewpoints around the object.

GPTEval3D. We follow the procedure proposed by (Mao et al., 2023) precisely, with one change.
The version of the GPT model used in the original study is no longer available through OpenAI
API, so we utilize a newer version GPT-4o. We compare each pair of methods based on 90 pairwise
comparisons. For each comparison, we randomly sample a pair of objects produced by the two
methods for the same text prompt and compose the request to the model. Each request consists of a
pair of grids of renderings of the compared objects and a textual description of the questions to the
model. Interestingly, we observed that the compressed version of the model, GPT-4o-mini, prefers
the left result in the majority of comparisons regardless of the quality.

CLIP. We use ViT-L/14 version of the CLIP model. We calculate the CLIP similarity between the
RGB render of the object and the respective text prompt for each of the 120 viewpoints around the
object and report the average value.

D     A DDITIONAL RESULTS

In Table 5 we show the quantitative comparison of methods for the generation of multiple aligned
3D objects per each pair of objects. In Table 6 we show the quantitative comparison of methods
for structure-preserving transformation per each pair of initial model and text prompt. We note that
LucidDreamer diverged for half of the scenes.

D.1    E XTENDED DISCUSSION OF ABLATION RESULTS

In Tables 7 and 8 we show the results of the quantitative ablation study per each pair of objects, and in
Table 9 we show the comparison using GPTEval3D. In Figure 8, we show qualitative comparison for
one pair of objects, and we refer the reader to the complete set of animated results of our experiments
on the project page. We study our two main regularizations: encouraging the network to (1) learn
plausible transitions between the objects, and (2) learn smooth transitions.
To demonstrate the effects of progressively decreasing the strength of smoothness regularization, we
compare our method with a 1-layer MLP (D), with the versions with 2-layer MLP (E), and 3-layer
MLP (F). Weakening the regularization (increasing the number of layers) leads to a lower degree of
alignment, as confirmed by the DIFT distance, without any significant improvement of the visual and


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Quantitative comparison for the generation of multiple aligned 3D objects per each pair of
objects.

                                                                            CLIP Similarity ↑                                    DIFT distance ↓, % of object size
      Prompt 1                  Prompt 2             MVEdit LucidDreamer GaussianEditor A3D (Ours)                  MVEdit LucidDreamer GaussianEditor A3D (Ours)
ant animal               crab animal                    29.2          24.8               19.9            28.0         5.0           10.7                 1.9                   5.9
bicycle                  motorcycle                     26.7          26.2               22.8            25.7         4.5            7.0                 3.9                   5.5
bird animal              dinosaur animal                24.0          25.0               21.5            26.8         6.4           15.7                 1.6                   6.8
car                      carriage                       21.8          28.9               22.2            29.1         3.0           10.5                 1.6                   4.4
dwarf                    minotaur                       27.2          24.4               17.0            26.7         6.0            9.3                 0.9                   5.3
gopher animal            kangaroo animal                25.0          25.6               21.2            28.7         5.9           10.2                 3.4                   4.3
horse animal             horse skeleton                 26.7          24.4               25.9            29.1         2.1            4.2                 1.9                   7.2
animal                   lego animal                    25.9          25.4               26.0            24.3         5.1           16.7                 4.7                   5.5
magnolia tree            sakura tree                    30.2          24.3               28.0            30.6         9.0           14.3                 5.0                   2.8
space marine             ww2 soldier                    28.4          24.6               19.1            25.3         3.2           13.7                 0.7                   7.5
mermaid                  seahorse                       30.4          27.6               20.9            29.9         10.4          14.3                 1.6                   7.6
man standing             robot standing                 30.7          26.8               24.9            29.9         3.4           11.7                 3.6                   5.8
atakebune ship           modern yacht                   27.1          27.8               23.7            28.9         9.7            8.7                 1.9                   16.6
gothic cathedral hindu temple                           26.6          31.3               23.8            26.6         4.9           12.2                 1.8                   3.5
chair                    gothic throne, royal           26.6          28.9               25.2            26.5         3.2           10.1                 1.7                   2.6


Table 6: Quantitative comparison for structure-preserving transformation per each pair of initial
model and text prompt. We explain how we use the prompt describing the input model with our
method in Section 4.3.
                                                                                                CLIP Similarity ↑                          DIFT distance ↓, % of object size
Target text prompt                          Prompt describing the input model    MVEdit LucidDreamer GaussianEditor A3D (Ours)   MVEdit LucidDreamer GaussianEditor A3D (Ours)
arab warrior                                greek hoplite                         27.8       29.0           27.0       27.4        2.7        17.2              1.2              4.1
astronaut                                   man                                   27.1                      23.1       25.9        3.1                          1.0              6.8
avocado chair                               egg chair                             27.7                      26.4       32.5        6.2                          3.8              6.9
skeleton of a cat                           cat animal                            31.3                      28.6       31.6        3.1                          1.7              7.4
clown, sitting                              man, sitting                          32.1       29.6           28.7       31.6        2.2        13.7              1.2              6.5
dragon                                      parrot                                24.3                      18.8       26.0        8.2                          1.8             12.0
realistic baby duck bird                    yellow duck toy                       28.6                      29.8       27.9        5.0                          3.2              8.4
bearded dwarf with an axe                   man                                   26.7       27.6           23.8       30.5        3.4        13.1              1.8              5.4
female elf woman sitting                    female sitting                        27.7       32.7           30.8       33.6        1.6        16.2              1.7              4.5
saturn planet with rings                    globe on a stand                      24.5                      19.2       26.0        4.1                          1.2             11.6
groot                                       man wearing jeans and t-shirt         31.2                      22.7       31.3        3.6                          1.7              7.7
man hunter holding a gun in both hands      male human                            28.8       22.5           26.3       25.6        2.3        19.5              1.3              3.6
iron throne                                 antique wooden chair                  31.9                      24.9       27.5        5.4                          1.9             15.5
jedi with lightsaber                        man                                   25.1                      21.3       27.7        2.4                          1.8              4.0
female jedi with lightsaber                 woman                                 30.4       26.2           22.5       26.7        3.8        14.1              2.1              4.0
female jedi with lightsaber                 woman                                 27.7       23.4           21.3       28.7        3.2        20.3              1.0              5.6
highly detailed realistic lara croft        lara croft low poly                   29.3                      20.5       26.4        2.2                          1.6              3.7
female marble statue                        woman                                 31.8                      30.4       27.2        2.3                          2.2              6.8
space marine, warhammer                     man                                   24.4       25.9           20.3       28.0        6.5        16.6              2.1             13.1
my little pony                              horse animal                          29.0                      26.7       29.2        6.5                          1.3             15.5
beautiful princess sitting on a throne      female sitting                        26.7       27.1           23.2       26.5        2.3        18.6              1.7              9.4
robot                                       man                                   25.6       25.4           23.2       24.5        2.6        12.9              2.0             10.6
robot                                       man                                   24.6       25.7           24.7       25.5        3.4        14.9              1.2              9.6
robot, standing                             man, standing                         25.8                      25.4       23.8        2.9                          1.5              4.8
man wearing a black tailcoat with red tie   man wearing jeans and t-shirt         28.7                      29.4       24.6        4.4                          1.6              4.6
werewolf                                    man                                   25.7       27.8           20.1       27.8        2.3        17.7              2.1             12.4


                                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Quantitative ablation study comparing our method (D) with the baselines per each pair of
objects using DIFT distance. See descriptions of the baselines in Section 6.

                                                                     DIFT distance ↓, % of object size
      Prompt 1             Prompt 2       (A) MVDream (B) MVDream+mult. (C) Empty prompt (D) Ours (E) 2-layer MLP (F) 3-layer MLP
ant animal         crab animal                33.8            34.6              26.9         5.9         15.8             21.2
bicycle            motorcycle                 17.9             7.6               5.1         5.5         7.9              9.1
bird animal        dinosaur animal            28.3            21.9              13.6         6.8         15.1             13.9
car                carriage                   33.0            29.7              23.7         4.4         18.6             12.4
dwarf              minotaur                   41.2             9.0               6.7         5.3         8.8              9.7
gopher animal      kangaroo animal            37.7            38.2              27.3         4.3         6.7              8.0
horse animal       horse skeleton             13.0             8.5               7.0         7.2         7.9              8.4
animal             lego animal                25.8            10.8               4.8         5.5         3.6              2.8
magnolia tree      sakura tree                21.3             0.9               1.1         2.8         0.7              1.1
space marine       ww2 soldier                21.7            10.0              13.0         7.5         9.1              17.8
mermaid            seahorse                   34.1            35.8              27.4         7.6         24.0             17.9
man standing       robot standing             33.8             7.5               5.4         5.8         23.6             25.8
atakebune ship     modern yacht               39.5            30.9              15.3         16.6        28.3             26.8
gothic cathedral hindu temple                 35.7             8.0               6.1         3.5         8.0              12.7
chair              gothic throne, royal       34.4            27.2              29.7         2.6         25.0             26.9
                 Average                      30.1            18.7              14.2         6.1         13.5             14.3


Table 8: Quantitative ablation study comparing our method (D) with the baselines per each pair of
objects using CLIP similarity. See descriptions of the baselines in Section 6.

                                                                            CLIP Similarity ↑
      Prompt 1             Prompt 2       (A) MVDream (B) MVDream+mult. (C) Empty prompt (D) Ours (E) 2-layer MLP (F) 3-layer MLP
ant animal         crab animal                29.0            28.9              29.8         28.0        28.4             28.5
bicycle            motorcycle                 27.3            26.0              26.6         25.7        26.5             27.0
bird animal        dinosaur animal            24.8            24.6              25.2         26.8        25.4             24.8
car                carriage                   30.5            29.5              29.0         29.1        29.1             30.7
dwarf              minotaur                   27.4            29.7              29.4         26.7        27.6             28.4
gopher animal      kangaroo animal            30.4            29.8              30.2         28.7        29.5             29.9
horse animal       horse skeleton             28.9            29.7              30.5         29.1        30.3             31.1
animal             lego animal                26.4            25.0              26.4         24.3        24.0             23.3
magnolia tree      sakura tree                31.7            28.1              24.9         30.6        28.9             29.0
space marine       ww2 soldier                27.0            26.5              28.7         25.3        26.6             29.3
mermaid            seahorse                   29.9            29.3              28.9         29.9        29.0             28.8
man standing       robot standing             29.3            29.9              30.8         29.9        29.0             29.7
atakebune ship     modern yacht               28.5            27.7              28.8         28.9        28.4             27.9
gothic cathedral hindu temple                 28.6            29.0              29.7         26.6        28.6             31.4
chair              gothic throne, royal       27.7            27.5              27.5         26.5        28.1             28.4
                 Average                      28.5            28.1              28.4         27.7        28.0             28.5


Table 9: Quantitative ablation study comparing our method (D) with the baselines using GPTEval3D.
See descriptions of the baselines in Section 6.

                                                                 GPTEval3D, % of comparisons where our method is preferred
                                                             Text-asset Text-geometry     3D       Texture Geometry Overall
                                                             alignment    alignment   plausibility details  details quality
(A) MVDream, independently generated objects                         60.0          59.0        53.2     59.0       50.0          59.0
(B) MVDream + multiple objects in one network                        38.0          37.1        38.7     38.7       35.5          33.9
(C) A3D, transition plausibility with empty prompt                   47.0          44.9        65.6     54.4       68.8          68.8
(E) A3D, 2-layer MLP                                                 60.2          52.1        36.8     54.3       42.6          42.6
(F) A3D, 3-layer MLP                                                 59.9          51.4        50.0     53.6       50.0          51.5


                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: The first two rows show pairs of objects generated with our method (D) and the baselines
(see the main text for their description). The last row shows an overlay of the silhouettes of the
objects, demonstrating the alignment of their structural parts.


geometric quality, as confirmed by GPTEval3D and CLIP. We relate the preservation of the quality to
the following. The Instant-NGP 3D representation, which we use for the main implementation of our
method, mostly stores the neural field in the feature hash grid, while the MLP only plays an auxiliary
role.
To demonstrate the effects of progressively removing the plausibility regularization, we compare
our full method with the regularization conditioned on a blend of the text prompts (D), with the
regularization conditioned on an empty text prompt (C), and without the plausibility regularization
(B). Quantitatively, decreasing the plausibility of transitions also decreases the degree of alignment
between the objects, as confirmed by the DIFT distance, but may slightly increase the visual and
geometric quality of the results and their semantic coherence with the text prompts, measured with
GPTEval3D and CLIP. Qualitatively, when we relax the restriction on the plausibility of transitions,
the objects become less strictly aligned with each other and obtain more characteristic properties
corresponding to the text prompts, especially if they are naturally different. For example, the ant and
crab get generated with different numbers of legs, and the crab obtains a pair of claws; the car in
the car-carriage pair changes from vintage to modern; the proportions of the gopher and kangaroo
become more naturalistic.

D.2   VARYING DEGREE OF ALIGNMENT

We achieve the alignment between the objects through regularization of transitions between them.
Specifically, we encourage the network to learn plausible and smooth transitions. By varying the
strength of these regularizations, we can control the degree of alignment between the objects and
choose between more strict or more loose alignment.
The strength of the plausibility regularization is defined by the probability p of sampling the latent
code u from the edges of the latent simplex instead of its vertices (see Appendix B.1 for details).
In Figure 9 we compare the results of our full method (D) with the results obtained with a de-
creased strength of the regularization (G), and without the regularization (B). When we decrease
the plausibility of transitions, the objects become less strictly aligned with each other and obtain
more characteristic properties corresponding to the text prompts. For example, the ant and crab get
generated with different numbers of legs, and the crab obtains a pair of claws, while the proportions
of the gopher and kangaroo become more naturalistic.
We demonstrate the effects of progressively decreasing the strength of smoothness regularization in
our ablation study (Section 6 and Appendix D.1). We compare the results of our method with 1-layer
MLP (D), 2-layer MLP (E), and 3-layer MLP (F) in Figure 8 and on the project page. The variants
with more layers produce more loosely aligned objects.
On the project page, we show examples of transitions between the generated objects. The transitions
are generally smooth, gradually transforming one object into another. The plausibility of the interme-
diate results is higher for pairs of objects with a higher degree of alignment. The implementation of
our method based on RichDreamer produces smoother transitions compared to the implementation


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: The first two rows show pairs of objects generated with our method in the default con-
figuration (D), with a decreased strength of the plausibility regularization (G), and without this
regularization (B). The last row shows an overlay of the silhouettes of the objects, demonstrating
the alignment of their structural parts. Each three columns show the results for one pair of prompts
written below.


based on MVDream, which we relate to the implicit surface prior in DMTet that encourages the
network to learn smooth geometry.

E    OTHER EXPERIMENTS
Our method can generate instances of the same object with different details. In Figure 10 we show
examples of objects with adjusted accessories.
Our method can produce the results with some degree of diversity for a fixed set of text prompts, as
we show at the top row of Figure 11. The diversity of the results produced by our method is mostly
defined by the frameworks that we use for implementation: MVDream and RichDreamer. These
frameworks use Score Distillation Sampling. Optimization with the Score Distillation Sampling
employs high values of the Classifier-Free Guidance scale, which leads to mode-seeking behavior
and lack of diversity. Additionally, the diffusion models used in these frameworks are tuned on the
Objaverse dataset, which further decreases the diversity of the results produced by these models. One
way to obtain different instances of the same set of objects with our method is to describe the desired
differences in the text prompts, as we show at the bottom row of Figure 11.
Our method is robust to variations of the text prompts. In the first two rows of Figure 12 we show
the results for pairs of text prompts with the same meaning but with a different phrasing. While not
identical, the generated pairs exhibit a high degree of alignment between the objects and correspond to
the text prompts well. In the last row of Figure 12 we show the result for a pair of prompts describing
two different objects with the same attributes but using different phrasing. These objects are also
aligned well and have a high quality. Overall, A3D does not require too much prompt engineering
but one can expect some diversity in the results for different formulations of the text prompts.
We show a possible approach of applying our method to an image-to-3D model by performing the
structure-preserving transformation of a 3D object generated with this model. We show some results
obtained in this way in Figure 13. We generate the initial 3D models using the fast image-to-3D
pipeline of CRM (Wang et al., 2025) and then transform these models using our method as described
in Section 4.3. We use the faster implementation of our method based on the RichDreamer framework.
Our method preserves the structure of the initial object generated from the image well.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Figure 10: Pairs of instances of the same object with adjusted details generated with our method.


Figure 11: The top row shows two examples of slightly different instances of pairs of objects
generated with our method for the fixed pairs of text prompts, written below. For some text prompts,
the baseline text-to-3D framework MVDream tends to produce the exact same object every time
(bottom row, left). For the respective pairs of prompts, the diversity of the results produced by our
method is also limited (bottom row, middle). One way to obtain different instances of the same set of
objects with our method in this case is to describe the desired differences in the text prompts (bottom
row, right).


Figure 12: Each of the top two rows shows two pairs of objects generated with our method for pairs
of text prompts with a similar meaning but a different phrasing. The last row shows the result for a
pair of prompts describing two different objects with the same attributes but using different phrasing.



                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Examples of application of our method to an image-to-3D pipeline. Each triplet of images
shows an input image, the 3D model generated with the image-to-3D pipeline, and the result of
structure-preserving transformation of this model using our method with the target prompt written
below. The input image of the black cat is designed by macrovector / Freepik.


                                                25
