Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4K4DG EN :
PANORAMIC 4D G ENERATION AT 4K R ESOLUTION
 Renjie Li∗1,4 , Panwang Pan∗†‡1 , Bangbang Yang∗1 , Dejia Xu∗2 , Shijie Zhou3 , Xuanyang Zhang1 ,
 Zeming Li1 , Achuta Kadambi3 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Zhengzhong Tu4 , Zhiwen Fan2
 1
   Bytedance, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 University of California, Los Angeles,
 4
   Texas A&M University
 https://4k4dgen.github.io/
 paulpanwang@gmail.com


Figure 1: 4K4DGen takes a static panoramic image with a resolution of 4096×2048 and allows
animation through user interaction or an input mask, transforming the static panorama into dynamic
Gaussian Splatting. 4K4DGen supports the rendering of novel views at various timestamps, enriching
immersive virtual exploration.

                                              A BSTRACT

        The blooming of virtual reality and augmented reality (VR/AR) technologies has
        driven an increasing demand for the creation of high-quality, immersive, and
        dynamic environments. However, existing generative techniques either focus solely
        on dynamic objects or perform outpainting from a single perspective image, failing
        to meet the requirements of VR/AR applications that need free-viewpoint, 360◦
        virtual views where users can move in all directions. In this work, we tackle the
        challenging task of elevating a single panorama to an immersive 4D experience. For
        the first time, we demonstrate the capability to generate omnidirectional dynamic
        scenes with 360◦ views at 4K (4096 × 2048) resolution, thereby providing an
        immersive user experience. Our method introduces a pipeline that facilitates
        natural scene animations and optimizes a set of 3D Gaussians using efficient
        splatting techniques for real-time exploration. To overcome the lack of scene-scale
        annotated 4D data and models, especially in panoramic formats, we propose a novel
        Panoramic Denoiser that adapts generic 2D diffusion priors to animate consistently
        in 360◦ images, transforming them into panoramic videos with dynamic scenes
        at targeted regions. Subsequently, we propose Dynamic Panoramic Lifting to
        elevate the panoramic video into a 4D immersive environment while preserving
        spatial and temporal consistency. By transferring prior knowledge from 2D models
        in the perspective domain to the panoramic domain and the 4D lifting with spatial
        appearance and geometry regularization, we achieve high-quality Panorama-to-4D
        generation at a resolution of 4K for the first time.

   ∗: Equal contribution †: Project lead; ‡: Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION

With the increasing growth of generative techniques (Rombach et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2023a),
the capability to create high-quality assets has the potential to revolutionize content creation across
VR/AR and other spatial computing platforms. Unlike 2D displays such as smartphones or tablets,
ideal VR/AR content must deliver an immersive and seamless experience, enabling 6-DoF virtual
tours and supporting high-resolution 4D environments with omnidirectional viewing capabilities. De-
spite significant advancements in the generation of images, videos, and 3D models, the development
of panoramic 4D content has lagged, primarily due to the scarcity of well-annotated, high-quality
4D training data. Even in the most relevant field of 4D generation, existing works mainly focus on
generating or compositing object-level contents (Bahmani et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024), which are
often in low-resolution (e.g., below 1080p) and cannot fulfill the demand of qualified immersive
experiences. Based on these observations, we propose that an ideal generative tool for creating
immersive environments should possess the following properties: (i) the generated content should
exhibit high perceptual quality, reaching high-resolution (4K) output with dynamic elements (4D);
(ii) the 4D representation must be capable of rendering coherent, continuous, and seamless 360◦
panoramic views in real time, supporting efficient 6-DoF virtual tours. However, creating diverse,
high-quality 4D panoramic assets presents two significant challenges: (i) the scarcity of large-scale,
annotated 4D data, particularly in panoramic formats, limits the training of specialized models. (ii)
achieving both fine-grained local details and global coherence in 4D and 4K panoramic views is
difficult for existing 2D diffusion models. These models, typically trained on perspective images with
narrow fields of view (FoV), cannot be easily adapted to the expansive scopes of large panoramic
images (see Exp. 4.3). On another front, video diffusion models (An et al., 2023) trained with
web-scale multi-modal data have demonstrated versatile utility as region-based dynamic priors, and
Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) has shown efficient capabilities in modeling 4D environment.
Thus, we address the large-scale, omnidirectional dynamic scene generation (4D panoramic gener-
ation) problem by utilizing the generative power of diffusion models to animate static panoramic
images, transforming them into realistic, dynamic scenes that can support immersive, 360◦ viewing
experiences. To achieve this, we propose to elevate the dynamic panoramic video to 4D environment
assets using a set of dynamic Gaussians, which can be seamlessly integrated into VR/AR platforms
for real-time rendering and interaction.
In this paper, we introduce 4K4DGen, a novel framework designed to enable the creation of panoramic
4D environments at resolutions up to 4K. 4K4DGen addresses the key challenges of maintaining
consistent object dynamics across the entire 360◦ field-of-view (FoV) in panoramic videos, while
preserving both spatial and temporal coherence as the video transitions into a fully interactive 4D en-
vironment. Specifically, we propose the Panoramic Denoiser, which animates 360◦ FoV panoramic
images by denoising spherical latent codes corresponding to user-interacted regions. The Panoramic
Denoiser leverages a well-trained diffusion model originally designed for narrow-FoV perspective
images, enabling the generation of 360◦ dynamic panoramas while ensuring global coherence and
continuity throughout the entire panorama. To transform the omnidirectional panoramic video into
a 4D environment, we introduce Dynamic Panoramic Lifting, which corrects scale discrepancies
using a depth estimator enriched with perspective prior knowledge to generate panoramic depth maps.
Additionally, it employs time-dependent 3D Gaussians optimized with spatial-temporal geometry
alignment to ensure cross-frame consistency in dynamic scene representation and rendering. By
adapting generic 2D statistical patterns from the perspective domain to the panoramic format and
effectively regularizing Gaussian optimization with geometric principles, we achieve high-quality
4K panorama-to-4D content generation with photorealistic novel-view synthesis capabilities. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows.

       • We introduce 4K4DGen, the first framework capable of generating high-resolution (up to
         4096×2048) 4D omnidirectional assets without the need for annotated 4D data.
       • We propose the Panoramic Denoiser, which transfers generative priors from pre-trained
         2D perspective diffusion models to the panoramic space, enabling consistent animation of
         panoramas with dynamic scene elements.
       • We introduce Dynamic Panoramic Lifting, a method that transforms dynamic panoramic
         videos into dynamic Gaussians, incorporating spatial-temporal regularization to ensure
         cross-frame consistency and coherence.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                              Marginal Diffused
                                                                              Data Distribution

                                                                                                            (c) Denoising on Perspective Views


                                                                                                  View 0
                                                                                                                                       ...


                                                                                                  View 1
                                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                              (a)
                                                        Ele Per B
                                                           me
                                                              nt D atch
                                                                  eno
                                                                      isin
                                                                          g   Marginal Diffused
                                                                              Data Distribution               (d) Panoramic Denoiser Results
                    360° Panorama


                                                                                                   View 0
                                                                                                                                        ...


                                                                                                   View 1
                                       Sto Gen                                                                                          ...
                                          cha er


                                                                                xi o
                                             stic ativ


                                                                             e A ide
                                                 Peo e           (b)


                                                                                  s
                                                                          am /V
                                                    ces


                                                                        Fr atch
                                                        se   s


                                                                          B
Figure 2: Panoramic Denoiser adapts diffusion priors from the perspective domain to the panoramic
domain by simultaneously denoising perspective views and integrating them into spherical latents at
each denoising step. This approach ensures consistent animation across multiple views.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Diffusion-based Image and Video Generation. Recent advancements have significantly expanded
the capabilities of generating 2D images using diffusion models, as evidenced in several studies (Dhari-
wal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Podell et al., 2024; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022). Notably, Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) optimizes diffusion models (DMs) within
the latent spaces of autoencoders, striking an effective balance between computational efficiency and
high image quality. Beyond text conditioning, there is increasing emphasis on integrating additional
control signals for more precise image generation (Mou et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023). For example,
ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) enhances the Stable Diffusion encoder to seamlessly incorporate
these signals. Furthermore, the generation of images with consistent perspective views is gaining
attention, such as the training-based techniques like (Tang et al., 2023; Höllein et al., 2024), or the
sampling-based techniques like (Song et al., 2023; Bar-Tal et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Quattrini
et al., 2025). Diffusion models are also extensively applied in video generation, as demonstrated by
various recent works (Ge et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2023b; 2024b;
Zhou et al., 2022). For instance, Imagen Video (Ho et al., 2022) utilizes a series of video diffusion
models to generate videos from textual descriptions. Similarly, Make-A-Video (Singer et al., 2023)
advances a diffusion-based text-to-image model to create videos without requiring paired text-video
data. MagicVideo (Zhou et al., 2022) employs frame-wise adaptors and a causal temporal attention
module for text-to-video synthesis. Video Latent Diffusion Model (VLDM) (Blattmann et al., 2023b)
incorporates temporal layers into a 2D diffusion model to generate temporally coherent videos.

3D/4D Large-scale Generation. In recent 3D computer vision, a large-scale scene is usually
represented as implicit or explicit fields for its appearance (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Kerbl et al., 2023),
geometry (Peng et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023), and semantics (Kerr et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2024a; Qin et al., 2024). We mainly discuss the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl
et al., 2023) based generation here. Several works including DreamGaussian (Tang et al., 2024),
GaussianDreamer (Yi et al., 2024), GSGEN (Chen et al., 2023), CG3D (Vilesov et al., 2023), and
DiffSplat (Lin et al., 2025) employ 3DGS to generate diverse 3D objects and lay the foundations for
compositionality, while LucidDreamer (Chung et al., 2023), Text2Immersion (Ouyang et al., 2023),
GALA3D (Zhou et al., 2024c), RealmDreamer (Shriram et al., 2024), and DreamScene360 (Zhou
et al., 2024b) aim to generate static large-scale 3D scenes from text. Considering the current
advancements in 3D generation, investigations into 4D generation using 3DGS representation have
also been conducted. DreamGaussian4D (Ren et al., 2024) accomplishes 4D generation based
on a reference image. AYG (Ling et al., 2023) equips 3DGS with dynamic capabilities through
a deformation network for text-to-4D generation. Besides, Efficient4D (Pan et al., 2024) and
4DGen (Yin et al., 2023) explore video-to-4D generation, and utilize SyncDreamer (Liu et al., 2023)
to produce multi-view images from input frames as pseudo ground truth for training a dynamic 3DGS.
4K4D (Xu et al., 2024) is a high-resolution reconstruction technique that extends 3DGS to model
complex human motion with detailed backgrounds while achieving real-time rendering speed.


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Panoramic Representation. A panorama is an image that captures a wide, unbroken view of
an area, typically encompassing a field of vision much wider than what a standard photo would
cover, providing a more immersive representation of the subject. Recently, novel view synthesis
using panoramic representation has been widely explored. For instance, PERF (Wang et al., 2024a)
trains a panoramic neural radiance field from a single panorama to synthesize 360◦ novel views.
360Roam (Huang et al., 2022) proposed learning an omnidirectional neural radiance field and progres-
sively estimating a 3D probabilistic occupancy map to speed up volume rendering. OmniNeRF (Gu
et al., 2022) introduced an end-to-end framework for training NeRF using only 360◦ RGB images
and their approximate poses. PanoHDR-NeRF (Gera et al., 2022) learns the full HDR radiance field
from a low dynamic range (LDR) omnidirectional video by freely moving a standard camera around.
In the realm of 3DGS, 360-GS (Bai et al., 2024) takes 4 panorama images and 2D room layouts
as scene priors to reconstruct the panoramic Gaussian radiance field. DreamScene360 (Zhou et al.,
2024b) achieves text-to-3D Panoramic Gaussian Splatting by utilizing monocular depth priors to
regularize the Gaussian optimization.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

Taking a single panoramic image as input, the goal of 4K4DGen is to generate a panoramic 4D
environment capable of rendering novel views from arbitrary angles and at various timestamps. Our
approach initially constructs a panoramic video and then elevates it into a series of 3D Gaussians,
enabling efficient splatting for flexible rendering. Naïvely animating projected perspective images,
however, often results in unnatural motion and inconsistent animations. To overcome this, our method
propose the denoising of projected spherical latents, ensuring consistent animation of the panoramic
video from the original image, as detailed in Sec. 3.3.
Moreover, directly converting multiple perspective images from different timestamps into 4D fre-
quently leads to degraded geometry and visible artifacts (see Sec. 4.3). We address this by applying
spatial-temporal geometry fusion to lift the panoramic video, as described in Sec. 3.4. The complete
pipeline of 4K4DGen is illustrated in Fig. 3.


Figure 3: Overall Pipeline. Beginning with a static panorama as input, the Animating Phase
generates a panoramic video by first mapping the panorama into a spherical latent space, followed
by denoising within the perspective space, fusing back to the spherical latent space at each step,
and finally transforming it into the panoramic space. In the 4D Lifting Phase, a series of dynamic
Gaussians is employed to lift the panoramic video into a 4D representation, ensuring both spatial and
temporal consistency.


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   P RELIMINARIES

Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs). LDMs (Rombach et al., 2022) consist of a forward procedure
q and a backward procedure p. The forward procedure gradually introduces noise into the initial
latent code x0 ∈ Rh×w×c , where x0 = E(I) is the latent code of image I within the latent space of a
VAE, denoted
        √      by E. Given the latent code at step t − 1, the q procedure is described as q(xt |xt−1 ) =
N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I). Conversely, the backward procedure p, aimed at progressively removing
noise, is defined as pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)). In practical applications, images are
generated under the condition y, by progressively sampling from xT down to x0 . Recently, image-to-
video (I2V) generation has been realized (Guo et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2023) by extending the latent
code with an additional frame dimension and performing decoding at each frame. The denoising
procedure is succinctly represented as xt−1 = Φ(xt , I), where xt , xt−1 ∈ Rl×h×w×c represent the
sampled latent codes and I the conditioning image. Recently, image-to-video (I2V) generation has
been achieved (Guo et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2023) by extending the latent code with an additional
frame dimension and performing decoding at each frame. The denoising procedure is succinctly
expressed as xt−1 = Φ(xt , I), where xt , xt−1 ∈ Rl×h×w×c represent the sampled latent codes, and
I represents the conditioning image.

Omnidirectional Panoramic Representation. Panoramic images or videos, denoted as I, are
typically represented using equirectangular projections, forming an H × W × C matrix, where H and
W denote the image resolution and C represents the number of channels. While this format preserves
the matrix structure, making it consistent with planar images captured by conventional cameras, it
introduces distortions, especially noticeable near the polar regions of the projection. To mitigate these
distortions, we adopt a spherical representation for panoramas, where pixel values are defined on a
sphere S2 = {d = (x, y, z)|x, y, z ∈ R ∧ |d| = 1}. For a more precise definition of the projection,
we represent matrix-like images using a mapping EI : [−1, 1]2 → RC , which normalizes the image
coordinates into the range [0, 1]. Thus, for any given pixel (x, y) ∈ [−1, 1]2 , the corresponding
pixel value is determined by EI (x, y). We define the spherical representation of panoramas using
the field SI : S2 → RC , where SI (d) gives the pixel value at a given direction d = (x, y, z). The
relationship between the spherical and equirectangular representations is established through the
following projection formula:

                                             1             y       2
                         SI (x, y, z) = EI     arccos √          , arcsin z .                         (1)
                                             π           1 − z2 π
For perspective images, we define a virtual camera centered at the origin. The rays for each pixel
are determined through ray casting, as described in (Mildenhall et al., 2020), where each ray d is
represented by r(x, y, f, u, s, R). This representation takes into account the focal length f , the z-axis
direction u, the image plane size s, and the camera’s rotation along the z-axis R. Consequently,
for a given panorama I, the perspective image P can be projected using these camera parameters
(f, u, s, R) as:
                                 EP (x, y) = SI ◦ r (x, y, f, u, s, R) .                               (2)
In this paper, we fix the focal length f , the image plane size s, and the rotation R. We denote
the process of projecting the panorama I into a perspective image i, based on the camera’s z-axis
direction u, as i = γ(I, u).

3.2   I NCONSISTENT P ERSPECTIVE A NIMATION

Large-scale pre-trained 2D models have shown remarkable generative capabilities in creating images
and videos, benefiting from vast multi-modal training data gathered from the Internet. However,
acquiring high-quality 4D training data is considerably more challenging, and no current 4D dataset
reaches the scale of those available for images and videos. Therefore, our approach aims to utilize
the capabilities of video generative models to produce consistent panoramic 360◦ videos, which
are then elevated to 4D. Nonetheless, the availability of panoramic videos is significantly more
limited compared to planar perspective videos. Consequently, mainstream image-to-video (I2V)
animation techniques may not perform optimally for panoramic formats, and the resolution of the
videos remains constrained, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (b) and Tab. 2. Alternatively, the animator can be
applied to perspective images. but this introduces inconsistencies across different projected views, as
depicted in Fig. 5 (c)


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3   C ONSISTENT PANORAMIC A NIMATION

Limited by the scarcity of 4D training data in panoramic format, and given that large diffusion models
are primarily trained on planar perspective videos, directly applying 2D perspective denoisers presents
challenges in generating seamless panoramic videos with proper equirectangular projection, due to
inconsistent motion across different views and the domain gap between spherical and perspective
spaces. This constraint has driven us to develop a panoramic video generator in spherical space
that leverages priors from general image-to-video (I2V) animation techniques, as shown in Fig. 2.
Consequently, starting from a static input panorama, we animate it into a panoramic video, as
demonstrated in the “Animating Phase” section of Fig. 3.

Spherical Latent Space. To generate panoramic video from a static panorama, we build up the
denoise-in-latent-space schema (An et al., 2023; Blattmann et al., 2023a; Dai et al., 2023) in a
spherical context. For general video generation, a noisy latent sample is progressively denoised using
DDPM (Ho et al., 2020), conditioned on a static input image, and subsequently decoded into a video
sequence by a pre-trained VAE decoder. However, in 4K4DGen, unlike the method for generating
perspective planar videos, both the latent code and the static panorama input are represented on
spheres. We start with the initial panoramic latent code S T : S2 → RL×c , where L denotes the
number of video frames and c the channels per frame. A novel Panoramic Denoiser is then applied to
generate the clean panoramic latent code S 0 , conditioned on the static input panorama I ∈ RH×W .
Subsequently, the equirectangular projection, as introduced in Sec. 3.1, projects the clean panoramic
latent code into the matrix-like latent code Z 0 ∈ Rh×w×L×c , with h and w representing the resolution
of the latent code. Each k th video frame I k in pixel space is decoded by the pre-trained VAE decoder
as I k = D(Z 0 [:, :, k, :]).

Build the Panoramic Denoiser. We leverage a pre-trained perspective video generative model
(Dai et al., 2023) to build our Panoramic Denoiser. This video generator takes a perspective image
i ∈ RpH ×pW ×c and an initial latent code z T ∈ Rph ×pw ×(L×c) as inputs, progressively denoising the
latent code z T to a clean state z 0 through a denoising function z t−1 = Φ(z t , i). Here, ph and pw
represents the resolution of the latent code, pH and pW the resolution of the conditioning image, c the
number of channels, and L the video length. Our goal is to transform the initial noisy panoramic latent
code S T into the clean state S 0 , ensuring that each perspective view is appropriately animated while
maintaining global consistency. The underlying intuition is that if each perspective view undergoes
its respective denoising process, the perspective video will feature meaningful animation. Moreover,
if two perspective views overlap, they will align with each other (Jiménez, 2023; Bar-Tal et al., 2023;
Lugmayr et al., 2022) to produce a seamless global animation.
Given a static input panorama I and an initial spherical latent code S 0 : S2 → RL×c , we progressively
remove noise employing a project-and-fuse procedure at each denoising step. Specifically, the
spherical latent code at the tth denoising step, S t : S2 → RL×c , is projected into multiple perspective
latent codes Z t = {z1t , z2t , . . . , znt }, where each zkt = γ(S t , dk ) ∈ Rph ×pw ×(L×c) represents the k th
perspective latent code projected in the equirectangular format detailed in Sec. 3.1. Each perspective
latent code is then denoised by one step using a pre-trained perspective denoiser, denoted as zkt−1 =
Φ(zkt , ik ), where ik = γ(I, dk ) ∈ RpH ×pW ×c is the perspective conditioning image projected from
the panorama I. Subsequently, we optimize the spherical latent code S t−1 : S2 → RL×c at step t − 1
by fusing all the denoised perspective latent codes zkt−1 . Formally, the denoising procedure at step t,
denoted as S t−1 = Ψ(S t , I), encompasses the following operations:

                     Ψ S t , I = argmin Ed∈S2 ∥γ(S, d) − Φ γ(S t , d), γ(I, d) ∥.

                                                                                                             (3)
                                      S


3.4   DYNAMIC PANORAMIC L IFTING

We define the panoramic video as V = {I 1 , I 2 , . . . , I L }, consisting of L frames. The video is divided
into overlapping perspective videos {v0 , v1 , . . . , vn }, each captured from specific camera directions
{d1 , . . . , dn }, collectively encompassing the entire span of the panoramic video V . Subsequently, we
estimate the geometry of the 4D scene by fusing the depth maps through spatial-temporal geometry
alignment. Following this, we describe our methodology for 4D representation and the subsequent
rendering procedure.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Supervision from Spatial-Temporal Geometry Alignment. To transition from 2D video to 3D
space, we utilize a monocular depth estimator (Ranftl et al., 2021), inspired by advancements
in (Zhou et al., 2024b), to estimate the scene’s geometric structure. Nonetheless, depth maps
generated for each frame and perspective might lack spatial and temporal consistency. To address
this, we implement Spatial-Temporal Geometry Alignment using a pre-trained depth estimator
Θ : Rh×w×3 → Rh×w , applied to perspective images. Our objective is to amalgamate n perspective
depth maps DiK = Θ(γ(I k , di )) into a cohesive panoramic depth map Dk for each frame I k ,
ensuring spatial and temporal continuity. We express these depth maps as a spherical representation
  1            L
SD  , . . . , SD . For enhanced optimization, we assign n scale factors αik ∈ R and shifting parameters
βik ∈ Rh×w to each perspective depth map. The comprehensive depth map Dk is then optimized
jointly with these parameters α and β. The formal objective is structured as follows:
                  k
                 SD = argmin         E        λdepth Ldepth + λscale Lscale + λshift Lshift .           (4)
                            S    i∈{1,...n}


where Ldepth = ∥ softplus(αik )Θ(γ(I k , di )) − γ(S) + βik ∥ is the depth supervision term, Lscale =
∥αik −αik−1 ∥+∥ softplus(αik )−1∥ the regularize term for α, and Lshift = LTV (βik )+∥βik −βiK−1 ∥
the regularize term for β where LTV is the TV regularization.

4D Representation and Rendering. We represent and render the dynamic scene using T sets
of 3D Gaussians.  Each set, corresponding to a specific timestamp t, is denoted as Gt =
{ pit , qti , sit , cit , oit |i = 1, . . . , n}. This definition aligns with the methods described in (Bah-
mani et al., 2024), which also provides a fast rasterizer for rendering images based on these Gaussian
sets and given camera parameters. Consistent with Sec. 3.1, while the camera intrinsics remain fixed,
we parameterize the camera extrinsics through a position p ∈ R3 and an orientation d ∈ S2 . The
training process is structured in two stages: initially, we directly supervise the 3D Gaussians using
the panoramic videos. Let R(G, p, d) represent the rasterized image from Gaussian set G, utilizing
camera extrinsics p = 0 and camera direction d. Let It denote the tth frame of the panoramic video.
We optimize the tth Gaussian set Gt using the following objective:

                    L = λrgb Lrgb + λtemporal Ltemporal + λsem Lsem + λgeo Lgeo                         (5)

where the RGB supervision term Lrgb = λL1 + (1 − λ)LSSIM is the same as 3D-GS (Kerbl et al.,
2023), and the temporal regularize term Ltemporal written as:

                                         n
                                         X
                         Ltemporal =           ∥R(Gt , 0, di ) − R(Gt−1 , 0, di ))∥                     (6)
                                         i=1


Then, we adopt the distillation loss and geometric regularization used in (Zhou et al., 2024b), the
distillation loss is defined as follows: Lsem = 1 − cos ⟨CLS(R(Gt , 0, di )), CLS(R(Gt , δp , di ))⟩,
where δp ∈ [−α, α]3 is the disturbing vector, CLS(·) the feature extractor such as DINO (Oquab
et al., 2023), and cos⟨·, ·⟩ the cos value of two vectors. The geometric regularization is defined as
follows: Lgeo = 1 − √ Cov(RD (Gt ,0,di ),Θ(γ(I,di ))) , where RD is the rendered depth, Cov(·, ·)
                          Var(RD (Gt ,0,di )) Var(Θ(γ(I,di )))
the covariance, and Var(·) the variance.


4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
Implementation Details. For perspective images, we uniformly select 20 directions u on the sphere
S2 as the z-axis of 20 cameras. In each experiment, the image plane size s is set at 0.6 × 0.6, with a
focal length f = 0.6 and a resolution of 512 × 512. Rotation along the z-axis is kept at zero for all
cameras, ensuring that the up-axis for the ith camera aligns with the (O, ui , z) plane. During the
animating phase, we utilize the perspective denoiser Φ, instantiated as the Animate-anything model
(Dai et al., 2023), which fine-tunes the SVD model (Blattmann et al., 2023a). In the Spatial-Temporal
Geometric Alignment stage of the lifting phase, the depth estimator Θ is implemented using MiDaS
(Ranftl et al., 2021; Birkl et al., 2023). All experiments are executed on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU
with 80 GB RAM.

                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 t=0   t=0.5       t=1           t=0   t=0.5   t=1


                                                                                                                     Ours
      Pano. RGB                                          View1                           View2


                desert, SUV, sand dunes, rocky


                                                                                                                     3D-Cin.
                outcrops, blue sky, off-road vehicle,
      Prompts
                tire tracks, sunrise or sunset, arid
                landscape, panoramic view, clear
                sky, warm color palette, natural
                lighting, adventure travel, …
      Pano. Depth                                        View1                           View2

                                                                 t=0   t=0.5       t=1           t=0   t=0.5   t=1


                                                                                                                     Ours
      Pano. RGB                                          View1                           View2


                sailing ship, monochrome, digital art,


                                                                                                                     3D-Cin.
                swirls,    surreal,  sea,     waves,
      Prompts
                reflections, mountain landscape,
                fantasy, stylized water, starry sky,
                circular frame, high contrast, black
                and white, maritime.
      Pano. Depth                                        View1                           View2

                                                                 t=0   t=0.5       t=1           t=0   t=0.5   t=1


                                                                                                                     Ours
      Pano. RGB                                          View1                           View2


                landscape, mountain view, dirt road


                                                                                                                     3D-Cin.
                fork, clouds, blue sky, green hills,
      Prompts
                pine trees, scenic, vibrant colors,
                nature,     summer,    no    people,
                illustration, tranquil, panoramic,
                perspective, clear weather, …
      Pano. Depth                                        View1                           View2


Figure 4: Comparison between 4K4DGen and 3D-Cinemagraphy. We present the input static
panorama (Pano RGB), the corresponding text prompts, and the rendered results from different views
and at various timestamps. 4K4DGen (Ours) effectively generates 4D scenes that are both spatially
and temporally consistent, while 3D-Cinemagraphy (3D-Cin.) suffers from ghosting artifacts in the
middle frames.


Evaluation. As there is no ground truth 4D scene data available, we render videos at specific test
camera poses from the synthesized 4D representation and employ non-reference video/image quality
assessment methods for quantitative evaluation of our approach. For the test views, we select random
cameras with p = 0 as part of our testing camera set. We then introduce disturbances as described
in Sec. 3.4, applying a disturbance factor of α = 0.05 at these selected views. Datasets. The task
of generating 4D panoramas from static panoramas is new, and thus, no pre-existing datasets are
available. In line with previous large-scale scene generation works (Zhou et al., 2024b; Yu et al.,
2024), we evaluate our methodology using a dataset of 16 panoramas generated by text-to-panorama
diffusion models (Yang et al., 2024). Baselines. Current SDS-based methods (Wu et al., 2024a;
Zhao et al., 2023) are limited to generating object-centered assets and do not support outward-facing
scene generation. We compare our method with the optical-flow-based 3D dynamic image technique,
3D-Cinemagraphy (3D-Cin.) (Li et al., 2023b) (both the “circle” and “zoom-in” mode), by inputting
the static panorama and projecting the output onto perspective images. Metrics. It is challenging to
evaluate the visual quality without a ground-truth reference. We evaluate the rendered perspective
videos regarding both the frame and video visual quality. For frame quality, We employ the LLM-
based visual scorer Q-Align (Wu et al., 2023a) (IQ Scorer and IA Scorer) to evaluate the quality of
individual frames. For video quality, we use the Q-Align video model (VQ) as the quality scorer.
Additionally, we conduct user studies to further evaluate the results. In this paper, there are two
types of user studies: (1) User Choice (UC), where participants are asked to compare and select the
best video from candidates generated by different methods, and (2) User Agreement (UA), where
participants assess whether specific properties are present in the videos generated by a particular
approach.

4.2   R ESULTS
Quantitative Results. We show the quantitative comparison between 4K4DGen and 3D-
Cinemagraphy (Li et al., 2023a) in Tab. 1. 4K4DGen consistently achieves better performance
in the LLM-based Q-Align metric regarding the image quality (IQ), image aesthetic (IA), and the


                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison with 3D-Cinemagraphy. We compare our method with 3D-Cinemagraphy
using rendered images from 4D representations. The IQ, IA, and VQ models represent the image
quality scorer, image aesthetic scorer, and video quality scorer, respectively, within the Q-Align
assessment framework. Our method, 4K4DGen, consistently achieves superior performance in both
image and video quality across these metrics. Furthermore, 4K4DGen performs better in our user
studies in terms of visual quality (Quality), motion amplitude (Amplitude), and the motion naturalness
(Naturalness). Please refer to D.2 for further details.
            Method                Q-Align (IQ) ↑   Q-Align (IA) ↑   Q-Align (VQ) ↑   Quality (UC) ↑   Amplitude (UC) ↑      Naturalness (UC) ↑
 3D-Cinemagraphy (zoom-in)              0.47           0.38               0.57            7%               29.4%                  19.7%
  3D-Cinemagraphy (circle)              0.48           0.40               0.58           12%               32.0%                  21.1%
   Ours (holistic pipeline)             0.66           0.44               0.62           81%               38.6%                  59.2%


video quality (VQ). Besides, 4K4DGen is preferred by the users considering the video quality, motion
amplitude, and motion naturalness.

Qualitative Results. We present a qualitative comparison between 4K4DGen and 3D-
Cinemagraphy (3D-Cin.) on the rendered images from 4D representations. Since the performance of
3D-Cin. is similar under the “circle” and “zoom-in” settings in Tab. 1, we use the “circle” setting
to represent 3D-Cin. in Fig. 4. As shown in the figure, 4K4DGen produces high-quality perspec-
tive videos that maintain consistency across both time and views, whereas 3D-Cin. struggles with
generating ghosting artifacts in the middle frames.
4.3    A BLATION S TUDIES

We conduct ablation studies for both the animating and lifting phases of our methodology. In the
animating phase, we perform evaluation on 2D animated videos with different strategies, and highlight
the importance of our spherical denoise strategy by replacing it with two basic animation techniques.
In the lifting phase, we analyze the impact of excluding the Spatial-Temporal Geometry Alignment
process and the temporal loss during the optimization of 4D representations.

Animating Phase. For analyzing the strategies in the animating phase, as shown in Tab. 2, we use
Q-Align (visual quality scorer), view-consistency (user agreement), motion amplitude (user choice),
and motion naturalness (user choice) to evaluate the 2D animated videos. For the details of the user
studies, please refer to the Appendix D.2. To animate the panorama into a panoramic video, a
straightforward approach is to apply animators directly to the entire panorama. However, we observed
that this strategy often results in minor motion, as shown in Fig. 5 (b) and Tab. 2 (Animate Pano.
with small motion amplitude and less naturalness). This issue arises due to two main reasons: (1)
animators are typically trained on perspective images with a narrow field of view (FoV), whereas
panoramas have a 360◦ FoV with specific distortions under the equirectangular projection; (2) our
panorama is high-resolution (4K), which exceeds the training distribution of most 2D animators
and can easily cause out-of-memory issues, even with an 80GB VRAM graphics card. Thus the


            View1                View2                View1                 View2              View1                 View2
      t=0
      t=1


             (a) Our Spherical Denoiser                    (b) Animate Panorama                       (c) Animate Pers. Image
                (Consistent & Sufficient Motion)                    (Small Motion)                        (Inconsistent Motion)



Figure 5: Comparison to Different Animators: Animators trained primarily on perspective images
tend to produce limited motion when applied to panoramas, and the resolution may be limited.
On the other hand, animating perspective images individually can lead to inconsistencies between
overlapping views.


                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: Ablating Lifting Phase: (Left) The w/o LTemp variant (column d) produces renderings
with flashing stripes. Zoomed-in details of the flashing stripe region are highlighted in (e). (Right)
Without spatial-temporal geometry alignment, the geometry in the smoke area of the volcano for the
w/o STA variant (column g) appears less consistent compared to the full model (column f).
panoramas have to be down-sampled to a lower resolution (2K), causing a loss of details. To this end,
we seek to animate on perspective views. Applying the animator on perspective views offers benefits
such as reduced distortion and inputs that suit the domain of the animator, allowing for smooth
animation of high-resolution panoramas. However, animating perspective images separately can
introduce inconsistencies between overlapping perspective views, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (c) and Tab.
2 (Animate Pers.). To resolve this challenge, we propose simultaneously denoising all perspective
views and fusing them at each denoising step, in the spherical latent space, which capitalizes on
the benefits of animating perspective views while ensuring cross-view consistency. The results are
displayed in Fig. 5 (a) and Tab. 2.
Lifting Phase. We conduct ablation studies on the Spatial-Temporal Geometry Alignment (STA)
module and the temporal loss during the lifting phase, as shown in Fig. 6.
Table 2: Different Animation Strategies in the Animating Phase. We analyze the efficacy of
animation strategies by evaluating the animated 2D videos in different ways. Animating the entire
panorama results in worse motion and reduced resolution (first row), as indicated by the Amplitude
and Naturalness metric. Conversely, animating from perspective views leads to inconsistencies
across different views (second row), as supported by the Q-Align metric and the “View-consistency
(UA)” study. 4K4DGen capitalizes the generative ability from perspective animating priors while
enabling cross-view consistent motion between different perspectives, which achieves the best motion
naturalness and amplitudes among all the settings (third row).

  Animator                 Max Pano. Res.   Q-Align (VQ) ↑   View-consistency (UA)↑   Amplitude (UC) ↑   Naturalness (UC) ↑

  Animate Pano.             2048 × 1024          0.82                  -                   26.8%               17.8%
  Animate Pers.             4096 × 2048          0.64                33%                   32.4%               39.3%
  Ours (Animating Phase)    4096 × 2048          0.85                70%                   40.8%               42.9%


5 C ONCLUSION
Conclusion. We have proposed a novel framework 4K4DGen, allowing users to create high-quality
4K panoramic 4D content using text prompts, which delivers immersive virtual touring experiences.
To achieve panorama-to-4D even without high-quality 4D training data, we integrate generic 2D prior
models into the panoramic domain. Our approach involves a two-stage pipeline: initially generating
panoramic videos using a Panoramic Denoiser, followed by 4D elevation through a Spatial-Temporal
Geometry Alignment mechanism to ensure spatial coherence and temporal continuity.
Limitation. First, the quality of temporal animation in the generated 4D environment mainly relies on
the ability of the pre-trained I2V model. Future improvements could include the integration of a more
advanced 2D animator. Second, since our method ensures spatial and temporal continuity during the
4D elevation phase, it is currently unable to synthesize significant changes in the environment, such
as the appearance of glowing fireflies or changing weather conditions. Third, the high-resolution
and time-dependent representation of the generated 4D environment necessitates substantial storage
capacity, which could be optimized in future work using techniques such as model distillation and
pruning.


                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Harry Yang, Sonal Gupta, Jia-Bin Huang, Jiebo Luo, and Xi Yin. Latent-
   shift: Latent diffusion with temporal shift for efficient text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2304.08477, 2023.
Sherwin Bahmani, Ivan Skorokhodov, Victor Rong, Gordon Wetzstein, Leonidas Guibas, Peter
  Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, Jeong Joon Park, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and David B Lindell. 4d-fy:
  Text-to-4d generation using hybrid score distillation sampling. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Jiayang Bai, Letian Huang, Jie Guo, Wen Gong, Yuanqi Li, and Yanwen Guo. 360-gs: Layout-guided
   panoramic gaussian splatting for indoor roaming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00763, 2024.
Omer Bar-Tal, Lior Yariv, Yaron Lipman, and Tali Dekel. Multidiffusion: Fusing diffusion paths for
 controlled image generation. International conference on machine learning, 2023.
Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, and Matthias Müller. Midas v3.1 – a model zoo for robust monocular
  relative depth estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14460, 2023.
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and
  Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22563–22575, 2023b.
Zilong Chen, Feng Wang, and Huaping Liu. Text-to-3d using gaussian splatting. Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Jaeyoung Chung, Suyoung Lee, Hyeongjin Nam, Jaerin Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Luciddreamer:
  Domain-free generation of 3d gaussian splatting scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13384, 2023.
Zuozhuo Dai, Zhenghao Zhang, Yao Yao, Bingxue Qiu, Siyu Zhu, Long Qin, and Weizhi Wang.
  Animateanything: Fine-grained open domain image animation with motion guidance, 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Mengyang Feng, Jinlin Liu, Miaomiao Cui, and Xuansong Xie. Diffusion360: Seamless 360 degree
 panoramic image generation based on diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13141, 2023.
Songwei Ge, Seungjun Nah, Guilin Liu, Tyler Poon, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, David Jacobs,
  Jia-Bin Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yogesh Balaji. Preserve your own correlation: A noise prior for
  video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 22930–22941, 2023.
Pulkit Gera, Mohammad Reza Karimi Dastjerdi, Charles Renaud, PJ Narayanan, and Jean-François
  Lalonde. Casual indoor hdr radiance capture from omnidirectional images. British Machine Vision
  Conference, 2022.
Kai Gu, Thomas Maugey, Sebastian Knorr, and Christine Guillemot. Omni-nerf: neural radiance
  field from 360 image captures. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo
 (ICME), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2022.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff:
  Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition
  video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
Lukas Höllein, Aljaž Božič, Norman Müller, David Novotny, Hung-Yu Tseng, Christian Richardt,
  Michael Zollhöfer, and Matthias Nießner. Viewdiff: 3d-consistent image generation with text-
  to-image models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 5043–5052, 2024.
Huajian Huang, Yingshu Chen, Tianjian Zhang, and Sai-Kit Yeung. 360roam: Real-time indoor
  roaming using geometry-aware 360◦ radiance fields. SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings,
  2022.
Jiahui Huang, Zan Gojcic, Matan Atzmon, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Francis Williams. Neural
   kernel surface reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4369–4379, 2023.

Álvaro Barbero Jiménez. Mixture of diffusers for scene composition and high resolution image
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02412, 2023.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting
  for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4):1–14, 2023.
Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Language
  embedded radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 19729–19739, 2023.
Yuseung Lee, Kunho Kim, Hyunjin Kim, and Minhyuk Sung. Syncdiffusion: Coherent montage via
  synchronized joint diffusions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:50648–
  50660, 2023.
Xingyi Li, Zhiguo Cao, Huiqiang Sun, Jianming Zhang, Ke Xian, and Guosheng Lin. 3d cinemagra-
  phy from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4595–4605, 2023a.
Xingyi Li, Zhiguo Cao, Huiqiang Sun, Jianming Zhang, Ke Xian, and Guosheng Lin. 3d cinemagra-
  phy from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4595–4605, June 2023b.
Chenguo Lin, Yuchen Lin, Panwang Pan, Xuanyang Zhang, and Yadong Mu. Instructlay-
  out: Instruction-driven 2d and 3d layout synthesis with semantic graph prior, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07580.
Chenguo Lin, Panwang Pan, Bangbang Yang, Zeming Li, and Yadong Mu. Diffsplat: Repurposing
  image diffusion models for scalable gaussian splat generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2501.16764.
Huan Ling, Seung Wook Kim, Antonio Torralba, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your
  gaussians: Text-to-4d with dynamic 3d gaussians and composed diffusion models. Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
  Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 11461–11471, 2022.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan. T2i-
  adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 4296–4304, 2024.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. International conference on machine learning, 2021.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
 Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
 robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Hao Ouyang, Kathryn Heal, Stephen Lombardi, and Tiancheng Sun. Text2immersion: Generative
  immersive scene with 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09242, 2023.
Zijie Pan, Zeyu Yang, Xiatian Zhu, and Li Zhang. Fast dynamic 3d object generation from a
  single-view video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08742, 2024.
Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. Con-
  volutional occupancy networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part III 16, pp. 523–540. Springer, 2020.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Minghan Qin, Wanhua Li, Jiawei Zhou, Haoqian Wang, and Hanspeter Pfister. Langsplat: 3d
 language gaussian splatting. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Fabio Quattrini, Vittorio Pippi, Silvia Cascianelli, and Rita Cucchiara. Merging and splitting diffusion
  paths for semantically coherent panoramas. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  234–251. Springer, 2025.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.
René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vision transformers for dense prediction.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 12179–12188,
  2021.
Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Jiaxiang Tang, Chi Zhang, Ang Cao, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. Dreamgaus-
   sian4d: Generative 4d gaussian splatting. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Jaidev Shriram, Alex Trevithick, Lingjie Liu, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Realmdreamer: Text-driven 3d
   scene generation with inpainting and depth diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07199, 2024.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et al. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video
  data. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Liangchen Song, Liangliang Cao, Hongyu Xu, Kai Kang, Feng Tang, Junsong Yuan, and Zhao Yang.
  Roomdreamer: Text-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with coherent geometry and texture. In
  Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 6898–6906, 2023.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenqiang Sun, Shuo Chen, Fangfu Liu, Zilong Chen, Yueqi Duan, Jun Zhang, and Yikai Wang.
 Dimensionx: Create any 3d and 4d scenes from a single image with controllable video diffusion.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04928, 2024.

Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Genera-
   tive gaussian splatting for efficient 3d content creation. International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2024.

Shitao Tang, Fuyang Zhang, Jiacheng Chen, Peng Wang, and Yasutaka Furukawa. Mvdiffusion:
  Enabling holistic multi-view image generation with correspondence-aware diffusion. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & challenges. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.

Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and
  Sylvain Gelly. Fvd: A new metric for video generation. International Conference on Learning
  Representations(ICLR), 2019.

Alexander Vilesov, Pradyumna Chari, and Achuta Kadambi. Cg3d: Compositional generation for
  text-to-3d via gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17907, 2023.

Guangcong Wang, Peng Wang, Zhaoxi Chen, Wenping Wang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu.
  Perf: Panoramic neural radiance field from a single panorama. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
 Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024a.

Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Mod-
   elscope text-to-video technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06571, 2023a.

Qian Wang, Weiqi Li, Chong Mou, Xinhua Cheng, and Jian Zhang. 360dvd: Controllable panorama
  video generation with 360-degree video diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6913–6923, 2024b.

Zhen Wang, Shijie Zhou, Jeong Joon Park, Despoina Paschalidou, Suya You, Gordon Wetzstein,
  Leonidas Guibas, and Achuta Kadambi. Alto: Alternating latent topologies for implicit 3d
  reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 259–270, 2023b.

Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian,
  and Xinggang Wang. 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20310–20320,
  2024a.

Haoning Wu, Zicheng Zhang, Weixia Zhang, Chaofeng Chen, Chunyi Li, Liang Liao, Annan Wang,
  Erli Zhang, Wenxiu Sun, Qiong Yan, Xiongkuo Min, Guangtai Zhai, and Weisi Lin. Q-align:
  Teaching lmms for visual scoring via discrete text-defined levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17090,
  2023a.

Jay Zhangjie Wu, Yixiao Ge, Xintao Wang, Stan Weixian Lei, Yuchao Gu, Yufei Shi, Wynne Hsu,
  Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Mike Zheng Shou. Tune-a-video: One-shot tuning of image diffusion
  models for text-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 7623–7633, 2023b.

Ruiqi Wu, Liangyu Chen, Tong Yang, Chunle Guo, Chongyi Li, and Xiangyu Zhang. Lamp: Learn a
  motion pattern for few-shot-based video generation. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024b.

Zhen Xu, Sida Peng, Haotong Lin, Guangzhao He, Jiaming Sun, Yujun Shen, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei
  Zhou. 4k4d: Real-time 4d view synthesis at 4k resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bangbang Yang, Wenqi Dong, Lin Ma, Wenbo Hu, Xiao Liu, Zhaopeng Cui, and Yuewen Ma.
  Dreamspace: Dreaming your room space with text-driven panoramic texture propagation. In 2024
  IEEE Conference Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 650–660. IEEE, 2024.
Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and
  Xinggang Wang. Gaussiandreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d gaussians by bridging 2d and
  3d diffusion models. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2024.
Yuyang Yin, Dejia Xu, Zhangyang Wang, Yao Zhao, and Yunchao Wei. 4dgen: Grounded 4d content
  generation with spatial-temporal consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17225, 2023.
Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Charles Herrmann, William T Freeman, and Jiajun Wu. Wonderworld:
  Interactive 3d scene generation from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09394, 2024.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Yuyang Zhao, Zhiwen Yan, Enze Xie, Lanqing Hong, Zhenguo Li, and Gim Hee Lee. Animate124:
  Animating one image to 4d dynamic scene. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14603, 2023.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018, 2022.
Shijie Zhou, Haoran Chang, Sicheng Jiang, Zhiwen Fan, Zehao Zhu, Dejia Xu, Pradyumna Chari,
  Suya You, Zhangyang Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Feature 3dgs: Supercharging 3d gaussian
  splatting to enable distilled feature fields. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024a.
Shijie Zhou, Zhiwen Fan, Dejia Xu, Haoran Chang, Pradyumna Chari, Tejas Bharadwaj, Suya
  You, Zhangyang Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Dreamscene360: Unconstrained text-to-3d scene
  generation with panoramic gaussian splatting. European Conference on Computer Vision, 2024b.
Xiaoyu Zhou, Xingjian Ran, Yajiao Xiong, Jinlin He, Zhiwei Lin, Yongtao Wang, Deqing Sun,
  and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Gala3d: Towards text-to-3d complex scene generation via layout-guided
  generative gaussian splatting. International conference on machine learning, 2024c.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    A PPENDIX

Due to space constraints in the main draft, we include supplementary details and experimental results
in the appendix. Specifically, in Sec. B , we provide details about the acquisition process for the static
panoramas used in our experiments. In Sec. C, we offer further explanation of the implementation
for both the animation and lifting phases. Finally, in Sec. D, we describe the experimental setup and
present additional results.


B    ACQUISITION OF PANORAMAS

The static panoramas used in the dataset of the main draft are generated by a text-to-panorama
diffusion model, fine-tuned from stable diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) on SUN360. Similar
to (Yang et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2023), this model follows three steps: circular blending, super-
resolution, and refinement. The panoramas are initially at a resolution of 6144 × 3072 and then
down-sampled to 4096 × 2048 using the bi-linear interpolation.


C    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we introduce the implementation details of the panoramic animator and the 4D lifting
procedure.

Implementation of Spherical Representing For the spherical representation, the continuous
spherical mapping SI : S2 → RC is instantiate as discrete point set P = {pi }, which is uniformly
sampled from the sphere SI . We first initialize a icosahedron with 20 triangle faces {fi |i =
1, · · · , 20} to approximate a real sphere S2 . Then we uniformly sample a point set Pi on each face
fi and union all the point sets together as P̂ = ∪20 i=1 Pi . We then obtain the discrete point set P by
projecting P̂ onto the sphere S2 by P = {pi /∥pi ∥ | pi ∈ P̂}.

Panoramic Animation Phase For the Panoramic Animator, we set the video length L = 14,
the channel number c = 9, the latent code size (h, w) = 18 (H, W ), the perspective image size
pH = pW = 14 W . The sphere is uniformly divided into 20 perspective views, each with 80◦
FOV. For the denoiser, the max denoising step is 25. For the continuous optimization in Eq. 3, we
calculate each latent vector at each point on the sphere by taking the weighted average on the latent
vectors of knn points that are projected from the corresponding pixel on the perspective views, the
weights are the inversed distances between the sphere point and the projected points. We conduct the
spherical denoising for the first 10 denoising steps and then the spherical latent is projected to the
equirectangular form and denoised using sliding window, to avoid noises introduced by interpolation.
The perspective denoiser is initiated as Animate-Anything (Dai et al., 2023). The masks required by
the denoiser are given by bounding boxes defined by user clicks.

Dynamic Panoramic Lifting Phase In the lifting phase, similar to the animation phase, we choose
the perspective view number n = 20, each with 80◦ FOV. Each perspective view has a square shape,
PH = PW = 41 W , where W is the width of the original static panorama. In the Spatial-Temporal
Geometric Alignment stage, the depth estimator Θ is implemented using MiDaS (Ranftl et al., 2021;
Birkl et al., 2023). The depth map from the perspective image is scaled according to the projection of
the unit-length ray direction onto the camera orientation d. Formally, if the pre-scaled depth is d at
point p ∈ P̂ introduced above, the scaled depth should be d/∥p∥. Additionally, for scenes without
distinct boundaries, such as the sky, depth values for distant elements are assigned a finite value to
support optimization.

Optimization Details The hyper-parameters for optimization are set as follows: λdepth =
1, λscale = 0.1, λshift = 0.01. We conduct Spatial-Temporal Geometry Alignment optimization over
3000 iterations, with λscale and λshift set to zero during the first 1500 iterations. For the 4D represen-
tation training stage, Gaussian parameters are optimized over 10000 iterations for each time stamp
t. The hyper-parameters for this stage are defined as λrgb = 1, λtemporal = λsem = λgeo = 0.05,


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and the disturbance vector range α is varied at 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2 during the 5400, 6600, and 9000
iterations, respectively.

D     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

D.1     T HE P ROCEEDING T IME OF P ER -G ENERATION

Animating Phase. We provide the time and GPU cost to animate a single video at different
resolutions in the Table 3.

                       Table 3: The Proceeding Time of Animating Phase.
                     Resolution    GPU Usage (GB) ↓      Time Cost (Minutes/frame) ↓
               1024 × 512 (1K)             9.38                      0.89
              2048 × 1024 (2K)            29.31                      2.99
              4096 × 2048 (4K)            73.41                     22.31

Lifting Phase. We provide the time and GPU cost to lift a single frame at 4K, 2K, and 1K resolution.
The results are shown in the Table 4.

                         Table 4: The Proceeding Time of Lifting Phase.
                     Resolution    GPU Usage (GB) ↓      Time Cost (Minutes/frame) ↓
               1024 × 512 (1K)             7.59                       19
              2048 × 1024 (2K)            12.07                       22
              4096 × 2048 (4K)            31.27                       33

The computational cost increases rapidly with the resolution, making 4K generation highly chal-
lenging. We will put more engineering effort to accelerate the generation pipeline in the future.


D.2     U SER S TUDY D ETAILS

D.2.1    U SER S TUDY FOR V IDEO Q UALITY
We conducted two user studies, gathering a total of 84 questionnaires from 42 users. For the “Quality
(UC)”column in Tab. 1, we collected 42 questionnaires, each containing eight questions. Each
question asked users to choose the bests video in term of visual quality from the perspective videos
provided by different models. The user choice (UC) score of a method is the percentage of times the
method’s video was selected as the best one, out of a total of 336 questions. Thus, the UC scores for
all methods sum to 100%. For the “View-Consistency (UA)” column in Tab. 2, we collected another
42 questionnaires, with each questionnaire containing eight questions. Each question presented two
videos from different views, both generated by the same method, and users were asked to determine
whether the two videos were view-consistent. The user agreement (UA) score is the percentage of
video pairs marked as view-consistent out of all the video pairs generated by the method. The UA
scores do not necessarily sum to 100%. In the Quality column of Tab. 1, among the 336 questions,
users selected 4K4DGen 272 times, 3D-Cin. (circle) 40 times, and 3D-Cin. (zoom-in) 24 times. In
the View-consistency column of Tab. 2, 118 out of 168 video pairs generated by “Our” were marked
as consistent, while 56 out of 168 pairs from “Animate Pers” were considered consistent.

D.2.2    U SER S TUDY FOR V IDEO M OTION
Since the quantitative evaluation of motion quality remains an open problem in our tasks, we hereby
conducted supplemented user studies for the “4D generation task” and “Animating Phase”, which
considers the motion’s naturalness and amplitude.

    • Motion’s naturalness: the motion of the generated view should be natural to human’s under-
      standing, avoiding abrupt pixel changes across frames.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   • Motion’s amplitude: the motion trajectory of the scene’s subjects should have adequate and
     realistic magnitude.

The user studies of Amplitude column and the Naturalness column are all conducted in the “user
choice” (UC) way. For each Amplitude and Naturalness column in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, we collect
320 questions from 20 participants. Each questions contains three videos from the different three
methods, users are asked to select the best one or more videos from the provided set that exhibit
noticeably greater amplitude (for the Amplitude columns) or superior naturalness (for the Naturalness
columns). Since users could select more than one video per question, the UC metric was normalized
based on the total number of selections. For example, if method A, B, C are selected na , nb , and nc
                                                          na            nb                nc
times, respectively, the UC metric for them should be na +n b +nc
                                                                  , na +n b +nc
                                                                                , and na +nb +nc
                                                                                                 .


D.3   M ORE QUANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We present quantitative results on an additional 32 scenes randomly sampled from WEB360
dataset (Wang et al., 2024b). As shown in the Table 5, 4K4DGen consistently outperforms the
baseline methods across the quantitative metrics.

Table 5: Comparison with 3D-Cinemagraphy in WEB360 Dataset. We adopt the FVD (Unterthiner
et al., 2019) and KVD (Unterthiner et al., 2018) to evaluate the generated panoramic video, which is
the intermediate result from the animating phase. The IQ, IA, and VQ models represent the image
quality scorer, image aesthetic scorer, and video quality scorer, respectively, within the Q-Align
assessment framework.
            Method              FVD ↓    KVD ↓     Q-Align (IQ) ↑   Q-Align (IA) ↑   Q-Align (VQ) ↑
  3D-Cinemagraphy (zoom-in)      307       5.86         0.65             0.57             0.70
   3D-Cinemagraphy (circle)      309       5.72         0.65             0.57             0.70
          4K4DGen                218       1.76         0.73             0.64             0.77


D.4   C OMPARISONS WITH M ORE BASELINE M ETHODS

To further address your primary concern, we adopt two types of baseline methods: 4D Object
Generation and 4D Scene Generation, to compare with the proposed method. Note that the panoramic
4D generation is still underexplored due to the scarcity of annotated data and the lack of well-trained
prior models tailored for panorama format. As a result, we find that existing methods cannot achieve
similar quality as 4K4DGen in this task.


4D Object Generation methods. Following your suggestion, we have devoted substantial engi-
neering efforts to adapt the 4D object generation framework 4DGen (Yin et al., 2023) to our camera
settings, as shown in the qualitative results in Figure 8 of the revised paper. It demonstrates that
recent 4D object generation methods struggle to generate scene-level content due to inherent domain
gaps between objects and scenes. Our method overwhelmingly outperforms 4DGen in terms of
quantitative evaluations (e.g., Image Quality, Image Aesthetics, and Video Quality) and qualitative
evaluations.


4D Generation Methods for Scene. We also construct two 4D scene generation baselines: (1)
We equip LucidDreamer (Liu et al., 2023) with our animator. We follow the authors’ setting, using
ZoeDepth and its inpainting model (Stable Diffusion) to expand invisible views for each timestamp,
and then we use our backbone animator to animate and optimize the Gaussians. (2) We employed
a very recent 4D scene generation technique DimensionX (Sun et al., 2024). We use the default
configuration, employing its lora (“orbit left”) model to generate novel views and 3D structures. Since
the DimensionX’s T-Director is currently unavailable, we leveraged the same backbone animator
from our approach to provide temporal guidance for its 4D representation in the 4D generation stage.
Compared with existing methods, including 4DGen, LucidDreamer, and DimensionX, our method
consistently achieves higher quantitative results, demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed method.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 6: Comparison with 4D Generation Methods.
               Method                     Q-Align (IQ) ↑       Q-Align (IA) ↑       Q-Align (VQ) ↑
          4DGen (object)                        0.19                 0.20                 0.29
     3D-Cinemagraphy (zoom-in)                  0.47                 0.38                 0.57
      3D-Cinemagraphy (circle)                  0.48                 0.40                 0.58
    LucidDreamer + Our Animator                 0.44                 0.41                 0.58
     DimensionX + Our Animator                  0.55                 0.42                 0.60
             4K4DGen                            0.66                 0.44                 0.62

D.5    M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We provide additional qualitative results in Figure 7. Furthermore, we highly recommend viewing
the video renderings of 4K4DGen and comparisons to baseline models in the supplementary static
HTML page for a more comprehensive and immersive experience.
We adapt the 4D object generation framework 4DGen (Yin et al., 2023) to our specific settings and
present the qualitative results in Figure 8, which indicate that the generated object varies significantly
in form from 4K4DGen’s scene outputs. We also compare OmniNeRF (Gu et al., 2022)’s optimized
geometry with 4K4DGen. The corresponding depth maps are shown in Figure 9. It can be evidently
demonstrated that 4K4DGen attains sharper geometric results. We provide the renderings of a lifted
3D scene where a user walked along a street in Figure 10. Notice the roof highlighted by green
bounding boxes in (a) and (b). When the user walks nearer and more area of the roof is observed, it
implies the necessity of the lifted 3D structure.

E     E THICS AND R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Ethics Statement. Our research enables the generation of 4D digital scenes from a single panoramic
image, which is advantageous for various applications such as AR/VR, movie production, and video
games. This technology distinctly excels in creating high-resolution 4D scenes up to 4K, significantly
enhancing user experiences. However, there is potential for misuse in the creation of deceptive
content or privacy violations, which contradicts our ethical intentions. These risks can be mitigated
through a combination of regulatory and technical strategies, such as watermarking.

Reproducibility. We provide sufficient implementation details to reproduce our methodology in
Sec. C, including the details of spherical denoiser, panoramic animator, dynamic panoramic lifting,
etc. We provide 16 Sec. 4’s panoramas and Sec. D.4’s 32 panoramas in the revised supplementary
material. Furthermore, we will make our panorama datasets and related code publicly available in the
future.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            t=0        t=0.5             t=1


                                                                                               View 1
  Pano. RGB



            sailing ship, monochrome, digital art,
            swirls, surreal, sea, waves,


                                                                                               View 2
  Prompts
            reflections, mountain landscape,
            fantasy, stylized water, starry sky,
            circular frame, high contrast, black
            and white, maritime


                                                            t=0        t=0.5             t=1


                                                                                               View 1
  Pano. RGB



              fireworks, cityscape, sunset,
              panorama, digital art, vibrant colors,


                                                                                               View 2
  Prompts
              futuristic, urban, celebration,
              skyscrapers, streets, glowing lights,
              dusk, orange sky, purple hues,
              artistic, wide angle, …


                                                            t=0        t=0.5             t=1


                                                                                               View 1
  Pano. RGB


          beach, seascape, waves, sandy shore,
          sailboat, horizon, clouds, blue sky,                                                 View 2
  Prompts
          panoramic view, tranquil scene, digital
          painting, soft focus, pastel colors,
          wide-angle, nature, outdoor, no
          people, calm sea, coastline, vacation
          mood

                                                            t=0        t=0.5             t=1
                                                                                               View 1


  Pano. RGB


          desert, sunset, sand dunes, yucca
          plants, mountain range, clouds, sky,
                                                                                               View 2


  Prompts
          warm color palette, panoramic view,
          digital art, serene, tranquil, nature,
          vast landscape, purple sky, orange
          hues, twilight, dusk, no people,
          scenic beauty, subtle shadows


Figure 7: Visualizations: We provide more visual results. For each shown case we provide the input
panorama, corresponding text prompt, and the rendering from two perspective views.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Results of 4DGen: 4DGen (Yin et al., 2023) focuses on object generation and struggles to
generate scenes.


Figure 9: Results of OmniNeRF: The optimized geometry of OmniNeRF (Gu et al., 2022) is not as
sharp as 4K4DGen.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Occlusion in True 3D Structure: When the user walks nearer, the more area of the roof
(highlighted by the green box) will be observed. It is hard to implement such effect without the lifted
3D structure.


                                                  22
