Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                  Chung-En Sun, Tuomas Oikarinen, Berk Ustun, Tsui-Wei Weng
                                   University of California San Diego
                     {cesun, toikarinen, berk, lweng}@ucsd.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         We introduce Concept Bottleneck Large Language Models (CB-LLMs), a novel
         framework for building inherently interpretable Large Language Models (LLMs).
         In contrast to traditional black-box LLMs that rely on limited post-hoc interpreta-
         tions, CB-LLMs integrate intrinsic interpretability directly into the LLMs – allowing
         accurate explanations with scalability and transparency. We build CB-LLMs for two
         essential NLP tasks: text classification and text generation. In text classification,
         CB-LLMs is competitive with, and at times outperforms, traditional black-box mod-
         els while providing explicit and interpretable reasoning. For the more challenging
         task of text generation, interpretable neurons in CB-LLMs enable precise concept
         detection, controlled generation, and safer outputs. The embedded interpretability
         empowers users to transparently identify harmful content, steer model behavior,
         and unlearn undesired concepts – significantly enhancing the safety, reliability,
         and trustworthiness of LLMs, which are critical capabilities notably absent in
         existing language models. Our code is available at https://github.com/Trustworthy-
         ML-Lab/CB-LLMs.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become pivotal in advancing Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks. However, their inherent opacity presents significant challenges in ensuring reliability
and safety, particularly when their decisions stem from unclear or flawed reasoning. This lack of
transparency not only hinders the detection of potential misuse or manipulation, but also makes it
difficult to identify and mitigate unsafe outputs. Furthermore, the complexity of their inner workings
complicates debugging efforts, making it even more challenging to diagnose and resolve these issues
effectively and efficiently.
Several recent works have explored interpretable models in the image domain using concept bottle-
necks [5, 10, 14, 16, 19, 20, 21], demonstrating the feasibility of building interpretable models for
image classification. In contrast, research on building interpretable models for NLP remains limited.
Only a few recent studies [8, 17] have investigated the development of inherently interpretable
language models. However, these methods are largely restricted to text classification on small datasets
and struggle to scale to larger benchmarks or more complex tasks like text generation, which is a
capability that has become indispensable with the growing dominance of autoregressive LLMs across
diverse applications.
Given the limited research on interpretable LLMs, our study is driven by two key goals. First, we aim
to enhance the interpretability of LLMs in text classification setting by improving scalability for larger
benchmarks, reducing development costs, and boosting both model performance and interpretability.
Second, we tackle the more challenging text generation setting of developing a generative LLM with
intrinsic interpretability – an area that is largely unexplored, as existing research focus solely on text
classification tasks [8, 17]. By embedding interpretability directly into the LLMs, we enable greater
transparency, steering, and control over their behavior. For example, as demonstrated in our case
studies, interpretability empowers users to trace the underlying reasoning behind harmful outputs,
identifying how inputs and neurons contribute to the generation of unsafe tokens, steering LLMs
toward safer response, and forcing LLMs to unlearn undesired concepts. This deeper insight is crucial
for enhancing the safety, reliability, and trustworthiness of LLMs.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With the above two goals, in this work, we propose a novel framework for constructing interpretable
LLMs that come with intrinsic interpretability. Our method can transform any pretrained black-box
LLM into an inherently interpretable LLM by incorporating a human-interpretable Concept Bottleneck
Layer alongside a linear prediction layer. We named our method Concept Bottleneck Large Language
Models (CB-LLMs), which is, to our best knowledge, the first CBM framework that scales to large text
classification and text generation tasks. In Section 3, we formally introduce how to train CB-LLMs for
the text classification task, and in Section 4, we present a novel approach to train CB-LLMs for the
text generation task. Note that due to the very different nature between the classification task and
generation task, a careful design for the training pipeline and algorithm of CB-LLMs for each task
is required. To avoid confusion, we refer to these models as CB-LLMs (classification) and CB-LLMs
(generation) for each task respectively when the context needs to be clear. Our contributions are as
follows:

 1. We present a novel framework to build interpretable LLMs for text classification and generation
    tasks: CB-LLMs (classification) and CB-LLMs (generation). Our CB-LLMs encapsulates the best
    of both worlds: it matches the high performance of black-box models across multiple settings
    while offering clear interpretability, a feature absent in existing LLMs.
 2. In the classification case, our CB-LLMs (classification) match the accuracy of the standard black-
    box models and achieves a 1.5× higher average rating compared to the existing works on the
    faithfulness evaluation. This suggests that our CB-LLMs (classification) provide high-quality
    interpretability without sacrificing performance.
 3. In the generation case, our CB-LLMs (generation) match the performance of the standard black-
    box models. It provides controllable and understandable generation, allowing further interaction
    between the user and the LLM. We also developed the first inherently interpretable LLM chatbot
    that can detect toxic queries and provide controllable responses.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM). CBM [5] introduces a model structure that incorporates a
concept bottleneck layer (CBL), where individual neurons are explicitly designed to learn specific,
human-interpretable concepts. This CBL is followed by a final linear layer to produce predictions.
Because the activation of the interpretable neurons directly and linearly contributes to the final logits,
users can easily understand the model’s decision-making process and intervene at the bottleneck layer
to correct potential errors.

CBM in Image Classification. Recently, CBMs have been revisited in the context of image
classification tasks [2, 3, 10, 14, 16, 19, 20, 21]. In the seminal work [5], the authors proposed to
train CBMs utilizing human-annotated concept labels, which may be expensive to collect in practice.
To address this challenge, recent works [20, 21] leverage concept activation vectors [4] or the multi-
modal CLIP model [13] to build CBMs efficiently. However, these approaches still require concept
labels to obtain Concept Activation Vector (CAV) or need to restrict the backbone to the CLIP image
encoder if concept labels are unavailable, which does not fully resolve the limitation. Recognizing
this constraint, [10] proposed Label-free CBM to learn CBMs without relying on concept labels by
using the interpretability tool CLIP-Dissect [9]. A recent work [16] further proposed VLG-CBM, to
ensure the faithfulness of Vision-based CBMs in image classification tasks, and a new metric called
Number of Effective Concept (NEC) is also proposed to control the information leakage and ensure
fair comparison between CBMs.
Despite the extensive studies of CBMs in the image classification tasks, to the best of our knowledge,
there is still no CBM that scales to large NLP benchmarks or text generation tasks. Consequently, our
work focuses on learning an efficient, automated, and high-performance CBM for LLMs.

CBM in Text Classification. Two recent works studied the CBM structure in text classification
settings. [8] introduced Text Bottleneck Models (TBMs), an interpretable text classification frame-
work that trains a linear predictor on the concept labels generated by GPT-4. Their approach does
not involve training the CBL before the linear predictor; instead, they utilize the output score from
GPT-4 to replace the output from CBL. Another work, [17], proposed C3 M, a framework that merges


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


human-annotated concepts with concepts generated and labeled by ChatGPT to build the CBM based
on GPT-2 and BERT backbone.
While both works aimed to construct interpretable language models utilizing the CBM structure, it’s
notable that TBM necessitates multiple queries to GPT-4 for each text sample, thereby limiting its
applicability to only a small subset of text samples (250 samples) in the datasets. On the other hand,
C3 M still depends on human-annotated concepts to augment the concept set, making it challenging to
scale to large datasets that lack pre-existing concept annotations. Furthermore, neither work studied
the autoregressive generation setting, which is a much more interesting setting given the increasing
prevalence of chatbots.
In contrast, our CB-LLMs can scale to large classification datasets of over 500,000 samples and
does not require using GPT-4 to label the concepts. CB-LLMs provide interpretability without
losing performance and achieves the same accuracy as the non-interpretable black-box counterpart.
Furthermore, our proposed approach can handle generation tasks, while existing works are limited to
simple text classification. More detailed comparisons are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Comparison between our CB-LLMs and other interpretable language models in terms of
scalability, efficiency, accuracy, and interpretability.
Methods                   Scalability                            Efficiency                   Accuracy        Interpretability
               Text generation       Large text        Concept labeling Inference new samples Same accuracy as   Provide
                   setting     classification dataset w/o querying LLMs w/o querying LLMs black-box model faithful explanations
Ours:
CB-LLMs             Yes                 Yes              Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
Prior works:
TBM [8]             No                  No               No                   No                 No                 No
C3 M [17]           No                  No               No                   Yes                No                 No


3     CB-LLM S FOR TASK C LASSIFICATION
In this section, we develop interpretable language models for text classification. Section 3.1 presents
a cost-effective method for transforming pretrained models into interpretable ones. We evaluate its
performance in Section 3.2 and showcase its benefits through a case study in Section 3.3.

3.1    M ETHOD

Our proposed method consists of five steps and is illustrated in Figure 1.
Step 1: Concept Generation. The first step is to generate a set of concepts related to the down-
stream task. To automate this process, we leverage ChatGPT [11] as a replacement for the domain
experts. For any text classification dataset D with n classes/labels, we prompt ChatGPTSto generate
                                                                                         n
the concept subset Ci for each class i. Then, the concept set C is the union of Ci , C = i=1 Ci . We
defer the details of prompting to Appendix A.8. Note that our proposed prompting style requires only
n queries to ChatGPT to obtain the full concept set, which can be done through the web interface
provided by OpenAI at zero cost.
Step 2: Automatic Concept Scoring. After generating the concept set C, the next step is to obtain
the concept labels for a given text sample x in dataset D for training. Typically, this stage requires
involving domain experts and can be time-consuming. TBM [8] and C3 M [17] leveraged ChatGPT
or GPT-4 to automate the labeling process, but their method incurs significant costs due to the
high number of API calls required (more than 100M API calls for large dataset like DBpedia). To
overcome this challenge, we propose an automatic scoring strategy by utilizing sentence embedding
models, which can measure the similarity between each concept and any text sample without the
need to query LLMs. We name this strategy as Automatic Concept Scoring (ACS).
For any sentence embedding model E that encodes a text sample into a fixed-size embedding, we
calculate the concept scores Sc (x) ∈ Rk for text sample x by calculating the following:
                                        Sc (x) = [E(c1 ) · E(x), ..., E(ck ) · E(x)]⊤ ,                                      (1)
                      d
where E(x) ∈ R denotes the text embedding generated by E, cj is the j-th concept in the concept set
C, and k is the size of the concept set. Each component of the vector Sc (x) measures the similarity


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The overview of CB-LLMs (classification). The pipeline consists of five steps: (1) Generate
concept set via querying ChatGPT. (2) Automatically label the samples with sentence embedding
models. (3) Fix the incorrect concept labels. (4) Train backbone LLM and CBL with the concept
labels. (5) Train a linear layer on top of the CBL to make the class predictions.

between the text x and concept cj . These entries represent pseudo concept labels for x that we will
use as a learning target for Concept Bottleneck Layer (CBL) in step 4.
We use the off-the-shelf sentence embedding models all-mpnet-base-v2 from Huggingface
[18] for ACS. It achieves better accuracy than labeling by LLMs and requires only a tenth of the time.
We will discuss this in Section 3.2.
Step 3: Automatic Concept Correction (ACC). While ACS in step 2 offers an efficient way to
provide pseudo concept labels (concept scores), its correctness is dependent on the performance of
the sentence embedding model. This may introduce a limitation wherein the concept scores may not
align with human reasoning, consequently impacting the learning of the CBL. Notably, this challenge
is prevalent in image CBM works that do not rely on human-assigned concept labels [10, 21].
To address this challenge, we proposed Automatic Concept Correction (ACC), a technique to improve
the quality of theSconcept scores generated by ACS in step 2. Recall that in step 1, we generate the
                    n
concept set C = i=1 Ci for dataset D with n classes, where Ci is the concept subset for class i. We
define the mapping M : c → {1, ..., n} which maps a concept c ∈ C to a class: M(c) = i if c ∈ Si .
For any text sample x in D, let y ∈ {1, ..., n} be the class label of x and Sc (x) be the concept scores
generated by sentence embedding model E as in Eq.(1). The key idea is to revise Sc (x) to a more
accurate concept score ScACC (x) as follows:

                                       Sc (x)i , if Sc (x)i > 0, M(ci ) = y
                        ScACC (x)i =                                                                 (2)
                                       0, otherwise
where ScACC (x)i is the i-th component of vector ScACC (x), and Sc (x)i is the i-th component of vector
Sc (x). Intuitively, ACC filters out the negative concept scores and forces every component of ScACC (x)
to be zero when the corresponding concept ci and text sample x belong to different classes. This is
achievable because we prompt ChatGPT to generate the concept set for each class separately, thereby
providing the mapping M, which associates concepts with their respective classes.
We utilize ACC to correct inaccurate concept scores before training the CBL, leading to a significant
improvement in the accuracy of CB-LLMs (classification) (3.5% in average), which matches those
of finetuned black-box models. Further details on the accuracy of CB-LLMs (classification) will
be discussed in Section 3.2. Additionally, our ACC strategy does not require any extra queries to
ChatGPT and thus requires almost no additional time cost.
Step 4: Training the Concept Bottleneck Layer (CBL). After step 3, we now have the corrected
concept scores ScACC (x) for every text example x in dataset D and are ready for training the Concept
Bottleneck Layer (CBL). The goal here is to force the neurons in CBL to activate in correlation with


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the pattern of concept scores. We first send the text sample x to a pretrained LM fLM to get a fixed
size embedding fLM (x) ∈ Rd . Then, the CBL fCBL projects the embeddings into a k dimensional
interpretable embedding fCBL (fLM (x)) ∈ Rk . To force the k neurons in the CBL learn the concepts,
we maximize the similarity between fCBL (fLM (x)) and ScACC (x) for every x:
                                1 X
                                      Sim fCBL (fLM (x; θ1 ); θ2 ), ScACC (x) ,

                        max                                                                       (3)
                        θ1 ,θ2 |D|
                                   x∈D
               k      k
where Sim : R × R → R can be any similarity function (we adopt cos cubed as proposed in [10]),
θ1 and θ2 are the parameters of fLM and fCBL , respectively.

Step 5: Train the linear layer. After training the CBL, the k neurons in the CBL learn the
corresponding k concepts. Let AN be the neuron activations from CBL, AN (x) = fCBL (fLM (x)), we
set all the negative activations of AN (x) to zero through a ReLU function A+    N (x) = ReLU(AN (x)).
We remove the negative activations as the negation of a concept introduces ambiguity (e.g., it is
unclear whether the negative activations imply the absence of a concept or the negation of the semantic
meaning of a concept). After obtaining A+    N , we train a final linear layer with sparsity constraint to
make the final text classification interpretable:
                               1 X
                         min             LCE (WF A+ N (x) + bF , y) + λR(WF ),                         (4)
                          W,b |D|
                                  x,y∈D
                n×k
where WF ∈ R         is the weight matrix and bF ∈ Rn is the bias vector of the final linear layer, y is
the label of x, and R(W ) = α||W ||1 + (1 − α) 21 ||W ||22 is the elastic-net regularization, which is the
combination of ℓ1 and ℓ2 penalty. λ is set to 0.0007 and α is set to 0.99.

3.2   E XPERIMENT

In this section, we evaluate our CB-LLMs (classification) in terms of three crucial aspects: Accuracy,
Efficency, and Faithfulness. These aspects are pivotal as our goal is to ensure that CB-LLMs (classifi-
cation) achieve high accuracy with minimal additional cost while providing human-understandable
explanations.

Setup. We work with four datasets for text classification: SST2 [15], Yelp Polarity (YelpP) [22],
AGnews [22], and DBpedia [6]. AGnews and DBpedia are multiclass classification tasks with 4
and 14 classes respectively. YelpP and DBpedia contain 560, 000 training samples which is 2000
times larger than the largest dataset used in TBM [8] and 20 times larger than the dataset used in
C3 M [17]. We generate 208 concepts for SST2, 248 concepts for YelpP, 216 concepts for AGnews,
and 476 concepts for DBpedia. We use RoBERTa-base [7] and GPT2 [12] pretrained model as
the backbone for learning CB-LLMs (classification), and compare them with the fine-tuned models
(standard black-box models) and the implementation of TBM and C3 M. Note that TBM and C3 M
utilize GPT series models for concept labeling, which becomes cost-prohibitive when applied to large
datasets. For datasets with m samples and n concepts, this requires m × n API calls to get all the
binary labels (e.g., 560, 000 × 476 = 266, 560, 000 API calls for DBpedia). Given the scale of our
datasets, their approaches are impractical. Therefore, we opt to use Llama3-8B-Instruct [1] as
the LLM for labeling and limit the process to 1, 000 samples per dataset to maintain feasibility. We
refer to this implementation as TBM&C3 M.

Accuracy. The test accuracy is shown in Table 2. In general, our CB-LLMs (classification) demon-
strate high accuracy across various datasets, including large ones such as YelpP and DBpedia. The
CB-LLMs implementation without ACC already achieves high accuracy: significantly outperforming
TBM&C3 M with only a 1~5% gap compared to the standard black-box model. This gap can be
further eliminated: it can be seen that our ACC strategy, described in Section 3.1 step 3, improves
the accuracy significantly to the level of the standard black-box model. This indicates that ACC
can effectively correct inaccurate concept scores and enhance learning on the given task. Overall,
our CB-LLMs (classification) sometimes achieve higher accuracy than the standard black-box model
(highlighted in blue in Table 2), demonstrating the potential to build interpretable models without
the performance trade-offs. Note that our framework is compatible with both encoder-only (e.g.
RoBERTa) and decoder-only (e.g. GPT2) backbones. See Appendix A.1 for additional results when
using GPT2 as the backbone.

                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Test accuracy of CB-LLMs (classification). CB-LLMs is competitive with the black-box model
after applying ACC. Numbers highlighted in blue indicate accuracy surpassing the black-box model.
Accuracy↑                                             SST2                       YelpP      AGnews                DBpedia
Ours:
CB-LLMs                                             0.9012                   0.9312         0.9009                0.9831
CB-LLMs w/ ACC                                      0.9407                   0.9806         0.9453                0.9928
Baselines:
TBM&C3 M                                             0.9270                      0.9534     0.8972                0.9843
Roberta-base fine-tuned (black-box)                  0.9462                      0.9778     0.9508                0.9917


Efficiency. CB-LLMs (classification) incur only a small time overhead while achieving interpretabil-
ity. Our ACS strategy takes about 1.6 hours on the largest YelpP and DBpedia dataset when using
all-mpnet-base-v2 as the sentence embedding model. In contrast, LLM-based labeling, as
used by TBM and C3 M, takes 8.8 hours to label just 1,000 samples per dataset. The training time
of CB-LLMs (classification) is approximately equivalent to the time cost of finetuning the standard
black-box model. The detailed comparison of the time cost is shown in Appendix A.2 Table 8.

Faithfulness. It is important for an interpretable model to make predictions based on human-
understandable and faithful logic. Hence, in this section, we evaluate the faithfulness of CB-LLMs
(classification) through human study. Specifically, we design below two tasks for human evaluation:
  • Task 1: Activation Faithfulness. In this task, workers will be presented with a neuron concept
    alongside the corresponding top k text samples where this neuron highly activates. Workers need
    to provide a rating ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) based on the agreement
    observed between the neuron concept and the top k highly activated samples. This task evaluates
    if the activations of neurons in CBL align with the corresponding concepts they have learned.
  • Task 2: Contribution Faithfulness. In this task, workers will be presented with explanations
    from two models for a text sample. Workers need to compare which model’s explanations are
    better. The explanations are generated by showing the top r neuron concepts with the highest
    contribution to the prediction. Given a text sample x, the contribution of a neuron j to class i is
    defined as Wij AN + (x)j , where W is the weight matrix from the final linear layer and AN + is
    the non-negative activations from CBL introduced in Section 3.1 step 5. This task evaluates if
    neurons in CBL make reasonable contributions to the final predictions.
We conduct human evaluations through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) for Task 1 and 2 to
compare our CB-LLMs (classification) with TBM&C3 M. To ensure reliable results, each question in
the tasks mentioned above is evaluated three times by different workers. More details about the survey
design and interface can be found in Appendix A.7. The results of task 1 (Activation Faithfulness)
are shown in Table 3. Our CB-LLMs w/ ACC constantly achieve higher ratings than TBM&C3 M.
This suggests that the neurons in our CB-LLMs w/ ACC are more interpretable. The results of task 2
(Contribution Faithfulness) are shown in Table 4. Workers consistently express a preference for our
CB-LLMs w/ ACC over TBM&C3 M. This suggests that the explanations generated by our CB-LLMs
w/ ACC are better. We visualize the connection between interpretable neurons and the prediction
through the final layer weights, as shown in Appendix A.3. For details on neuron interpretation and
the explanations provided by CB-LLMs (classification), refer to Appendix A.5 and A.6.
Table 3: Human evaluation results for Task 1. The higher rating of CB-LLMs (classification) suggests
that CB-LLMs are reasonably interpretable to humans.
Task 1                                                                 Dataset                               Average Rating
Activation Faithfulness ↑               SST2               YelpP                 AGnews   DBpedia
CB-LLM w/ ACC (Ours)                    3.47               4.33                   4.53     4.13                  4.12
TBM&C3 M                                3.47               2.67                   2.73     2.13                  2.75


Table 4: Human evaluation results for Task 2. Results show that CB-LLMs (classification) provide
good explanations.
Task 2 – Contribution Faithfulness ("which model is better?")
CB-LLMs w/ ACC clearly better CB-LLMs w/ ACC slightly better Equally good TBM&C3 M slightly better TBM&C3 M clearly better
         27.7%                         22.3%                   21.4%            13.8%                   14.8%


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: An example of concept unlearning. This example is initially classified as negative due to
the customer complaining about the high price, despite the lobster tails being great. After unlearning
the concept "Overpriced", the concepts "Amazing flavors" and "Generous portion sizes" dominate
the prediction, resulting in a positive prediction.

3.3   C ASE S TUDY ON C ONCEPT U NLEARNING

We demonstrate a use case of our CB-LLMs on “concept unlearning,“ which can enhance prediction
fairness by allowing users to remove biased or unfair elements. Concept Unlearning involves forcing
the model to forget a specific concept, which can be achieved by deactivating a neuron in the CBL or
removing its weights from the final linear layer.
Figure 2 illustrates unlearning the concept of “overpriced," which may be subjective or geographically
influenced in Yelp reviews (as the standard of overpricing varies across individuals and locations). This
adjustment encourages CB-LLMs to focus more on product quality. After unlearning “overpriced,"
predictions for 2,726 test samples shifted from negative to positive. Subsequently, we employed
bart-large-mnli, an NLI model, to assess whether these samples indeed contain the concept of
“overpriced“. Our findings reveal that 2, 162 out of the 2, 726 samples strongly entail “overpriced,"
accounting for 79%. This suggests that most samples with positive predictions were initially classified
as negative due to the presence of the “overpriced“.
Based on the above case study, we believe our CB-LLMs have great potential to facilitate human
intervention such as Concept Unlearning for enhancing fairness, as users can easily remove biased,
subjective, or unfair elements that could distort the predictions.


4     CB-LLM S FOR T EXT G ENERATION

In this section, we investigate a more interesting setting — building interpretable LLMs for generation
tasks. In section 4.1, we introduce a novel training design for building controllable and interpretable
autoregressive LLMs. In section 4.2, we evaluate the performance of CB-LLMs (generation). In
section 4.3, we demonstrate its practical benefits through a case study for toxicity reduction.

4.1   M ETHOD
Main challenge of the design. In the generation case, the CBL alone cannot capture all necessary
concepts for token prediction, as it is unable to capture all the possible concepts needed for generation.
To increase the capability of CBM, a common strategy is to introduce unsupervised (non-interpretable)
neurons in parallel with the CBL, as shown in Figure 3 Module 1. This additional unsupervised layer
helps provide the necessary broader context for more effective generation. This structure is known as
hybrid CBM used in the image domain [2, 21]. However, a notable issue with this structure is that
the final layer may over-rely on the unsupervised layer for predictions, which can result in the CBL’s
activations becoming irrelevant to the token predictions, thereby diminishing the interpretability.
We overcome this issue through an adversarial training-like framework that forces the unsupervised
layer to forget information related to the concept. As shown in Figure 3 Module 2, the outputs of
the unsupervised layer pass through a linear classifier for concept prediction. The linear classifier
is trained to make accurate predictions, while the unsupervised layer is trained to output features
that make the linear classifier predict uniformly. By jointly training these two components, the
unsupervised layer learns to remove concept-related information, thereby disentangling the CBL
from the unsupervised layer. This design can significantly improve the steerability of CB-LLMs
(generation), which will be further examined in Section 4.2. The whole training pipeline is shown in
Figure 3. There are two modules: CB-LLM training and adversarial training for disentangling.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: The overview of CB-LLMs (generation). The training has two modules: (1) the main module
for concept and token learning, and (2) the ADV training module, which prevents the unsupervised
layer from encoding concept-related information, improving steerability.

Module 1: CB-LLM training. This is the main module of CB-LLMs (generation). The text sample
x is first processed by the pretrained LLM fLLM , generating a latent representation of dimension d.
This representation is then passed through the CBL with ReLU, denoted as f + CBL : Rd → Rk ,
and the unsupervised layer f unsup : Rd → Ru , where k is the number of concepts and u is the
number of unsupervised neurons in funsup . To eliminate ambiguity, we apply a ReLU function after
the CBL, consistent with our classification setting. The outputs of these layers are then concatenated
to form the final hidden state, which is subsequently unembedded through the final linear layer
fFL : Rk+u → R|V| , producing token logits over the vocabulary V. Unlike the classification setting,
                   +
we jointly train fCBL , funsup , and fFL to make concept and token predictions. The training loss for
Module 1 includes three parts, concept loss Lc , token loss Lt and the elastic-net regularization R:
Lc + Lt + λR(W ), where W ∈ Rk×|V| is the weights between the output of CBL and the token
predictions. The concept loss is the cross entropy loss between CBL’s output and concept label yc :
                                     1 X          +

                             Lc =            CE fCBL (fLLM (x; θ1 ); θ2 ), yc ,                    (5)
                                    |D|
                                        x∈D
where CE is the Cross-Entropy loss, and θ1 and θ2 are the parameters of the backbone LLM and the
CBL respectively. This ensures the neurons in CBL learn the corresponding concepts. The token loss
is the cross entropy loss between the next token prediction and the next token label y:
                  1 X                +

          Lt =             CE fFL (fCBL  ∥ funsup (fLLM ([x1 , ..., xi−1 ]; θ1 ); θ2 ∥ θ3 ); θ4 ), yi , (6)
                 |D|ℓ
                      x∈D,i
where ℓ is the sequence length, and θ3 and θ4 are the parameters of the unsupervised layer and the
final layer respectively. This is the standard loss used in LLM training.
Module 2: Adversarial Training. The purpose of Module 2 is to ensure that the unsupervised
layer funsup does not contain any knowledge related to the concepts. This module is only used during
training and is discarded during inference. The output of funsup is fed into a linear classifier gc to make
the concept prediction. We jointly train funsup and gc with negative entropy loss Le and detection loss
Ld respectively. The negative entropy loss is defined as follows:
                  1 X
          Le =           p log p,      where      p = Softmax(gc (funsup (fLLM (x; θ1 ); θ3 ))).         (7)
                 |D|
                     x∈D
Here θ1 and θ3 denote the parameters of the backbone LLM and the unsupervised layer, respectively.
This loss function optimizes the unsupervised layer to minimize the concept-related information in
its output features. Finally, the detection loss is the cross entropy loss:
                                    1 X
                           Ld =             CE gc (funsup (fLLM (x)); θ5 ), yc ,               (8)
                                   |D|
                                       x∈D
where θ5 are the parameters of the linear classifier. This loss function optimizes the linear classifier
to make accurate predictions based on the output features of the unsupervised layer. Ultimately, the
linear classifier will fail to make correct predictions once the output features of the unsupervised
layer no longer contain any concept-related information.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combine these two modules. The total loss L includes five terms:
                                L = Lc + Lt + Le + Ld + λR(W ),                                   (9)
and the two modules are trained simultaneously. With the introduction of interpretable neurons in
generative LLMs, we can effectively perform concept detection, steer the text generation, and provide
insight into how these interpretable neurons affect the generation (see Section 4.2 and 4.3).

4.2   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate our CB-LLMs (generation) based on three crucial aspects: Concept
detection, Steerability, and Generation quality.
Setup. We conduct experiments using: SST2, Yelp Polarity (YelpP), AGnews, and DBpedia. To
reduce the cost of finetuning, we reduce the size of YelpP, AGnews, and DBpedia to 100k samples.
We use the labels of these datasets as concept labels directly (e.g., for AGnews, the concepts will
be world, sport, business, and technology news), which allow us to calculate the concept accuracy
in Table 5. Notably, concept labels are not necessarily required, as Automatic Concept Scoring
(ACS) can be applied here similarly to the classification setting. We use Llama3-8B [1] pretrained
model as the backbone for learning CB-LLMs (generation), and compare them with the finetuned
Llama3-8B (standard black-box model). The training time of CB-LLMs (generation) is roughly the
same as fine-tuning the black-box Llama3-8B.
Concept Detection. Concept detection involves identifying the concepts in the prompt by extracting
the interpretable neurons with the highest activation in the CBL. Specifically, if the prompt is about
"sports", the "sports" neuron should exhibit the highest activation, and the accuracy is calculated as
the proportion of correctly aligned cases. The accuracy of the concept detection is shown in Table 5
(row Accuracy). CB-LLMs (generation) achieve similar accuracy with less than a 1% gap compared
to the Llama3-8B model finetuned for direct concept classification, indicating that the interpretable
neurons behave as expected.
We also visualize how CB-LLMs (generation) detect the concept in Figure 4. We use deeper colors to
indicate higher neuron activations. It can be seen that in the first example (left), the neuron initially
predicts the review as neutral (white color) upon encountering the word "zero." However, it predicts
the review as strongly positive (green color) when it processes the phrase "zero complaints". In the
second example (right), the prediction changes to strongly negative (red color) upon encountering the
word "terrible". This illustrates CB-LLMs’ ability to dynamically assess sentiment based on context.


Figure 4: An example of how neurons in CB-LLMs (generation) detect the concepts. A deeper color
means higher neuron activations.

Steerability. An interesting application of CB-LLMs (generation) is steering generation by inter-
vening the activations of the neurons in CBL, as these neurons are connected to the concept-related
tokens through the final linear layer weights. We provide some visualizations in Appendix B.2.
Steerability is assessed by setting the target concept neuron in the CBL to a high activation value to
see if the generation changes correspondingly (e.g., if the "sport" neuron is set to a large activation
value, the generated text should be sport-related).
Formally, generation begins without a human prompt (i.e., starting from the <bos> tag), producing
multiple samples of 100 tokens each for every class under intervention. The intervention value is set
to 100 for the target class and 0 for all the other classes. We then use a finetuned Roberta classifier
to evaluate if the generated samples belong to the target class and calculate the rate of successful
intervention, defining this metric as the steerability score. The steerability of CB-LLMs (generation) is
shown in Table 5 (row Steerability). We can see that the steerability of CB-LLMs (generation) is much
higher than the one trained without the adversarial training module (Module 2), whose steerability
is close to the random generation. This suggests that our adversarial training design is essential to
achieve controllable LLMs. An example of steering CB-LLMs (generation) to generate world, sport,
business, and technology news respectively is shown in Appendix B.3.

                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generation Quality. The last important aspect is generation quality, as we want to make sure that
CB-LLMs generate grammatically correct sentences while providing steerability and interpretability at
the same time. Generation quality is measured by evaluating the perplexity of the generated sentences
(initiated without a human prompt) using the pretrained Llama3-8B model. It’s important to note
that the perplexity evaluation described here differs from the standard approaches, which typically
compute the perplexity of a trained language model on a specific dataset. In our evaluation, we
utilize another well-trained LLM to evaluate the perplexity of sentences generated by CB-LLMs
(generation). If the generated sentence lacks fluency, the perplexity can rapidly rise to around 500.
Therefore, a small difference in perplexity would not affect the generation quality. The perplexity
of CB-LLMs (generation) is shown in Table 5 (row Perplexity). Our CB-LLMs (generation) achieves
similar perplexity compared to the standard black-box model, suggesting our approach can improve
interpretability in a way that does not compromise generation quality.
Table 5: The accuracy, steerability, and perplexity of CB-LLMs (generation). CB-LLMs (generation)
perform well on accuracy (↑) and perplexity (↓) while providing higher steerability (↑).
Method                          Metric              SST2            YelpP          AGnews          DBpedia
CB-LLMs (Ours)                  Accuracy↑          0.9638          0.9855          0.9439          0.9924
                                Steerability↑       0.82            0.95            0.85            0.76
                                Perplexity↓        116.22           13.03          18.25           37.59
CB-LLMs w/o ADV training        Accuracy↑          0.9676          0.9830          0.9418          0.9934
                                Steerability↑       0.57            0.69            0.52            0.21
                                Perplexity↓        59.19           12.39           17.93           35.13
Llama3 finetuned (black-box)    Accuracy↑          0.9692          0.9851          0.9493          0.9919
                                Steerability↑        No              No              No              No
                                Perplexity↓         84.70           6.62            12.52           41.50


4.3      C ASE STUDY ON T OXICITY R EDUCTION

We present a case study of CB-LLMs (generation) to detect and reduce toxicity in chatbot settings,
leveraging its concept detection and steerability capabilities. Specifically, we fine-tuned a chatbot us-
ing Llama3-8B with a combination of ToxicDPOqa and toxic-chat, incorporating four interpretable
neurons: The first neuron activates while the user query is benign. The second neuron activates
while the user query is harmful. Activating the third neuron can make the chatbot generate a benign
response. Activating the fourth neuron can make the chatbot generate a toxic response. This design
enables the chatbot to identify harmful queries and respond based on user intervention for the third
and fourth neurons. For example, as shown in Figure 5, the chatbot detects harmful queries containing
words like "kill" and "people," with the intensity of red indicating confidence in toxicity. Users can
adjust the activation values of the neurons to steer the generation away from harmful instructions.
CB-LLMs (generation) achieved an accuracy of 0.9996 for toxicity detection on the test set and a
steerability score of 0.9137, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting toxic prompts and accurately
following user interventions. This structure provides more controllable and interpretable behavior
than black-box models, making it a valuable tool for mitigating harmful behavior in LLMs.


Figure 5: An example of toxicity detection and successful steering the generation via CB-LLMs
(generation). CB-LLMs identifies the harmful query token by token (marked in red), and users can
steer the response to be benign (green) or toxic (red) through intervention on CBL.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced CB-LLMs, the first interpretable model that scales to both large text
classification benchmarks and generation tasks. Our CB-LLMs is fully automatic, training-efficient,
and achieves performance nearly on par with black-box LLMs (within 1% gap) while providing
faithful interpretability and steerability. It supports diverse applications, including concept unlearning
and toxicity reduction, enhancing controllability and safety of LLMs.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors are partially supported by National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2107189,
2313105, 2430539, Hellman Fellowship, Intel Rising Star Faculty Award, and Nvidia Academic
Grant Program. The authors also thank computing support from CIS230154 in Advanced Cyberin-
frastructure Coordination Ecosystem. Finally, the authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers
for valuable feedback to improve the manuscript.

R EFERENCES
 [1] AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/
     llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
 [2] Aya Abdelsalam Ismail, Julius Adebayo, Héctor Corrada Bravo, Stephen Ra, and Kyunghyun
     Cho. Concept bottleneck generative models. In ICLR, 2024.
 [3] Hailey Joren, Charles Thomas Marx, and Berk Ustun. Classification with conceptual safeguards.
     In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=t8cBsT9mcg.
 [4] Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie J. Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda B. Viégas,
     and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept
     activation vectors (TCAV). In ICML, 2018.
 [5] Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim,
     and Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In ICML, 2020.
 [6] Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimitris Kontokostas, Pablo N. Mendes,
     Sebastian Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick van Kleef, S. Auer, and Christian Bizer. Dbpedia
     - a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted from wikipedia. Semantic Web, 2015.
 [7] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
     Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT
     pretraining approach. CoRR, 2019.
 [8] Josh Magnus Ludan, Qing Lyu, Yue Yang, Liam Dugan, Mark Yatskar, and Chris Callison-
     Burch. Interpretable-by-design text classification with iteratively generated concept bottleneck.
     CoRR, 2023.
 [9] Tuomas P. Oikarinen and Tsui-Wei Weng. Clip-dissect: Automatic description of neuron
     representations in deep vision networks. In ICLR, 2023.
[10] Tuomas P. Oikarinen, Subhro Das, Lam M. Nguyen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Label-free concept
     bottleneck models. In ICLR, 2023.
[11] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
     Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
     Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano,
     Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
     feedback. In NeurIPS, 2022.
[12] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
     models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
[13] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
     wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
     Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML,
     2021.
[14] Sukrut Rao, Sweta Mahajan, Moritz Böhle, and Bernt Schiele. Discover-then-name: Task-
     agnostic concept bottlenecks via automated concept discovery. In ECCV, 2024.
[15] Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng,
     and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
     treebank. In EMNLP, 2013.
[16] Divyansh Srivastava, Ge Yan, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Vlg-cbm: Training concept bottleneck
     models with vision-language guidance. In NeurIPS, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[17] Zhen Tan, Lu Cheng, Song Wang, Yuan Bo, Jundong Li, and Huan Liu. Interpreting pretrained
     language models via concept bottlenecks. CoRR, 2023.
[18] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
     Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. Huggingface’s
     transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR, 2019.
[19] Xinyue Xu, Yi Qin, Lu Mi, Hao Wang, and Xiaomeng Li. Energy-based concept bottleneck
     models: Unifying prediction, concept intervention, and probabilistic interpretations. In ICLR,
     2024.
[20] Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Shenghao Zhou, Daniel Jin, Chris Callison-Burch, and Mark
     Yatskar. Language in a bottle: Language model guided concept bottlenecks for interpretable
     image classification. In CVPR, 2023.
[21] Mert Yüksekgönül, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models. In
     ICLR, 2023.
[22] Xiang Zhang, Junbo Jake Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for
     text classification. In NeurIPS, 2015.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table of Contents
      A Appendix: CBLLMs — classification case                                                      13
        A.1 Performance of CB-LLMs using GPT2 and Gemma2-2B as backbones . . . . .                  13
        A.2 Time cost of building CB-LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14
        A.3 Visualization of how interpretable neurons connected with class predictions through
            final layer weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
        A.4 More examples on Concept Unlearning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
        A.5 Visualization of neurons in CB-LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
        A.6 Explanations from CB-LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27
        A.7 MTurk survey design and interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30
        A.8 Details of prompting ChatGPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32

      B Appendix: CBLLMs — generation case                                                          38
        B.1 Performance of CB-LLMs using Llama2-13B and Mistral-7B as backbones . . .               38
        B.2 Visualization of the relation between interpretable neurons and token predictions       39
        B.3 Examples of steering CB-LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41
        B.4 More examples on Toxicity Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41



A     A PPENDIX : CBLLM S — CLASSIFICATION CASE
A.1   P ERFORMANCE OF CB-LLM S USING GPT2 AND G EMMA 2-2B AS BACKBONES


Table 6: Test accuracy of CB-LLMs (classification) using GPT2 as backbone. CB-LLMs are
competitive with the black-box model after applying ACC. Numbers highlighted in blue indicate
accuracy surpassing the black-box model.
Accuracy↑                                                                 Dataset
                                                SST2             YelpP              AGnews          DBpedia
Ours:
CB-LLM                                         0.8869           0.9347              0.8946          0.9830
CB-LLM w/ sparse FL                            0.8847           0.9326              0.8912          0.9752
CB-LLM w/ ACC                                  0.9072           0.9726              0.9261          0.9918
CB-LLM w/ ACC & sparse FL                      0.9072           0.9726              0.9261          0.9916
Baselines:
TBM & C3 M (LLM concept labeling)              0.7518           0.9228              0.8830          0.9780
GPT2 fine-tuned (black-box)                    0.9154           0.9762              0.9446          0.9911


Table 7: Test accuracy of CB-LLMs (classification) using Gemma2-2B as the backbone. Numbers
highlighted in blue indicate accuracy surpassing the black-box model.
Accuracy↑                                           Dataset
                                           SST2               YelpP             AGnews              DBpedia
Ours:
CB-LLM w/ ACC                             0.9594              0.9860             0.9471             0.9933
CB-LLM w/ ACC & sparse FL                 0.9616              0.9861             0.9459             0.9934
Baselines:
Gemma2 fine-tuned (black-box)             0.9610              0.9629            0.9538              0.9927


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    T IME COST OF BUILDING CB-LLM


Table 8: The time cost of ACS and learning CB-LLMs. Training CB-LLMs require only slightly
more time than the standard fine-tuning process, and it is significantly faster than the TBM and C3 M
pipeline.
Time cost (hours)↓                                                       Dataset
                                                   SST2         YelpP         AGnews        DBpedia
labeling concepts:
mpnet ACS (Ours)                                  0.0024        1.6172         0.2455        1.6578
LLM labeling for 1000 samples (TBM & C3 M)        3.3697        8.1069         4.2633        8.7541
Finetuning models:
CB-LLM (Ours)                                     0.0984        8.9733         2.0270        9.1800
Standard finetune (black-box model)               0.0289        8.9679         1.3535        9.1996


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   V ISUALIZATION OF HOW INTERPRETABLE NEURONS CONNECTED WITH CLASS
      PREDICTIONS THROUGH FINAL LAYER WEIGHTS


In this section, we visualize how the interpretable neurons are connected to the final predictions
through the final layer weights. We display the top 5 concepts with the strongest connections to each
class. The results are shown in Figure 6, 7, 8 and 9. We can see that these concepts are closely related
to their associated classes.


Figure 6: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with SST2 connect
to the class predictions.


Figure 7: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with Yelp connect
to the class predictions.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with AGnews
connect to the class predictions.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with DBpedia
connect to the class predictions.



                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4   M ORE EXAMPLES ON C ONCEPT U NLEARNING

Figure 10 demonstrates another example of Concept Unlearning. The concept "Unappetizing food" is
unlearned. After unlearning, the predictions of 370 samples changed from negative to positive, with
313 of them (85%) strongly entailing "Unappetizing food". This suggests that most of the samples
now predicting positive were initially classified as negative due to the presence of the "Unappetizing
food" concept.


Figure 10: Another example of concept unlearning. This example is initially classified as negative
due to the customer complaining about the bland food, despite the cool and clean atmosphere. After
unlearning the concept "Unappetizing food" the concepts "Clean and inviting ambiance" and "quiet
and relaxing atmosphere" dominate the prediction, resulting in a positive prediction.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5   V ISUALIZATION OF NEURONS IN CB-LLM

In this section, we provide more visualizations of the neurons in our CB-LLM. We select 3 neurons
that have the highest activations across samples for each dataset.

Table 9: The neurons of CB-LLM w/ ACC and corresponding highly activated samples for each
dataset. We show the top 3 neurons with the largest activations for each dataset.
  Dataset     Neuron              Highly activated samples
                                        1. the humor is hinged on the belief that knees in the
                                           crotch , elbows in the face and spit in the eye are
                                           inherently funny .
                                        2. it ’s laughing at us .
                                        3. there are a few stabs at absurdist comedy ... but
              Neuron 184:
                                           mostly the humor is of the sweet , gentle and oc-
  SST2        Clever and unex-
                                           casionally cloying kind that has become an iranian
              pected humor.
                                           specialty .
                                        4. occasionally funny , always very colorful and enjoy-
                                           ably overblown in the traditional almodóvar style
                                           .
                                        5. hilarious , acidic brit comedy .
                                        1. hugh grant and sandra bullock are two such likeable
                                           actors .
                                        2. binoche and magimel are perfect in these roles .
                                        3. makes s&m seem very romantic , and maggie gyl-
              Neuron 170:                  lenhaal is a delight .
  SST2        Great chemistry
              between actors.           4. hayek is stunning as frida and ... a star-making
                                           project .
                                        5. tim allen is great in his role but never hogs the scenes
                                           from his fellow cast , as there are plenty of laughs
                                           and good lines for everyone in this comedy .
                                        1. frenetic but not really funny .
                                        2. beyond a handful of mildly amusing lines ... there
                                           just is n’t much to laugh at .
                                        3. but here ’s the real damn : it is n’t funny , either .
              Neuron 34:                4. do not , under any circumstances , consider taking a
  SST2        Lack of humor or             child younger than middle school age to this wallow
              wit.                         in crude humor .
                                        5. it ’s frustrating to see these guys – who are obviously
                                           pretty clever – waste their talent on parodies of things
                                           they probably thought were funniest when they were
                                           high .


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. Loved the breakfast! Protein Berry Pancakes and
                                          eggs!
                                       2. I’m obsessed with the breakfast here. There’s a
                                          huge smorgasbord of options to choose from on the
                                          brekkie menu, and the hardest part is actually pick-
                                          ing something to order because they all sound so
                                          good! I couldn’t resist ordering the eggs benedicto.
                                          What a cute twist on your typical eggs benedict dish!
                                          The eggs were perfectly poached on toasty slabs of
                                          english muffin and accented with the rich and savory
                                          sundried tomato hollandaise. The bits of candied
                                          prosciutto added a nice meatiness to the benedict
                                          without making it too heavy. And while I don’t
                                          normally reach for mixed greens for breakfast.... I
                                          did like it in this dish because my usual gripe with
                                          eggs benedict is that there’s just wayyy too much
                                          going on. But the greens were a light alternative that
                                          kinda balanced everything out in a way that potatoes
                                          don’t do it for me. I also picked up the horchata
                                          latte. I’m a huge fan of horchata (which is pretty
                                          hard to find in Hawaii where I’m from) and a cof-
              Neuron 184:                 fee lover, so this was a must try for me! It’s totally
  YelpP       Good breakfast              sweet, creamy, and probably chock full of calories,
              options.                    but worth every single tasty sip. If you’re not feeling
                                          in a benedicto mood, that’s OK because there’s a ton
                                          of other food options to choose from. All of which
                                          resemble your standard breakfast fare, with a little
                                          bit of a twist. Mexican, southern, classic american
                                          breakfasts... You name it. If I had more stomach
                                          room and a little more time in Madison, I’d wanna
                                          try a little bit of every dish on the menu. One of each,
                                          please!
                                       3. Half order of Mashed Potatoes Omelet and an ice
                                          tea is how everyone should start their day!
                                       4. Great breakfast.
                                       5. My last two breakfasts here I have ordered the
                                          ’Healthy Turkey’ .... which is an egg white omelette
                                          with diced turkey, spinach, feta cheese, diced onions
                                          and tomatoes. It is served with an english muffin and
                                          is very tasty! ... My husband continues to order his
                                          standard raisin french toast smothered in butter and
                                          warm blueberry sauce .... with two eggs over easy
                                          on the side .... and is still loving it! : ) The coffee is
                                          also consistently good and is kept topped up by the
                                          great wait staff.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. I absolutely loved the show. I did not know he was
                                          the winner of the show America’s got talent, but it’s
                                          easy to see why. He’s clever, funny, has a great voice
                                          and it’s astounding to see him perform and not move
                                          his mouth. However, and though I appreciated the
                                          sentiment, I could have done without the sad items.
                                          There was one song that had everyone in tears. It’s
                                          a beautiful tribute, but I’m not sure this is the right
                                          venue for that. Don’t let that stop you though, he
                                          truly is talented and very funny!!
                                       2. If you’re a huge Beatles fan, you will love this show.
                                          If you’re a huge Cirque du Soleil fan, you might feel
                                          a lil’ bit disappointed? But I guarantee this, you will
                                          definitely appreciate the artistic value of the show
                                          and what it’s goal was..and that was to pay homage
                                          to one of the most influential bands in the history of
                                          music. ...
                                       3. I love the Beatles and I loved Love! (...and all you
                                          really need is love...) I wanted to see Love for awhile.
                                          So, when my husband wanted to go to Vegas for a
                                          couple of days, I bought tickets. We were in the
                                          second section, which seemed perfect. But, as oth-
              Neuron 159:                 ers have said, there probably isn’t a bad seat in the
  YelpP       Engaging perfor-            house. I was completely mesmerized by this show.
              mances.                     I think its one of the better Cirque shows I’ve seen,
                                          and the star of the show is definitely the music. Its
                                          a dizzying combination of effects, acrobatics, cos-
                                          tumes, choreography and music. I can’t wait to go
                                          back and see it again!
                                       4. this show was great!! if you love fire and acrobatic
                                          stuff you will love this show!! its good for fami-
                                          lies as well. this was the 3rd cirque du soleii show
                                          they never dissapoint me. the set was awesome and
                                          costumes!
                                       5. This show was awesome! Complete with cool stunts,
                                          music, emotion and a great story. The most impres-
                                          sive part though is the inanimate star of the show, the
                                          incredible stage. It raises, lowers and pivots eleventy
                                          billion different directions and is quite the engineer-
                                          ing feat. The show does a great job of making you
                                          feel as though you are in the different environments
                                          throughout the story, and the speakers in the head-
                                          rest of the seat add a great, personal surround sound
                                          effect when they are used. Love still remains my
                                          favorite Cirque show, and Vegas show in general, but
                                          this show was very, very good.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. Not at all impressed! The place is a maze - a con-
                                          densed outdoor mall with lots of cheap stores. The
                                          best stores are Target and Kohls which says a lot.
                                          Desert Ridge seems to be for teenagers or young
                                          moms. Difficult to find your way around the nar-
                                          row streets - no large directional signage with store
                                          names. Instead you must drive round and round to
                                          try to spot a store. Drivers don’t pay attention to
                                          Stop signs painted on the crosswalks - I almost got
                                          hit twice. Even the walkways in the mall were tight
                                          and congested. I think Arrowhead Mall does it right!
                                          I was truly glad to drive out of the mall back to open
                                          space. And, unlike Arnold, I will not be back.
                                       2. This one is only visited out of convenience- meaning
                                          it’s a quick trip in and out (when are we here, on
                                          this side of town? when we go to my MIL’s house
                                          for dinner), but I don’t really like this one. I could
                                          probably blame the area as a whole- the Wal-Mart
                                          (really ghetto) and 99 Cents Store (very ghetto- in
                                          fact, I could probably say that I hate this one- actu-
                                          ally had a verbal altercation with a foreigner, maybe
                                          Russian- have not been there since). The parking lot
                                          is way too busy making it hard to get out of your
              Neuron 104:                 parking space if you’re parked right in front of the
  YelpP       Unattractive store          store. Also, many of the people shopping here seem,
              layout.                     downright weird. This store doesn’t have everything
                                          you’re looking for, either, seems lacking.
                                       3. This mall- eh It’s not horrible, but it’s a waste of
                                          time. I visited from out of town and it was not worth
                                          my while. The stores were your typical "upscale"
                                          shops, but good luck finding anything with the pacs
                                          of shoppers looking to score "deals". The only stores
                                          worth going to are Gap outlet and J Crew factory. I
                                          was excited when I saw H&M but don’t be fooled,
                                          it’s not an outlet store so no "special" deals there.
                                          Avoid the crowds, save the gas $ and go elsewhere.
                                          ...
                                       4. BORING...It’s one of those "very chic" shopping
                                          venues that is sterile and dull with all the same shops
                                          you can see at any high end mall. I’d rather walk
                                          around the TL in San Francisco. It’s more interest-
                                          ing.
                                       5. I gave this location such a low rating because the
                                          store is usually a mess. Having worked in super-
                                          markets before I’ve noticed that products you think
                                          would be in the same aisle are in a completely irrele-
                                          vant spot. Their shelves need to be reset in a better
                                          manner.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. Ken Caminiti, 1996 NL MVP, Dies at Age 41 NEW
                                          YORK - Ken Caminiti, the 1996 National League
                                          MVP who later admitted using steroids during his
                                          major league career, died Sunday. He was 41...
                                       2. Maddux Wins No. 302, Baker Wins No. 1,000 Greg
                                          Maddux pitched the Chicago Cubs into the lead in
                                          the NL wild-card race and gave Dusty Baker a win to
                                          remember. Maddux threw seven shutout innings for
                                          his 302nd career win, Baker got his 1,000th victory
                                          as a manager and Chicago beat the Montreal Expos
                                          5-2 on Monday night...
                                       3. At Last, Success on the Road for Lions The Detroit
                                          Lions went three full seasons without winning an
                                          away game, setting an NFL record for road futility.
                                          They ended that ignominious streak Sunday in their
              Neuron 20:                  first opportunity of the season, beating the Chicago
  AGnews      sports events and           Bears 20-16 at Soldier Field...
              achievements.
                                       4. Davenport Advances at U.S. Open NEW YORK -
                                          Lindsay Davenport’s summer of success stayed on
                                          course Thursday when the fifth-seeded former U.S.
                                          Open champion defeated Arantxa Parra Santonja 6-4,
                                          6-2 and advanced to the third round of the season’s
                                          final Grand Slam event...
                                       5. Men Set for Sizzling Duel in 100 Meters ATHENS,
                                          Greece - The preliminaries in the 100 meters were
                                          perhaps just a sample of what’s to come Sunday,
                                          when a talented group of qualifiers - including Amer-
                                          icans Shawn Crawford, Justin Gatlin and defend-
                                          ing champion Maurice Greene - will try to turn
                                          their competition into the fastest show at the Athens
                                          Games. Five men broke 10 seconds in qualifying
                                          Saturday, led by Crawford’s time of 9.89...


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. England’s Lawyers Try to Get Photos Thrown Out
                                          Lawyers for Pfc. Lynndie R. England sought
                                          Wednesday to throw out evidence at the heart of
                                          the Abu Ghraib prison scandal – the now-infamous
                                          photos showing her smiling and pointing at naked
                                          Iraqi detainees.
                                       2. Anwar launches bid to clear name Lawyers for An-
                                          war Ibrahim, the former deputy prime minister of
                                          Malaysia, have launched a bid to clear his name.
                                          Mr Anwar was freed from jail on Thursday, after a
              Neuron 16:                  conviction for sodomy was quashed by a Malaysian
              human rights vio-           court.
  AGnews
              lations and advo-
                                       3. Gujarat riot murder retrial opens The retrial of 16
              cacy.
                                          Hindus charged with the murder of 12 Muslims in
                                          the Gujarat riots of 2002 opens in Mumbai.
                                       4. Yemeni Poet Says He Is al-Qaida Member GUAN-
                                          TANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba Aug. 26, 2004
                                          - In a dramatic turn that silenced defense lawyers, a
                                          Yemeni poet accused of crafting terrorist propaganda
                                          argued on Thursday to represent himself before a US
                                       5. Terreblanche challenges SA arrest White
                                          supremacist Eugene Terreblanche is detained
                                          after allegedly breaking the terms of his parole.
                                       1. Thaksin in the Firing Line After Massacre
                                          BANGKOK/JEDDAH, 29 October 2004 - A bomb
                                          ripped through two bars in southern Thailand yester-
                                          day, killing two people and wounding about 20, in
                                          what could be the first reaction to the deaths of 78
                                          Muslims in police custody this week.
                                       2. Seven suspected terrorists arrested in Spain Spain’s
                                          Interior Minister says police have broken up a radical
                                          Muslim cell, plotting to bomb the country’s National
                                          Court.
                                       3. Bomb kills one in southern Thailand A bomb has
                                          exploded in southern Thailand, killing one person
              Neuron 10:                  and injuring about 20, in what could be the first
  AGnews      terrorism and se-           reaction to the deaths of 85 Muslim protesters earlier
              curity threats.             this week.
                                       4. Rebel Attacks Hit Baghdad as Rumsfeld Visits Iraq
                                          A rocket attack and suicide car bombing killed at
                                          least four people in Baghdad Sunday as Defense
                                          Secretary Donald Rumsfeld began an unannounced
                                          visit to Iraq to gauge efforts to calm violence before
                                          January elections.
                                       5. Suicide Car Bomber Hits Baghdad Checkpoint
                                          Again (Reuters) Reuters - A suicide car bomber
                                          struck an entrance to Baghdad’s Green Zone govern-
                                          ment compound Tuesday, 24 hours after an almost
                                          identical attack at the same checkpoint on the first
                                          anniversary of Saddam Hussein’s arrest.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. USS Chase - Navy ArchivesUSS Chase (DE-
                                          158/APD-54) a Buckley-class destroyer escort of the
                                          United States Navy was named in honor of Admi-
                                          ral Jehu V. Chase (1869-1937).Chase was launched
                                          24 April 1943 by Norfolk Navy Yard; sponsored by
                                          Mrs. J. V. Chase ; and commissioned 18 July 1943
                                          Lieutenant Commander V. B. Staadecker USNR in
                                          command.
                                       2. The third USS Warren was a sloop-of-war that served
                                          in the United States Navy from 1799 to 1801.
                                       3. USS Reuben James (DE-153) was a Buckley-class
                                          destroyer escort in the United States Navy. She
                                          was the second ship named for Reuben James a
                                          Boatswain’s Mate who distinguished himself fight-
                                          ing the Barbary pirates.Reuben James was laid down
                                          on 7 September 1942 at the Norfolk Naval Shipyard
              Neuron 174:                 Portsmouth Virginia launched on 6 February 1943
  DBpedia     words related to            sponsored by Mrs. Oliver Hiram Ward and commis-
              ship, car, train.           sioned on 1 April 1943 with Lieutenant Commander
                                          Frank D. Giambattista in command.
                                       4. HMS Swiftsure was a 74-gun third rate ship of the
                                          line of the Royal Navy launched from Bucklers Hard
                                          on 23 July 1804. She fought at Trafalgar.The French
                                          74-gun ship Swiftsure also took part in the battle.
                                          She had originally been a British ship but was cap-
                                          tured by the French in 1801.It was a myth at the
                                          time that the Swiftsure sailed faster at night.[citation
                                          needed]Swiftsure became a receiving ship in 1819
                                          and was eventually sold out of the service in 1845.
                                       5. Bredenhof VOC Bredenhof was a Dutch East In-
                                          diaman transport ship that foundered on a reef 120
                                          miles south of Mozambique and only 13 miles off
                                          the African coast near the Cape of Good Hope on 6
                                          June 1753. The loss of the Bredenhof on her third
                                          voyage to the East Indies was meticulously recorded
                                          in the Dutch archives.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       1. Rochelle Perts (born 20 March 1992) is a Dutch
                                          singer who rose to prominence after winning the
                                          fourth season of talent show X Factor on 10 June
                                          2011.
                                       2. Theophilus Musa London (born February 23 1987) is
                                          a Trinidadian-born American rapper from Brooklyn
                                          New York City.
                                       3. Miss Dominique [as she is generally known as] born
              Neuron 71:                  Dominique Michalon September 7 1978 in Sarcelles
  DBpedia     the artist’s born           France is a French singer and second-place finalist
              date.                       of the fourth edition of Nouvelle Star [based version
                                          of Pop Idol]. Her parents are both Caribbean.
                                       4. Patrick Nuo (born August 31 1982 in Canton of
                                          Lucerne) is a Swiss-Albanian recording artist and
                                          actor.
                                       5. April Byron (real name April Elizabeth Dove Potts)
                                          was born March 22 1947 in Warburton Victoria
                                          Australia. April is an award-winning Australian
                                          pop/rock pioneer.
                                       1. The Sale & Altrincham Advertiser is a weekly
                                          free newspaper delivered to homes in Sale Altrin-
                                          cham Timperley Bowdon Partington and Hale in the
                                          Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in Greater Manch-
                                          ester England. Published every Thursday it is one of
                                          two sister MEN Media publications covering Traf-
                                          ford: the other is the Stretford & Urmston Advertiser;
                                          both replaced the Trafford Metro in October 2010.
                                       2. The Enterprise is an afternoon daily newspaper pub-
                                          lished in Brockton Mass. It is considered a news-
                                          paper of record for Brockton and nearby towns in
                                          northern Bristol and Plymouth counties and southern
                                          Norfolk County.The Fuller-Thompson family owned
                                          The Enterprise for 115 years prior to its 1996 sale to
                                          joint venture headed by incumbent president Myron
              Neuron 469:
                                          F. Fuller and new majority owner James F. Plugh
  DBpedia     the publisher and
                                          who was said to have paid between $20 million and
              imprint of the
                                          $30 million.
              work.
                                       3. The Star-Ledger is the largest circulated newspa-
                                          per in the U.S. state of New Jersey and is based in
                                          Newark.
                                       4. The Mercury is an upmarket English-language news-
                                          paper owned by Independent News & Media and
                                          published in Durban South Africa.
                                       5. The Anniston Star is the daily newspaper serving
                                          Anniston Alabama and the surrounding six-county
                                          region. Average Sunday circulation in September
                                          2004 was 26747. The newspaper is locally-owned
                                          by Consolidated Publishing Company which is con-
                                          trolled by the descendants of Col. Harry M. Ayers
                                          one of the newspaper’s early owners.The Star is Con-
                                          solidated’s flagship paper.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6   E XPLANATIONS FROM CB-LLM

In this section, we provide more explanations generated by our CB-LLM. We randomly select 3
samples and show the top 5 explanations for each dataset.

Table 10: The explanations generated by CB-LLM w/ ACC for a given text sample. We show 3
random samples for each dataset.
   Dataset    Sample                               Explanations
                                                            1. Stellar and diverse ensemble
                                                               cast.
              Sample 260:                                   2. Touching and heartfelt mo-
              a very witty take on change , risk and           ments.
  SST2        romance , and the film uses humour to         3. Stylish and unique costumes.
              make its points about acceptance and          4. Unforgettable and heartwarm-
              growth .                                         ing moments.
                                                            5. Engaging character relation-
                                                               ships.
                                                            1. Poorly executed social com-
                                                               mentary.
              Sample 1649:                                  2. Lack of believable conse-
              i was perplexed to watch it unfold with          quences for character actions.
  SST2
              an astonishing lack of passion or unique-     3. Poorly executed voice-over
              ness .                                           narration.
                                                            4. Unimpressive set design.
                                                            5. Excessive runtime.
                                                            1. Stylish and unique costumes.
                                                            2. Stellar and diverse ensemble
              Sample 330:                                      cast.
              occasionally funny , always very col-         3. Charming and lovable side
  SST2
              orful and enjoyably overblown in the             characters.
              traditional almodóvar style .                 4. Touching and heartfelt mo-
                                                               ments.
                                                            5. Stunning locations.
                                                            1. Inefficient payment systems.
              Sample 21864:
              These guys are money grubbing. What           2. Excessive fees.
  YelpP       WAS a $25 haircut just jumped up to a         3. Excessive ads.
              $32 haircut. It’s just a haircut for God’s
                                                            4. Low-quality materials used.
              sake! I’m going elsewhere.
                                                            5. No valet service.
              Sample 34857:
              This place has something for everyone.
              My wife and I started going there out of      1. Responsive concierge service.
              convenience before attending a movie at
                                                            2. Quiet and relaxing atmo-
              the South Pointe. But then we continued
                                                               sphere.
  YelpP       going back because we liked the food
              and the staff is very helpful. This most      3. Engaging podcasts.
              recent visit I had sushi for the first time   4. Quick and easy setup.
              and it was very good - and reasonably
              priced. We have company coming and            5. Clear signage for directions.
              are going to make it one of our stops on
              their visit.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Sample 10736:
              One of the few Cirque du Soleil that
              follow a story line, so if you are look-
              ing for a Cirque du Soleil show and a
              story this is the one to see. Although it
              strays a bit from the traditional style of
              Cirque du Soleil, it is still sure to please.
              We were fortunate enough to be able to          1. Engaging podcasts.
              purchase front section tickets for 50%          2. Engaging storytelling.
  YelpP       off AMAZING deal! (End of summer
                                                              3. Quick and easy setup.
              special). KA is the show which it is the
              stage that is at the center of attention. It    4. Thorough examinations.
              uses a sectional stage that is fully mobile     5. Interactive features.
              it rotates and moves on a 3D axis it re-
              ally adds another level of excitement to
              the show. I would not recommend this
              as anyone’s first Cirque du Soleil show
              but for a any repeat or veteran Cirque
              du Soleil viewer this must make it onto
                    ¨
              your "Seen   it"¨ list.
                                                              1. telecommunications and 5G
                                                                 technology.
              Sample 3058:
              Mobile phone network reaches last of            2. tech giants and major industry
              China’s ethnic minorities (AFP) AFP -              players.
              China has brought its mobile phone net-         3. consumer electronics and gad-
  AGnews
              work to the last of its ethnic minority            gets.
              regions previously cut off from commu-          4. words related to technical de-
              nication with the outside world, state             vices.
              media reported.
                                                              5. 3D printing and additive man-
                                                                 ufacturing.
                                                              1. company earnings and finan-
                                                                 cial results.
              Sample 6125:
              Icahn Takes The High River NEW                  2. initial public offerings (IPOs).
              YORK - Why has Carl Icahn set his               3. investment portfolio diversifi-
  AGnews      sights on the relatively insignificant My-         cation.
              lan Laboratories, a generic drug com-           4. financial literacy and educa-
              pany with just $1.5 billion in sales and           tion programs.
              a $4.3 billion market cap?
                                                              5. interest rates and central bank
                                                                 policies.

              Sample 1035:                                    1. record-breaking performances.
              Orioles 8, Devil Rays 0 Javy Lopez              2. fan reactions and opinions.
              drove in four runs, Daniel Cabrera be-
                                                              3. team rankings and standings.
  AGnews      came the first rookie to win 10 games
              this season, and the Baltimore Orioles          4. sports analytics and data-
              held the Tampa Bay Devil Rays to two               driven insights.
              hits in an 8-0 victory.                         5. sports science breakthroughs.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Sample 52170:
              Narthecium is a genus of flowering          1. The plant’s historical or cul-
              plants. This genus was traditionally           tural symbolism.
              treated as belonging to the family
                                                          2. The methods of cultivation and
              Liliaceae but the APG II system of
                                                             care for the plant.
              2003 placed it in the family Narthe-
              ciaceae.The global distribution of the      3. The plant’s method of repro-
  DBpedia
              genus is widely disjunct - 1 species in        duction (e.g., seeds, spores,
              Asia 1-5 species in Europe (see Narthe-        cuttings).
              cium ossifragum and 2 species in North      4. the genus or family of plant.
              America. Narthecium americanum is a
              candidate for listing under the federal     5. The plant’s contribution to bio-
              Endangered Species Act in the United           diversity.
              States.
              Sample 32678:                               1. The architectural style of the
              Pemberton’s Headquarters also known            building (e.g., Gothic, Modern,
              as Willis-Cowan House is a two-story           Colonial).
              brick house that served as the head-        2. the location of the building.
              quarters for Confederate General John
                                                          3. The building’s role in local or
              C. Pemberton during most of the 47
  DBpedia                                                    national history.
              day siege of Vicksburg and the site
              where he decided to surrender the city to   4. The cultural or artistic signifi-
              Union General Ulysses S. Grant on July         cance of the building.
              4 1863.During the 1960s the building        5. The building’s awards or
              housed a kindergarten associated with          recognitions for design or
              Vicksburg Catholic School (St.                 preservation.
              Sample 12750:
              Disma Fumagalli (born Inzago Septem-        1. the artist’s born date
              ber 8 1826 - died Milan March 9 1893)
              was an Italian composer and teacher of      2. The artist’s cultural signifi-
              music. He was a graduate of the Milan          cance.
  DBpedia     Conservatory where he began teaching        3. The artist’s enduring legacy.
              piano in 1853. He composedmore than         4. The artist’s unique artistic
              300 études for piano as well as other          voice.
              exercises; he also wrote a concerto for
              piano and string orchestra. Fumagalli’s     5. The artist’s famous collabora-
              brothers Carlo Polibio Adolfo and Luca         tions.
              were all composers.


                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.7   MT URK SURVEY DESIGN AND INTERFACE

We perform the human evaluation through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Each worker is paid
0.05$ per question and must sign a consent form to take the survey. The details of the two tasks we
designed are as follows:

      1. Task 1 — Activation Faithfulness: In this task, workers will be presented with a neuron
         concept alongside the corresponding top 5 highly activated text samples. Workers need
         to provide a rating ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) based on the
         agreement observed between the neuron concept and the top 5 highly activated samples.
      2. Task 2 — Contribution Faithfulness. In this task, workers will be presented with explana-
         tions from two models for a text sample. The explanations are generated by showing the top
         5 neuron concepts with the highest contribution to the prediction. Workers need to compare
         which model’s explanations are better and select an option from "model 1 is clearly better",
         "model 1 is slightly better", "equally good", "model 2 is slightly better", and "model 2 is
         clearly better".

We did human evaluations on MTurk for Task 1 and Task 2 as mentioned in Section 3.2. The details
are as follows:

       • Human evaluation: We evaluate the following 2 models:
           – CB-LLM w/ ACC
           – Random baseline: For Task 1, the highly activated text samples are randomly selected.
             For Task 2, the explanations are randomly selected from the same concept set.
         For task 1, we evaluate each model’s 5 most highly activated neuron concepts across each
         dataset. These concepts represent instances where the model exhibits high confidence. For
         task 2, we evaluate 5 random samples for every dataset.

To ensure more reliable results, each question in the tasks mentioned above is evaluated three times
by different workers.
The survey interface for task 1 and task 2 is shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12 respectively. In task 2,
workers are also asked to provide ratings for each model, similar to task 1. These ratings are utilized
to filter out inconsistent results. The following logic is employed for filtering:

       • If workers indicate that model 1 is slightly or clearly better than model 2, the rating of model
         1 must be no lower than the rating of model 2, and vice versa.
       • If workers select "equally good," the two models must have the same rating.


                   Figure 11: The interface for task 1 — Activation faithfulness.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Figure 12: The interface for task 2 — Contribution faithfulness.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.8   D ETAILS OF PROMPTING C HAT GPT

In this section, We provide the details of how we prompt ChatGPT to acquire the concept set. We use
four human-designed concepts as examples for in-context learning. This prompting style requires
only n queries to ChatGPT to obtain the full concept set and can be done efficiently through the web
interface provided by OpenAI. The full prompts are shown in 11.

                   Table 11: The designed prompts for each dataset and class.
   Dataset     Class          Prompt
                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                              a negative movie rating. Each feature is shown between the tag
                              <example></example>.
                              <example>Flat or one-dimensional characters.</example>
                              <example>Uninteresting cinematography.</example>
   SST2        negative
                              <example>Lack of tension-building scenes.</example>
                              <example>Lack of emotional impact.</example>
                              List 100 other different important features that are often present
                              in a negative movie rating. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                              <example>features</example>.

                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                              a positive movie rating. Each feature is shown between the tag
                              <example></example>.
                              <example>Engaging plot.</example>
                              <example>Strong character development.</example>
   SST2        positive
                              <example>Great humor.</example>
                              <example>Clever narrative structure.</example>
                              List 100 other different important features that are often present
                              in a positive movie rating. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                              <example>features</example>.

                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                              a negative Yelp review with lower star ratings (e.g., 1 or 2 stars).
                              Each feature is shown between the tag <example></example>.
                              <example>Overpriced.</example>
                              <example>Unappetizing food.</example>
                              <example>Unprofessional service.</example>
                              <example>broken products.</example>
   YelpP       negative
                              The reviews fall into the following categories: Food, Automo-
                              tive, Home Services, Entertainment, Medical, Hotels, Financial
                              Services, Media, Parking, Clothing, Electronic devices, and Clean-
                              ing. List 100 other different important features that are often
                              present in a negative Yelp review with lower star ratings (e.g.,
                              1 or 2 stars). Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                              ple>features</example>.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                             a positive Yelp review with higher star ratings (e.g., 4 or 5 stars).
                             Each feature is shown between the tag <example></example>.
                             <example>Delicious food.</example>
                             <example>Outstanding service.</example>
                             <example>Great value for the price.</example>
                             <example>high quality products.</example>
  YelpP       positive
                             The reviews fall into the following categories: Food, Automo-
                             tive, Home Services, Entertainment, Medical, Hotels, Financial
                             Services, Media, Parking, Clothing, Electronic devices, and Clean-
                             ing. List 100 other different important features that are often
                             present in a positive Yelp review with higher star ratings (e.g.,
                             4 or 5 stars). Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                             worldwide news. Each feature is shown between the tag <exam-
                             ple></example>.
                             <example>words related to country and place.</example>
                             <example>political stunts taken by governments.</example>
  AGnews      world
                             <example>global issues.</example>
                             <example>words related to war, conflict.</example>
                             List 50 other important features that are often present in world-
                             wide news. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             in sport news. Each feature is shown between the tag <exam-
                             ple></example>.
                             <example>name of sports stars.</example>
                             <example>words related to game, competition.</example>
  AGnews      sports
                             <example>ball games like baseball, basketball.</example>
                             <example>name of sport teams.</example>
                             List 50 other important features that are often present in sport
                             news. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                             business and financial news. Each feature is shown between the
                             tag <example></example>.
                             <example>words related to currency, money.</example>
                             <example>the numerical amount of dollars.</example>
  AGnews      business
                             <example>the symbol like $.</example>
                             <example>words related to stock, Portfolio.</example>
                             List 50 other important features that are often present in business
                             and financial news. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present in
                             news related to science and technology. Each feature is shown
                             between the tag <example></example>.
                             <example>name of scientists or the word scientists.</example>
              science/       <example>words related to technical devices.</example>
  AGnews
              technology     <example>words related to universe, space, planet.</example>
                             <example>words related to the natural landscape.</example>
                             List 50 other important features that are often present in news
                             related to science and technology. Need to follow the template
                             above, i.e. <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                             introducing a company. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the company.</example>
                             <example>the location of the company</example>
  DBpedia     company
                             <example>the founding year of the company</example>
                             <example>words related to organization, group.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                             troducing a company. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                             <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing an educational institution. Each feature is shown
                             between the tag <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the school.</example>
              educational    <example>the location of the school</example>
  DBpedia
              institution    <example>the founding year of the school</example>
                             <example>words related to college, university.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                             troducing an educational institution. Need to follow the template
                             above, i.e. <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing an artist. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the artist’s name.</example>
                             <example>the artist’s works</example>
  DBpedia     artist
                             <example>the artist’s born date</example>
                             <example>words related to music, painting.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                             ducing an artist. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                             introducing an athlete or sports star. Each feature is shown between
                             the tag <example></example>.
                             <example>the athlete’s or sports stars’ name.</example>
                             <example>the sport the athlete plays (e.g. football, basket-
  DBpedia     athlete        ball).</example>
                             <example>the athlete’s or sports stars’ born date</example>
                             <example>words related to ball games, competition.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                             ducing an athlete or sports star. Need to follow the template above,
                             i.e. <example>features</example>.



                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                              introducing an office holder. Each feature is shown between the
                              tag <example></example>.
                              <example>the office holder’s name.</example>
                              <example>the office holder’s position.</example>
  DBpedia     office holder
                              <example>the office holder’s born date</example>
                              <example>words related to politician, businessman.</example>
                              List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                              ducing an office holder. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                              <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing transportation. Each feature is shown between
                             the tag <example></example>.
                             <example>the model type of the transportation or vehi-
                             cle.</example>
                             <example>the production date of the transportation or vehi-
  DBpedia     transportation cle.</example>
                             <example>the functions of the transportation or vehi-
                             cle.</example>
                             <example>words related to ship, car, train.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when
                             introducing transportation. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                             <example>features</example>.

                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                              when introducing a building. Each feature is shown between the
                              tag <example></example>.
                              <example>the name of the building.</example>
                              <example>the built date of the building.</example>
  DBpedia     building        <example>the location of the building.</example>
                              <example>words related to the type of the building (e.g. church,
                              historic house, park, resort).</example>
                              List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                              ducing a building. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                              ple>features</example>.

                              Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                              introducing a natural place. Each feature is shown between the tag
                              <example></example>.
                              <example>the name of the natural place.</example>
                              <example>the length or height of the natural place.</example>
  DBpedia     natural place
                              <example>the location of the natural place.</example>
                              <example>words related to mountain, river.</example>
                              List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                              troducing a natural place. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                              <example>features</example>.


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing a village. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the village.</example>
                             <example>the population of the village.</example>
  DBpedia     village
                             <example>the census of the village.</example>
                             <example>words related to district, families.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                             ducing a village. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                             introducing a kind of animal. Each feature is shown between the
                             tag <example></example>.
                             <example>the species of the animal.</example>
                             <example>the habitat of the animal.</example>
  DBpedia     animal         <example>the type of the animal (e.g.                bird, insect,
                             moth).</example>
                             <example>words related to genus, family.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                             ducing a kind of animal. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                             <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                             introducing a kind of plant. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the plant.</example>
                             <example>the genus or family of plant.</example>
  DBpedia     plant
                             <example>the place where the plant was found.</example>
                             <example>words related to grass, herb, flower.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                             troducing a kind of plant. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                             <example>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing an album. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the album.</example>
                             <example>the type of music, instrument.</example>
  DBpedia     album
                             <example>the release date of the album.</example>
                             <example>words related to band, studio.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when intro-
                             ducing an album. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present
                             when introducing a film. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the film.</example>
                             <example>the maker or producer of the film.</example>
  DBpedia     film           <example>the type of the film (e.g. drama, science fiction, comedy,
                             cartoon, animation).</example>
                             <example>words related to TV, video.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                             troducing a film. Need to follow the template above, i.e. <exam-
                             ple>features</example>.

                             Here are some examples of key features that are often present when
                             introducing a written work. Each feature is shown between the tag
                             <example></example>.
                             <example>the name of the written work.</example>
                             <example>the author of the film.</example>
  DBpedia     written        <example>the type of the written work (e.g. novel, manga, jour-
              work           nal).</example>
                             <example>words related to book.</example>
                             List 30 other important features that are often present when in-
                             troducing a written work. Need to follow the template above, i.e.
                             <example>features</example>.


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A PPENDIX : CBLLM S — GENERATION CASE
B.1   P ERFORMANCE OF CB-LLM S USING L LAMA 2-13B AND M ISTRAL -7B AS BACKBONES


Table 12: The accuracy, steerability, and perplexity of CB-LLMs (generation) using Llama2-13B and
Mistral-7B as the backbones.
Method                             Metric               SST2     YelpP      AGnews       DBpedia
CB-LLM (Llama2-13B)                Accuracy↑            0.9649   0.9842      0.9444      0.9940
                                   Steerability↑         0.86     0.93        0.90        0.89
                                   Perplexity↓          78.86     17.05       30.61       45.72
Llama2-13B finetuned (black-box)   Accuracy↑            0.9676   0.9858     0.9525       0.9926
                                   Steerability↑          No       No         No           No
                                   Perplexity↓           31.29    11.56      22.99       29.04
CB-LLM (Mistral-7B)                Accuracy↑            0.9500   0.9810      0.9428      0.9934
                                   Steerability↑         0.82     0.83        0.62        0.85
                                   Perplexity↓          55.25     14.81      23.22       14.93
Mistral-7B finetuned (black-box)   Accuracy↑            0.9594   0.9807     0.9493       0.9904
                                   Steerability↑          No       No         No           No
                                   Perplexity↓           32.70    8.86       21.78        25.19


                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   V ISUALIZATION OF THE RELATION BETWEEN INTERPRETABLE NEURONS AND TOKEN
      PREDICTIONS


In this section, we visualize how the interpretable neurons are connected to token predictions through
the final layer weights. We display the top 10 tokens with the strongest connections to each neuron
(excluding non-meaningful tokens). The results are shown in Figure 13 and 14. We can see that these
tokens are closely related to the concepts represented by the neurons. Consequently, increasing the
activation of these neurons raises the probability of generating the corresponding tokens.


Figure 13: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with AGnews
connect to the token predictions.


                                                 39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: The visualization of how the interpretable neurons in CB-LLM trained with DBpedia
connect to the token predictions.

                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3   E XAMPLES OF STEERING CB-LLM

An example of steering CB-LLM is shown in Figure 15. When we set the "sport" neuron to an
activation value of 100, CB-LLM generates sport-related new accordingly.


  Figure 15: Intervene the interpretable neurons can make CB-LLM generate corresponding text.


B.4   M ORE EXAMPLES ON T OXICITY R EDUCTION

Figure 16 demonstrates another example of Toxicity reduction.


Figure 16: Another example of toxicity detection and reduction through steering the generation via
CB-LLM.


                                               41
