Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H IGH - QUALITY T EXT- TO -3D C HARACTER G ENERA -
TION WITH S PARSE C UBES AND S PARSE T RANSFORM -
ERS

 Jiachen Qian1 , Hongye Yang1 , Shuang Wu1,2 , Jingxi Xu1 , Feihu Zhang1∗
 1
   DreamTech, 2 Nanjing University



                                              A BSTRACT
             Current state-of-the-art text-to-3D generation methods struggle to produce 3D
             models with ﬁne details and delicate structures due to limitations in differen-
             tiable mesh representation techniques. This limitation is particularly pronounced
             in anime character generation, where intricate features such as ﬁngers, hair, and
             facial details are crucial for capturing the essence of the characters.
             In this paper, we introduce a novel, efﬁcient, sparse differentiable mesh repre-
             sentation method, termed SparseCubes, alongside a sparse transformer network
             designed to generate high-quality 3D models. Our method signiﬁcantly reduces
             computational requirements by over 95% and storage memory by 50%, enabling
             the creation of higher resolution meshes with enhanced details and delicate struc-
             tures. We validate the effectiveness of our approach through its application to
             text-to-3D anime character generation, demonstrating its capability to accurately
             render subtle details and thin structures (e.g.,individual ﬁngers) in both meshes
             and textures.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in 3D generation have primarily concentrated on transforming textual descrip-
tions into 3D models. Techniques such as DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2022) and subsequent method-
ologies employ score distillation sampling to iteratively reﬁne an implicit Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) representation, facilitating the creation of detailed 3D models. In
a similar vein, Tang et al. (2024b) introduce implicit 3D Gaussians for enhancing 3D model genera-
tion.
One-2-3-45++ (Liu et al., 2023a) and XCube(Ren et al., 2024) discretize 3D spaces into voxel grids
and uses diffusion to learn and optimize 3D meshes. Similarly, DMTet (Shen et al., 2021) and
Flexicubes (Shen et al., 2023) employ a grid-based method, but they advance it further by using
densely packed cubes within the grid. Unlike traditional voxels, these cubes incorporate controllable
geometric features such as Signed Distance Fields (SDFs) (Park et al., 2019), enabling DMTet and
Flexicubes to generate smoother and more accurate mesh surfaces.
Recently, large reconstruction models (Hong et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023a) have
been introduced for single or multi-view based 3D reconstruction and generation. These models
typically encode input images as tokens and train a powerful transformer architecture to reconstruct
the objects using implicit representations like NeRF (Triplanes) (Li et al., 2023a; Hong et al., 2023),
3D Gaussians (Tang et al., 2024a) or DMTet/Flexicube (Peng et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024).
However, a key limitation of these methods lies in their struggle to capture ﬁne details and intricate
structures. This is primarily due to the challenges associated with the differentiable representation
of the meshes. Character generation exempliﬁes this issue, particularly with elements such as hands,
hair, and facial features, which are critical for capturing a character’s essence (as shown in Fig. 1).
Unfortunately, compressing the 3D space into implicit representations, such as 2D Triplanes (Li
et al., 2023a) (Fig. 1a (a)), 3D Gaussian (Tang et al., 2024a) (Fig. 1b) often leads to a signiﬁcant
number of ﬂoating-point artifacts on the recovered 3D meshes. To mitigate this issue, existing
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (a) Instant3D              (b) LGM                (c) Our method         (d) Ground Truth

Figure 1: Visualization of the generation results with other methods. All algorithms used the same
set of multi-view images as input to generate the current avatar. (a) Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a)
produces blurred textures and overly smoothed meshes. (b) LGM (Tang et al., 2024a) provides
relatively clear rendered images but fails to provide detailed geometric structures. (c) Our method
can generate high-quality results, producing clear textures and detailed geometric structures even in
intricate areas such as the face and hands. (d) Ground truth.

methods often employ strong smoothing ﬁlters, which unfortunately remove crucial details in the
process.
Voxel-based methods (Schwarz et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2024) offer a way to represent 3D space but
often suffer from voxel effects on the ﬁnal mesh surfaces (Fig. 6). While increasing the resolution
can mitigate these artifacts, it comes at a signiﬁcant cost. Memory usage and computational require-
ments grow cubically, making high-resolution approaches impractical. Methods such as DMTet and
Flexicubes address this issue by incorporating Signed Distance Fields (SDFs) and geometric infor-
mation into each cube, enabling the extraction of high-quality meshes. However, this approach also
relies on a dense, high-resolution space, which leads to high memory and computational demands,
especially when aiming for very detailed reconstructions or generations.
We propose a novel approach to address the challenges of high-resolution 3D mesh generation: the
Differentiable SparseCubes representation. This representation enables the efﬁcient learning of de-
tailed 3D meshes and textures with signiﬁcantly lower memory and computational costs compared
to other methods. To leverage this new representation, we introduce a 3D Sparse Cube Transformer
architecture speciﬁcally designed for processing SparseCubes. The combination of these innova-
tions ensures superior preservation of geometric details, ultimately leading to the generation of high-
quality meshes.
The effectiveness of our SparseCubes representation and Sparse Cube Transformers is demonstrated
in the task of text-to-3D character generation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our method excels in pro-
ducing high-quality meshes and textures that feature exceptional details and intricate structures,
particularly in crucial areas such as faces and hands.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   3D R EPRESENTATION

Previous methods (Wu et al., 2016; Gadelha et al., 2017; Henzler et al., 2019; Lunz et al.,
2020; Smith & Meger, 2017) employ voxels to represent 3D objects. However, due to the high
memory footprint of voxel-based representations, alternative 3D representations such as point
clouds (Achlioptas et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021; Mo et al., 2019), occupancy
networks (Mescheder et al., 2019), Signed Distance Fields (SDFs) (Park et al., 2019), and octrees (Ib-
ing et al., 2023) have been explored. Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al.,
2020) have emerged as a groundbreaking implicit 3D representation, widely used in 3D reconstruc-
tion (Zhang et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2022; Barron et al., 2022; 2023; Hu et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023b) and generation (Poole et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2022). Instead of purely
using multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to implicitly represent the scene, TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022)


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and Strivec (Gao et al., 2023) utilize tensor grids. Additionally, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D GS) has
been proposed as an alternative 3D representation to NeRF, demonstrating impressive quality and
speed. Liao et al. (2018) apply the Marching Cubes (MC) algorithm to extract surface meshes from
implicit representations. DMTet (Shen et al., 2021) represents a shape using a Signed Distance Field
(SDF) encoded with a deformable tetrahedral grid and directly utilizes explicit supervision on the
surface, thus generating high-quality shapes with arbitrary topology. FlexiCubes (Shen et al., 2023)
utilize dense regular cubes to capture the geometry.

2.2   3D G ENERATION

Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) based Methods. As diffusion models have achieved remark-
able results in the text-to-image task, there is an emerging trend of employing pretrained 2D text-
to-image diffusion models to perform text-to-3D synthesis. Dreamfusion (Poole et al., 2022) intro-
duces a score distillation sampling (SDS) loss, which transfers pretrained 2D image-text diffusion
models to 3D object synthesis without any 3D data. Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) combines the hash
grid representation (Müller et al., 2022) with the image diffusion prior and reﬁnes the model in a
coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Zero-1-to-3 (Liu et al., 2023b) ﬁne-tunes a pretrained diffusion model to
learn controls over camera parameters and employs Score Jacobian Chaining (SJC) (Wang et al.,
2023a) to optimize a 3D representation with priors from text-to-image diffusion models. Dream-
Booth3D (Raj et al., 2023) ﬁrst ﬁne-tunes the DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) model and uses SDS
loss to optimize the NeRF, then renders multi-view results from the NeRF and translates them into
pseudo multi-view images. These images are used to ﬁne-tune both the DreamBooth model and the
NeRF. Make-it-3D (Tang et al., 2023) ﬁrst applies SDS loss to leverage 2D diffusion priors to gener-
ate a coarse model with plausible geometry, then reﬁnes the texture of the model using both visible
regions in the reference image and the diffusion prior. Realfusion (Melas-Kyriazi et al., 2023) uses
single-image textual inversion as a substitute for alternative views and normal vector regularization
to avoid low-level artifacts on surfaces. NeRDi (Deng et al., 2023) concatenates text embeddings
from an image caption network and Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), using the Pearson correla-
tion as a geometric regularization term. Fantasia3D (Chen et al., 2023) disentangles geometry and
appearance modeling and introduces the spatially-varying Bidirectional Reﬂectance Distribution
Function. ProliﬁcDreamer (Wang et al., 2023c) introduces Variational Score Distillation (VSD),
exhibiting better generation results than SDS. Magic123 (Qian et al., 2024) incorporates both 2D
and 3D priors into the 3D generation process and optimizes the model in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner.
DreamGaussian (Tang et al., 2024b) combines 3D Gaussian splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) and SDS
loss for efﬁcient 3D content generation.

Reconstruction based Methods. LRM (Hong et al., 2023) takes an image as input and adopts
a large transformer-based encoder-decoder architecture for learning 3D representations of objects.
PF-LRM (Wang et al., 2023b) employs a large transformer model to predict camera poses and re-
construct 3D objects from a few unposed images. DMV3D (Xu et al., 2023) uses LRM as the
multi-view denoiser, aiming to predict a clean Triplane representation from noisy multi-view im-
ages. Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a) ﬁrst generates four-view images simultaneously via a ﬁne-tuned
text-to-image diffusion model and then regresses a Triplane-based (Chan et al., 2022) NeRF from
these images using a transformer-based model. CRM (Wang et al., 2024) designs a Convolutional
Reconstruction Model and integrates geometric priors using six orthographic images. LGM (Tang
et al., 2024a) combines 3D Gaussian splatting with a proposed asymmetric U-Net to facilitate high-
resolution training. Our method utilizes a similar transformer network. While, we implement a more
efﬁcient SparseCubes representation and Sparse 3D transformer for high-quality 3D generation.


3     M ETHOD

To realize a text-to-3D pipeline, we ﬁrst convert the text into multi-view images. Due to the limited
amount of 3D character training data, we ﬁne-tune a text-to-image model based on P IX A RT-Σ (Chen
et al., 2024). We then train a multi-view diffusion model similar to ImageDream (Wang & Shi, 2023),
but with a higher resolution (512).
Our contribution lies in the proposed SparseCubes (Sec. 3.1) and Sparse Cube Transformer (Sec.
3.2) that can convert four image views into high-quality textured 3D character models. As illustrated


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in Fig. 2, the proposed method contains two parts: 1) a low-resolution coarse mesh proposal network
used to sparsify the cubes in the 3D space, and 2) a high-resolution Sparse Cube Transformer used
to further extract accurate meshes and textures.
Since learning and optimization in 3D spaces require cubic computations and memory costs, existing
methods like LRM, Instant3D, and InstantMesh et al.encode 2D features and optimize the Triplanes,
and then interpolate to achieve the 3D object. The compression of 3D information to 2D sometimes
leads to skew artifacts and over-smoothness of 3D meshes, as illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 5. We
instead utilize 3D transformers that can preserve the 3D geometric information and produce better
meshes.

3.1   S PARSE C UBES

Although current differentiable 3D representations, such as NeRF and Gaussian Splatting, can render
high-quality RGB images, extracting high-quality meshes from them remains challenging.
Schwarz et al. (2022) and Ren et al. (2024) use 3D voxels to extract meshes but result in only coarse
meshes with voxel effects on mesh surfaces (Fig. 6). Using high-resolution voxels can reduce these
artifacts, but the memory and computational costs grow cubically. Similarly, DMTet (Shen et al.,
2021) and FlexibleCube (Shen et al., 2023) can produce smooth meshes. However, limited by the
3D resolution, they cannot preserve details and delicate structures (e.g.,ﬁngers).
To achieve high-quality meshes, we speciﬁcally design a new differentiable 3D representation,
named SparseCubes. As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), we implement both geometric features and tex-
ture features into one cube. For the geometric feature, similar to FlexiCubes (Shen et al., 2023),
we use a 25-dimensional feature to represent the mesh. The ﬁrst dimension represents the SDF of
each vertex, while the second to fourth dimensions represent the deformation of each vertex. The
remaining 21 dimensions consist of three sets of weights deﬁned within each cube. These weights
are used to adjust the location of the crossing point along each edge, the dual vertex inside each face,
and the midpoint, respectively.
Different from other methods (Shen et al., 2021; 2023) that use a separate implicit representation to
interpolate RGB texture information in order to reduce memory and computational costs, we directly
implement a 30-dimensional feature vector into each cube to represent the texture information. This
means both geometry and texture can be optimized simultaneously.
We observe that the vast majority (> 95%) of cubes are empty, with only a small portion containing
mesh faces or vertices. Therefore, we do not use dense cubes but instead select a small subset (less
than 5%) to save memory and computational costs. The sparsiﬁcation process is shown in Fig. 2 (b).
We design a criterion to extract SparseCubes from these dense cubes. For a cube, if the SDF values
of all eight corners of a cube are either greater than 0 or less than 0, it indicates that the cube is
entirely outside or inside the mesh, respectively. To select cubes contain faces, we use the following
criterion:                                ∑
                                      T >      I(SDFi > 0) > 0,                                     (1)
                                           i∈ω
where ω represents the set of all corners of the cube. To compensate for the information loss due
to sampling, we select not only the cubes that meet the above criterion but also their neighboring
cubes.

3.2   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

As illustrated in Fig. 2, we follow the large reconstruction model to build our transformer network.
Our network comprises three components. The ﬁrst is the Coarse Proposal Network (CPN), which
takes images from four viewpoints and learnable cubes as input and predicts coarse cubes around the
3D avatar. The second component involves a sparsiﬁcation operation, which reduces the number of
invalid cubes, thereby signiﬁcantly enhancing computational efﬁciency. The last component is the
Sparse Cube Transformer (SCT), which decodes the cube features into the corresponding 3D avatar.

Coarse Proposal Network We use DINO (Caron et al., 2021) to encode the multi-view images
into pose-aware tokens (similar to Li et al. (2023a)). Unlike LRM (Hong et al., 2023) and In-
stant3D (Li et al., 2023a), we use 3D cubes instead of Triplanes to represent the scene. We ﬁrst


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Coarse
                                                                             Sparse
                      Proposal               Sparsification
                                                                          Transformer
     Learnable        Network
       cubes
                                    SDF       × 𝑁𝑁0
                                                      Transformer Block
                                  Geometry
                                                              Deconv
                   Sampling                   × 𝑁𝑁1
                                  Texture
                                                           Cross Attn
                                                           Local Attn
                                                              MLP
                                                                                        Self Attn
                    Propagation                               Deconv
                                              × 𝑁𝑁2
                                                           Local Attn
                                                              MLP
          a) Sparsification                       b) Sparse Transformer

Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed pipeline. Given the learnable cubes and multi-view images,
the coarse proposal network predicts the cubes that enclose the avatar. A sparsiﬁcation operation is
applied to reduce the number of invalid cubes. The Sparse Cube Transformer takes these valid cubes
as input and decodes the geometric structure and texture of the 3D avatar.


initialize cubes with a learnable 3D shape of 323 × 1024. Then, the cubes are reshaped into a
sequence of learnable tokens. The DINO image tokens are embedded into the 3D cubes through
cross-attention, followed by self-attention and MLP layers.
The number of tokens has a signiﬁcant impact on the generated meshes. High-resolution cubes
with more tokens can produce better meshes. In the coarse proposal network, we use cubes of
323 to reduce memory and computational costs. After sixteen 3D transformer blocks, we extract
the coarse meshes from the 3D cubes. To improve the extracted mesh resolutions, we use two
lightweight deconvolution layers (with a stride of 2) to upsample the cube representation before the
mesh extraction. Note that the lightweight upsampling block is used after the transformer and only
before the mesh extraction. This makes it memory and computationally efﬁcient.


Sparsiﬁcation As illustrated in Fig. 2, based on the SDF values of these cubes (Eq. 1), we trans-
form the dense cubes into sparse ones, preserving only valid cubes. To avoid inaccurate meshes and
missing parts in the coarse proposal meshes, We also propagate the valid voxels with its neighbor-
ing cubes. This propagation is repeated twice to select each neighborhood and its neighborhood’s
neighborhoods. In this way, a total of Mk cubes are selected, where Mk ≪ M and M is the total
number of cubes. In our experiments, M is set to 643 , and Mk is about 12K, accounting for less
than 5% of the total number of cubes.


Sparse Cube Transformer To generate a high-quality 3D avatar from the Mk valid cubes, we
design a Sparse Cube Transformer (SCT) (illustrated in Fig. 2). The Mk SparseCubes and the DINO
image tokens are fed into a transformer decoder to reﬁne the SparseCubes. The decoder contains
three kinds of transformer blocks. After the ﬁrst and the second transformer blocks, we implement
upsampling layers to improve the cube resolution to 2563 .
For the ﬁrst part, we implement sixteen transformer blocks similar to Instant3D(Li et al., 2023a).
Then, we implement the ﬁrst upsampling layer and employ eight transformer blocks to optimize
the cubes at a higher resolution of 1283 . In the cross-attention mechanism, the SparseCubes serve
as the query sequence, while the image tokens from DINO act as the key-value sequence. Instead
of the original self-attention, which is memory and computationally expensive, we implement self-
attention in a minimal 3D region (consisting of 23 consecutive cubes). Such a self-attention layer
can reduce the memory and computation costs by more than 1000 times. It can also help generate
ﬁne details and delicate structures in a local region after upsampling.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, we implement another upsampling and reﬁnement block (consisting of one deconvolu-
tion layer and four transformer blocks). This reﬁnement block is realized at a resolution of 2563 . The
number of tokens increases signiﬁcantly, even though we use SparseCubes. Therefore, we remove
the cross-attention layer from the transformer block and only implement the self-attention layer in a
minimal region of 43 . We observe that there is little loss in mesh and texture quality, but our method
achieves a 10 times acceleration with 100 times less memory usage.

3.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Training Loss     We optimize our model by minimizing the following loss function:

                 1 ∑
                     V                                      (           )
           L=          (Limage (Iˆi , Iigt ) + λlpips Llpips Iˆi , Iigt
                 V i=1                                                                                     (2)
             + λmask Lmask (M̂i , Migt ) + λdepth Ldepth (D̂i , Digt ) + λnormal Lnormal (N̂i , Nigt )),

where V is the number of image views, Iˆi , M̂i , D̂i and N̂i are the rendered image, mask, depth
map and normal of each viewpoint, respectively, and Iigt , Migt , Digt and N̂igt are their corresponding
ground truths. Limage , Ldepth and Lnormal are L2 loss and Lmask is an L1 loss. During the training of
the Coarse Proposal Network, we set λlpips and λmask to 2, and λdepth and λnormal to 1. For the training
of the Sparse Cube Transformer, we set λlpips and λnormal to 1, λmask to 8, and λdepth to 20.

Learning Strategies and Computational Resources The whole network can be trained in an end-
to-end manner. However, for faster training, we ﬁrst optimize the coarse proposal network using Eq.
2 for 121 hours with 32 A100 GPUs (30k iterations). The batch size is 5 and the learning rate is
4e-4 with a cosine decay. After that, we warm up the Sparse Cube Transformer with a learning
rate of 4e-4. We also use the upsampled output of the coarse proposal network as the learning
target and train the Sparse Cube Transformer with L2 loss for 14k iterations. Finally, we start to
optimize the Sparse Cube Transformer using the same loss as the coarse proposal network with a
smaller learning rate of 5e-5 and a batch size of 2. Learnable positional embeddings are used in
both stages. The shapes of the positional embeddings in the ﬁrst and second stage are 323 × 1024
and 643 × 1024, respectively. During the training phase, the positional embeddings for the second
stage are initialized by upsampling the positional embeddings used in the ﬁrst stage. After getting
the relative spatial positions of valid SparseCubes, we can select valid tokens from the learnable
positional embeddings as the input of the second stage. LRM (Hong et al., 2023) requires 9,000
A100 GPU hours for training, while our algorithm requires a total of 3,800 A100 GPU hours, less
than half of LRM’s requirement.

Datasets and Augmentations We use 20K anime characters to train our models. Limited by the
available amount of 3D data, we ﬁnd it difﬁcult to generate high-quality representations for some
uncommon characters (e.g., characters with wings). We observe that most of our character data is
centered within the cube, with only a small portion deviating from the center due to large tails or
wings. For this reason, position embeddings that are not centered within the cube did not receive
effective optimization, resulting in poor generation outcomes for characters with large tails or wings.
Therefore, we designed a data augmentation method to randomly displace character data in the front,
back, left, and right directions. This ensures that position embeddings not centered within the cube
also receive effective optimization, leading to signiﬁcantly improved results.

Multi-view Back Projection To further improve the texture accuracy of our generated mesh, we
employed a texture back-projection strategy similar to that in Peng et al. (2024). Since our generated
mesh is highly accurate and best matches the input multi-view images, there are very few conﬂicting
areas during the back-projection process.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct both qualitative and quantitative experiments to compare our method
with existing state-of-the-art 3D generation methods.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) Instant3d         (b) LGM             (c) InstantMesh            (d) Ours      (e) GT

Figure 3: Qualitative Comparisons on the LVIS subset of the Objaverse dataset (Deitke et al., 2023).
Each of the columns shows the results of a method (from left to right: Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a),
LGM (Tang et al., 2024a), InstantMesh (Xu et al., 2024), Ours and ground truth). Our method is
able to generate signiﬁcantly more detail for general 3D objects.

Table 1: Comparisons on ground truth single image to 3D. To ensure the fairness of the evaluation,
we ﬁne-tune all the methods used for evaluation on our dataset of 20K anime characters. The test
set includes data of 30 randomly selected anime characters. We calculate PSNR and SSIM on eight
full-body images and four headshot images from different perspectives. ∗ For DreamGaussian and
InstantMesh, we use the provided pre-trained model without ﬁne-tuning.

                        Method                     PSNR (%)↑ SSIM↑ CD (10−5 ) (%)↓ Time (s) ↓
          DreamGaussian (Tang et al., 2024b)∗         15.87       0.8263        184.96   180
             InstantMesh (Xu et al., 2024)∗           14.76       0.8460        492.48    9
               Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a)          23.19        0.9106         19.42   15
        Instant3D with DMTet (Peng et al., 2024)     20.40        0.8915         48.26   10
                LGM (Tang et al., 2024a)             24.05        0.9213         28.49   52
                          Ours                       24.99        0.9283         5.90    20



4.1   C OMPARISONS WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ARTS

We compare our method against recent techniques capable of generating 3D meshes from a single
image. The comparison results are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. All input images are produced
using the ﬁne-tuned P IX A RT-Σ (Chen et al., 2024). For each generated mesh, we visualize both the
entire body (upper) and speciﬁc body parts (lower). The face and hand regions are rendered using
Blender (Community, 2018) to allow for detailed visual comparisons. Our method produces 3D
meshes with superior visual effects and high-quality details. The meshes we generate exhibit vivid
and lifelike facial features, while those generated by other methods often appear blurry. Additionally,
our meshes feature distinct and well-separated ﬁngers, whereas meshes generated by other methods
frequently show merged hands.
We train Instant3D and LGM on our training set under the same settings and then compare our
method with them. We also compare our method with DreamGaussian (Tang et al., 2024b) and
InstantMesh (Xu et al., 2024) by using the provided pre-trained models.


Comparisons on the anime avatar dataset Tab. 1 presents the comparison results. To ensure a
fair comparison we do not use the texture back-projection strategy for any of the algorithms when
calculating these metrics. Our algorithm achieved the best PSNR and SSIM, indicating that the
generated results of our method have the highest visual quality. In addition, our method signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms other approaches in terms of Chamfer Distance (CD) loss. Compared with the
second-best method, Instant3D, our method reduces Chamfer Distance error by about 70%, indicat-
ing that our approach produces much higher mesh quality and better details. As shown in Tab. 1,
our algorithm is also very fast in terms of generation speed. We also compare our method with an
SMPL-based approach, TeCH (Huang et al., 2024). The result is shown on Fig. 9 of the Appendix.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 an girl with blonde hair,
 blue eyes and pointed
ears. She is dressed in a
  white and silver outfit


a young girl with pink hair,
  green eyes and a blue
and white school uniform.
She has pink batlike wings
 extending from her back


 a girl with blonde hair,
 blue eyes and a light
   complexion.She is
  dressed in a pastel
      colored outfit


                                (a) DreamGaussian        (b) Instant3D           (C) LGM             (d) Ours

Figure 4: Qualitative Comparisons. First column: We use the text prompts to generate the input
image. Each of the remaining columns shows the results of a method (from left to right: Dream-
Gaussian (Tang et al., 2024b), Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a), LGM (Tang et al., 2024a), and Ours). To
compare the quality of details and delicate structures, we also show zoomed-in views of the hand
and face regions.

Table 2: Comparisons with other methods on the LVIS subset of the Objaverse dataset (Deitke et al.,
2023). The test set includes data from 30 randomly selected objects.

                                            Method                     PSNR (%)↑ SSIM↑ CD (10−5 ) (%)↓
                                  InstantMesh (Xu et al., 2024)          23.67   0.9129      71.32
                                   Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a)          23.16   0.9097      81.09
                            Instant3D with DMTet (Peng et al., 2024)     22.00   0.9063     230.64
                                    LGM (Tang et al., 2024a)             24.70   0.9389     116.14
                                              Ours                       26.78   0.9452     36.86


Comparisons on the realistic human dataset We test our method on the RenderPeople
dataset (ren, 2018) to demonstrate that it can generate high-quality, realistic-style characters. The
experimental results in the Tab. 5 of the Appendix demonstrate the effects of our method. Our Sparse
Transformers achieve the best PSNR for evaluating the rendering qualities and the best CD loss for
evaluating the mesh qualities.


Comparisons on the LVIS subset of the Objaverse dataset Since most algorithms (Tang et al.,
2024b; Xu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Tang et al., 2024a), are designed for the general 3D object
generation task, in order to ensure a fair comparison with these methods, we train our method on
the LVIS subset of the Objaverse dataset(Deitke et al., 2023). Tab. 2 shows the quantitative results.
Our method outperforms other methods across all metrics, demonstrating its ability to generate high-


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) DreamGaussian         (b) Instant3D              (C) LGM                 (d) Ours

Figure 5: Mesh Qualitative Comparisons. Characters are from Fig. 4. Additional results are provided
in the Appendix. Our method far outperforms state-of-the-art methods in mesh quality.

Table 3: Comparisons between SparseCubes and Dense Cubes representations. We report the speed
and memory usage during the training phase with a batch size of 1.
     Type Resolution PSNR↑ SSIM↑ CD(10−5 )↓ MEM(GB) Time per iter (s) Number of faces (K)
     Dense      64     21.34 0.8987      19.88        16           40                20
     Dense     128       -      -          -          24           340               50
     Dense     256       -      -          -          80          2850              170
     Sparse     64     21.08 0.8970      13.87        8             1                20
     Sparse    256     24.99 0.9283      5.90         37            5               170



quality 3D objects. The generated results of our method have the highest visual quality, as shown in
Fig. 3 and Fig. 8.


SparseCubes versus Implicit Representation Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a) and LGM (Tang et al.,
2024a) encode the 3D space into an implicit NeRF (TriPlanes) or 3D Gaussian and utilize trans-
formers to learn the meshes and textures. As shown in Tab. 1, Fig. 4, and Fig. 12, methods with
implicit representations use strong smoothness to remove ﬂoating artifacts; as a result, ﬁne details
and delicate structures are missing in the predicted results. Our SparseCubes use 3D representation
and 3D transformers in learning, which can better preserve geometric features and generate high-
quality meshes with exceptional detail and intricate structures, particularly in crucial areas such as
faces and hands.


SparseCubes versus DMTet/FlexiCubes DMTet and FlexiCubes use dense cubes as 3D mesh
representations. Instant3D with DMTet and InstantMesh with FlexiCubes use dense 3D cubes that
require much more memory and computational costs than our SparseCubes. As shown in Tab. 1,
they can only run with a low-resolution (1283 ) cube representation. The generated results do not
have a large Chamfer Distance error. Additionally, we observe that InstantMesh and Instant3D with
DMTet generate many holes in light-colored regions (as shown in Fig. 7 of the Appendix).


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Analysis of data augmentation. For faster training and evaluation, we use the model with a
resolution of 64.

                   Random displacement       PSNR ↑      SSIM ↑     CD (10−5 ) ↓
                                              19.81      0.8856         53.8
                              ✓               22.11      0.8997         46.1

SparseCubes verse Voxels Voxel-based methods that discretize 3D space as 0 and 1 (Ren et al.,
2024; Schwarz et al., 2022) tend to generate meshes with voxel effects (as illustrated in Fig. 6). Our
SparseCubes can produce smooth mesh surfaces with intricate structures.

4.2   A BLATION S TUDY

SparseCubes versus Dense Cubes Tab. 3 presents the comparison results between using Spar-
seCubes and Dense Cubes representations. We use the same number of transformer blocks and
compute the memory usage and speed with a batch size of one.
At the same resolution of 64, the PSNR and SSIM of the sparse model are comparable to those of
the dense model, indicating that the degradation in visual quality introduced by our sparsiﬁcation
operation is negligible. Meanwhile, the Chamfer Distance of the sparse model is much better than
that of the dense model, demonstrating that the proposed sparsiﬁcation enables the model to focus
more on the valid positions, thus resulting in more accurate geometry. In addition, the sparse model
run 40 times faster than the dense one. When increasing the resolution to 256, our sparse model
achieves far better accuracy in both textures and meshes.
Employing Dense Cubes with a resolution of 256 signiﬁcantly increases GPU memory consumption
(by 2 times) and training time (by more than 100 times), thereby hindering the acquisition of timely
training outcomes. Training with a resolution of 128 is also difﬁcult as it consumes 64 times more
computational resources than our Sparse Cube Transformer.
Note that, the FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022) in the xFormers (Lefaudeux et al., 2022) reduce the
memory costs in training transformers at the expense of increased runtime. The actual memory costs
of the dense models (for both resolutions of 128 and 64) are much higher than those of our Sparse
Cube transformers.

Random Displacement We conduct further analysis to assess the impact of random displacement
on the performance of our algorithm. Experiments are performed using a model with a resolution
of 64. The results in Tab. 4 indicate that our data augmentation method signiﬁcantly improves the
quality of the generated results.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we introduced SparseCubes, a novel and efﬁcient sparse differentiable mesh represen-
tation method, along with a sparse transformer network for generating high-quality 3D characters.
Our approach addresses the limitations of current state-of-the-art 3D generation methods, which
struggle to capture ﬁne details and delicate structures crucial for applications such as anime avatar
generation. Through extensive testing and validation, we demonstrated that SparseCubes signiﬁ-
cantly reduce computational requirements and achieves high-quality and highly detailed 3D mesh
generation.

Limitations and Future work Limited by the amount of available 3D data and the diversity of text
descriptions, the ﬁne-tuned text-to-image model currently doesn’t always perfectly match the textual
descriptions. We believe this can be improved by ﬁne-tuning more powerful diffusion transformer
models (Li et al., 2024). Additionally, providing more diverse and longer text prompts can also
boost the alignment. As for future work, we will explore ways to further increase the resolution of
the SparseCubes (e.g.,1k 3 with millions of mesh faces) to achieve hyperﬁne structures in 3D meshes.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work shares similar concerns with other generative modeling efforts, particularly regarding the
potential for misuse in creating misleading content. Additionally, biases present in the training
datasets can be reﬂected in the generated outputs. As with any powerful creative tool, there is a
risk of misuse. Generated characters could be used inappropriately or to create harmful content. It
is essential to develop and enforce ethical guidelines and content moderation strategies to mitigate
such risks.

R EFERENCES
Renderpeople. In https://renderpeople.com/3d-people, 2018.
Panos Achlioptas, Olga Diamanti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Leonidas Guibas. Learning representa-
  tions and generative models for 3d point clouds. In ICML, 2018.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance ﬁelds. In CVPR, 2022.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Zip-nerf:
  Anti-aliased grid-based neural radiance ﬁelds. In ICCV, 2023.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV, 2021.
Eric R Chan, Connor Z Lin, Matthew A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio
  Gallo, Leonidas J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, et al. Efﬁcient geometry-aware 3d
  generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance ﬁelds.
  In ECCV, 2022.
Junsong Chen, Chongjian Ge, Enze Xie, Yue Wu, Lewei Yao, Xiaozhe Ren, Zhongdao Wang, Ping
  Luo, Huchuan Lu, and Zhenguo Li. Pixart-\sigma: Weak-to-strong training of diffusion trans-
  former for 4k text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint, 2024.
Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fantasia3d: Disentangling geometry and
  appearance for high-quality text-to-3d content creation. In ICCV, 2023.
Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Blender Foundation,
  Stichting Blender Foundation, Amsterdam, 2018. URL http://www.blender.org.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and
  memory-efﬁcient exact attention with IO-awareness. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
 Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of anno-
 tated 3d objects. CVPR, 2023.
Congyue Deng, Chiyu Jiang, Charles R Qi, Xinchen Yan, Yin Zhou, Leonidas Guibas, Dragomir
  Anguelov, et al. Nerdi: Single-view nerf synthesis with language-guided diffusion as general
  image priors. In CVPR, 2023.
Matheus Gadelha, Subhransu Maji, and Rui Wang. 3d shape induction from 2d views of multiple
 objects. In 3DV, 2017.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Quankai Gao, Qiangeng Xu, Hao Su, Ulrich Neumann, and Zexiang Xu. Strivec: Sparse tri-vector
  radiance ﬁelds. In ICCV, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Philipp Henzler, Niloy J Mitra, and Tobias Ritschel. Escaping plato’s cave: 3d shape from adversar-
  ial rendering. In ICCV, 2019.
Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli,
  Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3d. arXiv preprint,
  2023.
Wenbo Hu, Yuling Wang, Lin Ma, Bangbang Yang, Lin Gao, Xiao Liu, and Yuewen Ma. Tri-miprf:
 Tri-mip representation for efﬁcient anti-aliasing neural radiance ﬁelds. In ICCV, 2023.
Yangyi Huang, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Tingting Liao, Jiaxiang Tang, Deng Cai, and Justus Thies.
  TeCH: Text-guided Reconstruction of Lifelike Clothed Humans. In 3DV, 2024.
Moritz Ibing, Gregor Kobsik, and Leif Kobbelt. Octree transformer: Autoregressive 3d shape gen-
 eration on hierarchically structured sequences. In CVPR, 2023.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splat-
  ting for real-time radiance ﬁeld rendering. ToG, 2023.
Benjamin Lefaudeux, Francisco Massa, Diana Liskovich, Wenhan Xiong, Vittorio Caggiano,
  Sean Naren, Min Xu, Jieru Hu, Marta Tintore, Susan Zhang, Patrick Labatut, Daniel Haziza,
  Luca Wehrstedt, Jeremy Reizenstein, and Grigory Sizov. xformers: A modular and hackable
  transformer modelling library. https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers,
  2022.
Jiahao Li, Hao Tan, Kai Zhang, Zexiang Xu, Fujun Luan, Yinghao Xu, Yicong Hong, Kalyan
   Sunkavalli, Greg Shakhnarovich, and Sai Bi. Instant3d: Fast text-to-3d with sparse-view gen-
   eration and large reconstruction model. arXiv preprint, 2023a.
Zhaoshuo Li, Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Russell H Taylor, Mathias Unberath, Ming-Yu Liu, and
  Chen-Hsuan Lin. Neuralangelo: High-ﬁdelity neural surface reconstruction. In CVPR, 2023b.
Zhimin Li, Jianwei Zhang, Qin Lin, Jiangfeng Xiong, Yanxin Long, Xinchi Deng, Yingfang Zhang,
  Xingchao Liu, Minbin Huang, Zedong Xiao, Dayou Chen, Jiajun He, Jiahao Li, Wenyue Li, Chen
  Zhang, Rongwei Quan, Jianxiang Lu, Jiabin Huang, Xiaoyan Yuan, Xiaoxiao Zheng, Yixuan Li,
  Jihong Zhang, Chao Zhang, Meng Chen, Jie Liu, Zheng Fang, Weiyan Wang, Jinbao Xue, Yangyu
  Tao, Jianchen Zhu, Kai Liu, Sihuan Lin, Yifu Sun, Yun Li, Dongdong Wang, Mingtao Chen,
  Zhichao Hu, Xiao Xiao, Yan Chen, Yuhong Liu, Wei Liu, Di Wang, Yong Yang, Jie Jiang, and
  Qinglin Lu. Hunyuan-dit: A powerful multi-resolution diffusion transformer with ﬁne-grained
  chinese understanding, 2024.
Yiyi Liao, Simon Donne, and Andreas Geiger. Deep marching cubes: Learning explicit surface
  representations. In CVPR, 2018.
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten
  Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content
  creation. In CVPR, 2023.
Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Linghao Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Hansheng Chen,
 Chong Zeng, Jiayuan Gu, and Hao Su. One-2-3-45++: Fast single image to 3d objects with
 consistent multi-view generation and 3d diffusion. arXiv preprint, 2023a.
Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
  Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In CVPR, 2023b.
Sebastian Lunz, Yingzhen Li, Andrew Fitzgibbon, and Nate Kushman. Inverse graphics gan: Learn-
  ing to generate 3d shapes from unstructured 2d data. arXiv preprint, 2020.
Luke Melas-Kyriazi, Iro Laina, Christian Rupprecht, and Andrea Vedaldi. Realfusion: 360deg
  reconstruction of any object from a single image. In CVPR, 2023.
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In CVPR, 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance ﬁelds for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
Kaichun Mo, Paul Guerrero, Li Yi, Hao Su, Peter Wonka, Niloy Mitra, and Leonidas Guibas. Struc-
  turenet: Hierarchical graph networks for 3d shape generation. Siggraph Asia, 2019.
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics prim-
  itives with a multiresolution hash encoding. TOG, 2022.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In CVPR, 2019.
Hao-Yang Peng, Jia-Peng Zhang, Meng-Hao Guo, Yan-Pei Cao, and Shi-Min Hu. Charactergen:
  Efﬁcient 3d character generation from single images with multi-view pose canonicalization. arXiv
  preprint, 2024.
Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d
  diffusion. arXiv preprint, 2022.
Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-Ying
  Lee, Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, and Bernard Ghanem. Magic123: One
  image to high-quality 3d object generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors. In ICLR, 2024.
Amit Raj, Srinivas Kaza, Ben Poole, Michael Niemeyer, Nataniel Ruiz, Ben Mildenhall, Shiran
 Zada, Kﬁr Aberman, Michael Rubinstein, Jonathan Barron, Yuanzhen Li, and Varun Jampani.
 Dreambooth3d: Subject-driven text-to-3d generation. In ICCV, 2023.
Xuanchi Ren, Jiahui Huang, Xiaohui Zeng, Ken Museth, Sanja Fidler, and Francis Williams. Xcube:
  Large-scale 3d generative modeling using sparse voxel hierarchies. In CVPR, 2024.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kﬁr Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In CVPR,
  2023.
Katja Schwarz, Axel Sauer, Michael Niemeyer, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. Voxgraf: Fast 3d-
  aware image synthesis with sparse voxel grids. 2022.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra:
  a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Tianchang Shen, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Kangxue Yin, Zian Wang, Wenzheng Chen, Zan
  Gojcic, Sanja Fidler, Nicholas Sharp, and Jun Gao. Flexible isosurface extraction for gradient-
  based mesh optimization. TOG, 2023.
Edward J Smith and David Meger. Improved adversarial systems for 3d object generation and
  reconstruction. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2017.
Jiaxiang Tang, Zhaoxi Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Tengfei Wang, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. Lgm:
   Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation. arXiv preprint, 2024a.
Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative
   gaussian splatting for efﬁcient 3d content creation. ICLR, 2024b.
Junshu Tang, Tengfei Wang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Ran Yi, Lizhuang Ma, and Dong Chen. Make-
  it-3d: High-ﬁdelity 3d creation from a single image with diffusion prior. In ICCV, 2023.
Haochen Wang, Xiaodan Du, Jiahao Li, Raymond A Yeh, and Greg Shakhnarovich. Score jacobian
  chaining: Lifting pretrained 2d diffusion models for 3d generation. In CVPR, 2023a.
Peng Wang and Yichun Shi. Imagedream: Image-prompt multi-view diffusion for 3d generation.
  arXiv preprint, 2023.
Peng Wang, Hao Tan, Sai Bi, Yinghao Xu, Fujun Luan, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Wenping Wang, Zexi-
  ang Xu, and Kai Zhang. Pf-lrm: Pose-free large reconstruction model for joint pose and shape
  prediction. In ICLR, 2023b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengyi Wang, Cheng Lu, Yikai Wang, Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Proliﬁc-
  dreamer: High-ﬁdelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation. In
  NeurIPS, 2023c.
Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Yifei Chen, Chendong Xiang, Shuo Chen, Dajiang Yu, Chongxuan Li,
  Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Crm: Single image to 3d textured mesh with convolutional reconstruction
  model. arXiv preprint, 2024.
Jiajun Wu, Chengkai Zhang, Tianfan Xue, Bill Freeman, and Josh Tenenbaum. Learning a proba-
   bilistic latent space of object shapes via 3d generative-adversarial modeling. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Jiale Xu, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Xintao Wang, Shenghua Gao, and Ying Shan. Instantmesh:
   Efﬁcient 3d mesh generation from a single image with sparse-view large reconstruction models.
   arXiv preprint, 2024.
Yinghao Xu, Hao Tan, Fujun Luan, Sai Bi, Peng Wang, Jiahao Li, Zifan Shi, Kalyan Sunkavalli,
  Gordon Wetzstein, Zexiang Xu, et al. Dmv3d: Denoising multi-view diffusion using 3d large
  reconstruction model. arXiv preprint, 2023.
Guandao Yang, Xun Huang, Zekun Hao, Ming-Yu Liu, Serge Belongie, and Bharath Hariharan.
  Pointﬂow: 3d point cloud generation with continuous normalizing ﬂows. In ICCV, 2019.
Kai Zhang, Gernot Riegler, Noah Snavely, and Vladlen Koltun. Nerf++: Analyzing and improving
  neural radiance ﬁelds. arXiv preprint, 2020.
Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-voxel
  diffusion. In ICCV, 2021.


A    A PPENDIX / SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Ablation study on other parameters Since training large-scale transformer models costs signif-
icant GPU resources, ablation on all kinds of parameter settings (e.g.,the balance weights of the
loss function and the learning rate) is impossible. For the remaining parameters, we adjust them
only in a ﬁne-tuning manner. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁne-tune the model with different parameter settings
(e.g.,balance weights) for just 1000 iterations (about 6 hours) to discover the best settings by observ-
ing its convergence speed and CD loss of the meshes.


                      (a) Voxels in 2563                   (b) Our SparseCubes in 2563

Figure 6: Comparison of mesh results between our SparseCubes (at a resolution of 2563 ) and voxels.
(a) There are clear voxel effects in the mesh produced by voxelization. (b) Our SparseCubes can
produce high-quality meshes at the same resolution.


More results


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) Instant3D with DMTet            (b) InstantMesh                      (c) Ours



Figure 7: Illustration of holes in light-colored regions using Instant3D with DMTet and InstantMesh
(without ﬁne-tuning)


     (a) Instant3d          (b) LGM        (c) InstantMesh            (d) Ours              (e) GT

Figure 8: Results of normal on the LVIS subset of the Objaverse dataset (Deitke et al., 2023). Each
of the columns shows the results of a method (from left to right: Instant3D (Li et al., 2023a),
LGM (Tang et al., 2024a), InstantMesh (Xu et al., 2024), Ours and ground truth). Our method
is able to generate signiﬁcantly more detail for general 3D objects.


                     Table 5: Comparison on RenderPeople ren (2018) dataset.

                             Method                          PSNR (%)↑      CD (10−5 ) (%)↓
                   Instant3D Li et al. (2023a)                18.79              15.00
            Instant3D with DMTet Peng et al. (2024)           18.32              34.81
                    LGM Tang et al. (2024a)                   20.02              11.78
                             Ours                             25.93              9.60

                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Tech


 ImageDream


      Ours


Figure 9: Compairsons with the shapes of Tech (Huang et al., 2024) and ImageDream (Wang & Shi,
2023). The TeCH method (Huang et al., 2024) heavily depends on the SMPL model. However, the
3D character data includes diverse hairstyles and outﬁts that the SMPL model cannot adequately
represent. Consequently, the characters generated by TeCH exhibit signiﬁcantly poor quality.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Comparisons with CharacterGen (Peng et al., 2024). We have conducted a comparison
between CharacterGen and our method, as shown in Tab. 1. Speciﬁcally, we implemented Instant3D
with DMTet, the approach adopted by CharacterGen. Here we utilize the weights released by Char-
acterGen for further evaluation. The results clearly demonstrate that our method signiﬁcantly out-
performs CharacterGen, producing meshes with ﬁner details and textures that are noticeably sharper
and more realistic.


Figure 11: Comparisons between the coarse proposal network and the sparse transformer. We com-
pared the quality of the ﬁnger meshes generated by the coarse proposal network and the sparse
transformer. It is evident that the sparse transformer signiﬁcantly improves the quality of the ﬁngers
in the generated meshes.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Wonder3D


 OpenLRM


  Ours


            Figure 12: Visual Qualitative Comparisons. Extra comparisons of Fig. 4


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Figure 13: More results


     (a) DreamGaussian       (b) Instant3D           (C) LGM              (d) Ours



                         Figure 14: Additional mesh results from Fig. 5


                                               19
