Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


SEMDICE: O FF - POLICY S TATE E NTROPY M AXI -
MIZATION VIA S TATIONARY D ISTRIBUTION C ORREC -
TION E STIMATION

    Jongmin Lee∗ ,1,2 Meiqi Sun∗,1 Pieter Abbeel1
    1
      UC Berkeley 2 Yonsei University



                                               A BSTRACT

             In the unsupervised pre-training for reinforcement learning, the agent aims to learn
             a prior policy for downstream tasks without relying on task-specific reward func-
             tions. We focus on state entropy maximization (SEM), where the goal is to learn
             a policy that maximizes the entropy of the state’s stationary distribution. In this
             paper, we introduce SEMDICE, a principled off-policy algorithm that computes
             an SEM policy from an arbitrary off-policy dataset, which optimizes the policy di-
             rectly within the space of stationary distributions. SEMDICE computes a single,
             stationary Markov state-entropy-maximizing policy from an arbitrary off-policy
             dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that SEMDICE outperforms baseline
             algorithms in maximizing state entropy while achieving the best adaptation ef-
             ficiency for downstream tasks among SEM-based unsupervised RL pre-training
             methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The essence of intelligent agents lies in their ability to learn from experiences. Reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) provides a framework for autonomously acquiring an intelligent
behavior by interacting with the environment while receiving reward signals, and it has shown great
promise in various domains such as complex games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017) and
robotic control (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Still, standard RL algorithms learn
tabula rasa, i.e. learning from scratch for every task to maximize extrinsic rewards without using
previously learned knowledge. Consequently, the learned RL policy tends to be brittle and lacks
generalization capabilities, limiting its widespread adoption to many real-world sequential decision-
making problems (Cobbe et al., 2020; Gleave et al., 2020).
In contrast, in the fields of computer vision (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) and natural language
processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), large-scale unsupervised pre-training has paved
the way for sample-efficient few-shot adaptation. During unsupervised pre-training, the models are
trained using a large unlabelled dataset, and then the pre-trained models are fine-tuned later for
each specific downstream task with a handful of task-specific labeled datasets. We consider the
analogy setting of the unsupervised pre-training for RL (Laskin et al., 2021). Specifically, during
unsupervised RL pre-training, the agent is allowed to train over long periods without access to the
extrinsic rewards of the environment. This procedure yields a pre-trained policy snapshot, aiming
for data-efficient adaptation in subsequent downstream tasks defined by reward functions that were
inaccessible a priori.
We consider the State-Entropy Maximization (SEM) approach for RL policy pre-training (Hazan
et al., 2019; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021), as it is simple yet provides robust pol-
icy initialization for efficient adaptation against the worst-case reward function (Eysenbach et al.,
2022). However, despite its conceptual simplicity and widespread popularity, a principled approach
to sample-efficient off-policy SEM methods remains unexplored. Existing methods are either on-
policy (thus sample-inefficient) (Hazan et al., 2019), or off-policy but biased (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b;
Yarats et al., 2021). They construct the intrinsic reward function based on the particle-based entropy
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


estimator (Singh et al., 2003), and then optimize the policy in the direction of maximizing the con-
structed intrinsic rewards. For off-policy learning algorithms, state particles from the replay buffer
are naively used to estimate state entropy (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021), resulting in
estimates of the entropy of the state data stored in the replay buffer, rather than the state entropy of
the target policy’s state stationary distribution. Consequently, it remains unclear whether these off-
policy methods can converge to an optimal SEM policy. One can consider importance sampling to
correct the off-policyness (Mutti et al., 2021), but it would suffer from high variance issue due to the
curse of horizon (Liu et al., 2018), significantly limiting the degree of sample reuse. Consequently,
none of the existing methods serves as an unbiased, sample-efficient SEM method.
In this paper, we present a state-entropy maximization method that precisely addresses the afore-
mentioned issues of the existing methods. Our method, State-Entropy-Maximization via stationary
DIstribution Correction Estimation (SEMDICE), essentially optimizes in the space of stationary
distributions, rather than in the space of policies or Q-functions, and it leverages arbitrary off-policy
samples. We show that SEMDICE only requires solving a single convex minimization problem, and
thus it can be optimized stably. To the best of our knowledge, SEMDICE is the first principled and
practical algorithm that computes a SEM policy from arbitrary off-policy dataset. In the exper-
iments, we demonstrate that SEMDICE converges to an optimal SEM policy in the tabular MDP
experiments. Also, regarding RL policy pre-training, SEMDICE adapts to downstream tasks more
efficiently than eixsting data-based (i.e., SEM-based) unsupervised RL methods (Liu & Abbeel,
2021b; Yarats et al., 2021).

2       P RELIMINARIES
2.1     M ARKOV D ECISION P ROCESS (MDP)

We assume the environment modeled as an infinite-horizon1 Markov Decision Process (MDP) M =
⟨S, A, T, r, γ, p0 ⟩, where S is the set of states s, A is the set of actions a, T : S × A → ∆(S) is the
transition probability, r : S → R is the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor, p0 ∈ ∆(S)
is the initial state distribution. The policy π : S → ∆(A) is a mapping from state distribution
over actions2 . For a given policy, its state stationary distribution d¯π (s) and state-action stationary
distribution dπ (s, a) are defined as follows:
                                                 ∞
                                   
                                                    γ t Pr(st = s) if γ < 1,
                                                P
                                   (1 − γ)
                                   
                                   
                          ¯π
                         d (s) :=              t=0
                                                                                                      (1)
                                                    T
                                               1
                                                   P
                                    lim T +1           Pr(st = s) if γ = 1,
                                   
                                   
                                      T →∞         t=0
                                                 ∞
                                   
                                                    γ t Pr(st = s, at = a) if γ < 1,
                                                P
                                   (1 − γ)
                                   
                                   
                        π                      t=0
                       d (s, a) :=                  T                                                 (2)
                                               1
                                                   P
                                    lim T +1           Pr(st = s, at = a) if γ = 1,
                                   
                                   
                                      T →∞        t=0

where s0 ∼ p0 , at ∼ π(s), and st+1 ∼ T (st , at ) for each timestep t ≥ 0. dπ and d¯π can be un-
derstood as normalized (discounted) occupancy measures of (s, a) and s respectively. For brevity,
we focus on discounted MDPs (γ < 1) in the main text, but our formulation can be easily general-
ized to undiscounted (γ = 1) settings (see Appendix L). We will use the bar notation (¯·) to denote
the distributions for state s, e.g., d¯π (s). The goal of standard RL is to learn a policy
                                                                                    P∞ that maxi-
mizes the expected rewards by interacting with the environment: maxπ (1 − γ)Eπ [ t=0 γ t r(st )] =
Es∼d¯π [r(s)] = ⟨d¯π , r⟩.

2.2     U NSUPERVISED RL VIA S TATE E NTROPY M AXIMIZATION (SEM)

In the unsupervised pre-training of RL (Laskin et al., 2021), the agent is trained by interacting with
a reward-free MDP ⟨S, A, T, γ, p0 ⟩ over long periods, where the goal is to learn a policy that can
    1
      We consider infinite-horizon MDPs in the paper for simplicity, but our formulation can be extended to
finite-horizon MDPs (Appendix M).
    2
      We call π Makovian policy if π depends only on the last state and call it stationary policy if π does not
depend on timestep.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


quickly adapt to downstream tasks defined by reward functions that are unknown a priori. In this
work, we are particularly interested in the approach of maximizing the entropy of state stationary
distribution (Jain et al., 2023; Mutti et al., 2021; 2022; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021) as
an objective for unsupervised pre-training RL:
                                                           X
                            π ∗ := arg max H[d¯π (s)] = −      d¯π (s) log d¯π (s)                  (3)
                                    π
                                                           s

In other words, we aim to pre-train a policy whose state visitations cover the entire state space
equally well. Intuitively, having such an SEM policy would allow agents to efficiently receive reward
signals even for arbitrarily sparse reward functions, facilitating fast adaptation for downstream tasks.
More discussions on why learning an SEM policy can be useful for RL pre-training can be found in
Appendix A.

2.3   E XISTING SEM M ETHODS FOR RL P RE - TRAINING

Existing methods for SEM (Lee et al., 2020; Mutti et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats
et al., 2021) commonly follow the following procedures: (1) construct intrinsic reward functions
r̂(s) ≈ − log d¯π (s),
                      e.g., by    particle-based state-entropy estimation: r̂(si ) ≈ − log d¯π (si ) ≈
             k-NN             k-NN
log ∥si − si ∥2 where si           denotes k-nearest neighbor of si , and (2) update the policy param-
eters via policy gradients in the direction of maximizing r̂. However, this procedure, in principle,
requires on-policy state particles {si }N i=1 when estimating the state entropy of the current policy
d¯π (s), implying that the past experiences cannot be reused naively. Still, for off-policy learning to
improve sample-efficiency, existing methods for SEM pre-training (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats
et al., 2021) naively use (off-policy) state particles in the replay buffer for entropy estimation to
construct reward functions, combined with an off-policy RL algorithm. This may not be guaran-
teed to converge to an SEM policy as they estimate the replay buffer’s state entropy, rather than the
entropy of the target policy’s state stationary distribution. Importance sampling can be adopted for
off-policy corrections (Mutti et al., 2021) of policy gradients, but it suffers from high variance issue
with the curse of horizon (Liu et al., 2018). Consequently, existing methods for SEM pre-training
are either biased (off-policy) or sample-inefficient (on-policy). The key challenge in devising a
sample-efficient SEM algorithm lies in estimating the entropy of the target policy’s stationary state
distribution using an arbitrary off-policy dataset.


3     SEMDICE

In this section, we derive our SEM method, State-Entropy-Maximization via stationary DIstribution
Correction Estimation (SEMDICE), which computes an SEM policy from arbitrary off-policy
dataset. Our derivation starts by formulating the regularized SEM problem via concave program-
ming that directly optimizes stationary distributions, rather than optimizing policy. All the proofs
can be found in Appendix C.

3.1   C ONCAVE PROGRAMMING FOR SEM

Some careful readers may wonder which policy set should be considered to obtain an optimal SEM
policy, as it may not be immediately evident that searching for an optimal SEM policy within sta-
tionary Markov policies (instead of richer non-Markovian policies) is sufficient. Fortunately, the
following proposition addresses this concern.
Proposition 3.1. (Hazan et al., 2019) There always exists a stationary Markovian policy that max-
imizes the entropy of state stationary distribution (i.e., solution of (3)). Such an optimal stationary
Markovian policy is generally stochastic.

By Proposition 3.1, it is sufficient to consider the stationary distribution induced by stationary
Markovian policies to obtain an optimal SEM policy. We then begin our derivation with the fol-
lowing concave programming problem that optimizes the stationary distributions to solve a (regu-
larized) SEM problem, where the primary objective is to maximize the entropy of state stationary


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


distribution of some target policy while adopting f -divergence regularization.
                            P¯          ¯ −αDf d(s, a)||dD (s, a)

                   max − d(s)       log d(s)                                                                                (4)
                      ¯
                   d,d≥0     s               |           {z           }
                         |        {z       }      concave regularizer
                                                 ¯
                                 state entropy H[d(s)]

                                 d(s′ , a′ ) = (1 − γ)p0 (s′ ) + γ                 d(s, a)T (s′ |s, a) ∀s′
                            P                                                P
                     s.t.                                                                                                   (5)
                            a′                                               s,a
                            P              ¯
                                 d(s, a) = d(s) ∀s                                                                          (6)
                            a
The Bellman flow constraint (5) guarantees that d(s, a) is a valid state-action stationary distribution
for some policy, where d(s, a) can be understood as a normalized occupancy measure of (s, a). The
                                            ¯ is the state stationary distribution directly induced by
marginalization constraint (6) ensures that d(s)
d(s, a). In (4), Df (d(s, a)||d (s, a)) := E(s,a)∼dD f dd(s,a)
                               D

                                                         D (s,a)    denotes the f -divergence between
          D                ′   N
d and d , D = {(s, a, s )i }i=1 denotes any off-policy dataset of interest (e.g., replay buffer of the
agent), and dD is its corresponding distributions. We assume f is a strictly convex function and
continuously differentiable. For brevity, we will abuse the notation dD to represent (s, a) ∼ dD ,
(s, a, s′ ) ∼ dD . The regularization hyperparameter α > 0 balances between maximizing state
entropy and preventing distribution shift from past experiences.
The regularization term Df (d||dD ) in (4) can be understood as imposing trust-region updates Schul-
man et al. (2015) by constraining the solution to the vicinity of previous state-action visitations.
Technically, the regularization term ensures strict concavity of the objective function with respect
to d, thereby guaranteeing the uniqueness of the optimal solution for the concave programming (4-
6). In contrast to existing DICE-based RL methods (Lee et al., 2021; 2022; Nachum & Dai, 2020)
that formulate optimization problems only for state-action stationary distribution, we define the
optimization problem that jointly optimizes state stationary distribution with the marginalization
constraint (6) to deal with state entropy.
To sum up, we seek state-action stationary distribution d (and its corresponding state stationary dis-
tribution d) ¯ whose state entropy is being maximized. Once we have computed the optimal solution
(d∗ , d¯∗ ) of the concave programming (4-6), its corresponding optimal policy can be obtained by
                                                             ∗
normalized d∗ for each state (Puterman, 1994): π ∗ (a|s) = dd¯∗(s,a)
                                                                (s)
                                                                     .

3.2   L AGRANGE DUAL FORMULATION

Still, solving (4-6) directly requires a white-box model of the environment, which is inaccessible in
many practical applications of RL. To derive an algorithm that can be fully optimized in a model-free
manner, we consider the Lagrangian for the constrained optimization problem (4-6)
                           P¯
              max min − d(s)            ¯ − αDf (d||dD ) + P µ(s) P d(s, a) − d(s)
                                   log d(s)                                         ¯             (7)
              ¯
              d,d≥0 ν,µ          s                                                  s          a

                            ′                     ′                                 ′                    ′ ′
                    P                                     P                                   P
                +        ν(s ) (1 − γ)p0 (s ) + γ                d(s, a)T (s |s, a) −              a′ d(s , a )
                    s′                                     s,a
where ν(s) ∈ R are the Lagrange multipliers for the Bellman flow constraints (5), and µ(s) ∈ R
are the Lagrange multipliers for the marginalization constraints (6). Then, we rearrange the terms in
(7):
                                             h            i
  max min(1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 )] − αE(s,a)∼dD f dd(s,a)
                                                 D (s,a)                                                                     (8)
  ¯
  d,d≥0  ν,µ
                                              P
     + d(s, a) µ(s) + γEs′ [ν(s′ )] − ν(s) − d(s)¯                 ¯
        P
                                                        µ(s) + log d(s)
        s,a     |           {z            }    s
                                 =:eν,µ (s,a)
                                        h                            i                                    P¯
= min max (1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 )] − αEdD f                d(s,a)
                                                                         +
                                                                             P
                                                                                   d(s, a)eν,µ (s, a) −                    ¯
                                                                                                           d(s) µ(s) + log d(s)
      ¯
  ν,µ d,d≥0                                              dD (s,a)
                                                                             s,a                          s
                                                                                                                             (9)
In (9), we could reorder maximin to minimax thanks to strong duality (Boyd et al., 2004). Finally,
using the Fenchel conjugate, we can eliminate the inner maximization problem and end up with a
single convex minimization problem3 .
   3
     This simplification from min-max to min was made possible by introducing the optimization variable d¯
along with the marginalization constraint (6) (see Appendix B).


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3.2. The minimax optimization problem (9) is equivalent to solving the following uncon-
strained minimization problem:
                                  h                   i P
                                     ∗ 1
      min(1 − γ)Ep0 [ν(s0 )] + EdD αf+ α e ν,µ (s, a)  + exp(−µ(s) − 1) =: L(ν, µ)         (10)
      ν,µ                                                               s
        ∗
where f+  (y) = maxx≥0 xy − f (x). The objective function L(ν, µ) is convex for ν and µ. Fur-
thermore, given the optimal solution (ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν, µ), the stationary distribution
corrections of the optimal SEM policy are given by:
            d∗ (s, a)
             D
                      = (f ′ )−1 α1 µ∗ (s) + γEs′ [ν ∗ (s′ )] − ν ∗ (s)    =: wν∗∗ ,µ∗ (s, a) (11)
            d (s, a)                |             {z                  } +
                                                    =eν ∗ ,µ∗ (s,a)

where x+ := max(0, x).
In short, by operating in the space of stationary distributions, computing a stationary Markovian
SEM policy can, in principle, be addressed by solving a convex minimization problem. The resulting
                                                ∗                     w ∗∗           D
                                                                             ∗ (s,a)d (s,a)
policy can be obtained by π ∗ (a|s) = P d′ d(s,a)
                                             ∗ (s,a′ ) =
                                                         P ν ∗,µ          ′  D    ′  in the case of finite
                                       a                  a′ wν ∗ ,µ∗ (s,a )d (s,a )
MDPs.

3.3   P RACTICAL ALGORITHM

Still, one practical issue in (10) is that optimizing it is unstable due to its inclusion of exp(·)
term, often causing exploding gradient problems. To remedy this issue, we consider the follow-
ing Pnumerically stable alternative objective function Le that replaces P exp(−µ(s) − 1) with
                                                                           s
log s exp(−µ(s)).
Theorem 3.3. Define the objective functions L(ν,
                                               e µ) as
                                                 h                i
                                                    ∗ 1
            e µ) := (1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) + E(s,a)∼dD αf+                  P
            L(ν,                                         e (s, a) + log exp(−µ(s))
                                                        α ν,µ
                                                                                                      (12)
                                                                                              s

Then, for any optimal solutions (ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν, µ) and (e
                                                                      ν∗, µ
                                                                          e∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν,
                                                                                            e µ),
the following holds:
                                        L(ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = L(e
                                                       e ν∗, µ
                                                             e∗ )                              (13)
Also, there exists a constant C such that the following holds:
                                    µ∗ = µ
                                         e∗ + C and ν ∗ = νe∗ + 1−γ
                                                                 C
                                                                                                     (14)


Note that the gradient ∇s s log s exp(−µ(s)) = − P exp(−µ(s))
                               P     P
                                                                         ′   ∇s µ(s) normalizes exp(·)
                                                              s′ exp(−µ(s ))

by softmax, thus L no longer suffer from numerical instability by large gradients. At first glance,
                  e
it seems that optimizing (12) could yield a solution that is completely different from that of (10).
However, Theorem 3.3 shows that their optimal objective function values are the same and their
optimal solutions only differ in a constant shift. Furthermore, despite its constant shift, it does not
change anything for w∗ computation in (11), as can be seen as follows:

               eνe∗ ,eµ∗ (s, a) = µ∗ (s) − C + γ E[ν ∗ (s′ )] − 1−γC
                                                                       − ν ∗ (s) − 1−γC


                                = µ∗ (s) + γE[ν ∗ (s′ )] − ν ∗ (s) = eν ∗ ,µ∗ (s, a)
              ∴ wν∗∗ ,µ∗ (s, a) = wνe∗∗ ,eµ∗ (s, a)

Still, (12) requires summing up (or integrating) every possibleP
                                                               state, which is intractable for large (or
continuous) state space. Therefore, we approximateP    the log    exp(−µ(s)) term via Monte-Carlo
integration with an arbitrary distribution q: log exp(−µ(s)) = log Eq [exp(−µ(s) − log q(s))].
Finally, we optimize the following objective function with q(s) = d¯D (s):
                                                           h                     i
                                                               ∗ 1

                       min(1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) + E(s,a)∼dD αf+        α eν,µ (s, a)                   (15)
                       ν,µ
                                           h                          i
                           + log Es∼d¯D (s) exp(−µ(s) − log d¯D (s))


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The last remaining challenge is that (15) still cannot be naively optimized in a fully model-free
manner in continuous domains, as it contains computing expectations w.r.t. the transition model
                                ∗
inside the non-linear function f+ (·). For a practical implementation, we use the following objective
that can be easily optimized via sampling only from dD :
                                                           h                           i
                                                               ∗ 1
                    min(1 − γ)Ep0 [ν(s0 )] + E(s,a,s′ )∼dD αf+    α êν,µ (s, a, s′ )            (16)
                    ν,µ
                                        h                          i
                        + log Es∼d¯D (s) exp(−µ(s) − log d¯D (s)) =: L̂(ν, µ)

where ê(s, a, s′ ) := µ(s) + γν(s′ ) − ν(s) is a single-sample estimate of e(s, a). Note that every
term in (16) can now be evaluated only using the (s, a, s′ ) samples from D, thus we can optimize ν
and µ easily. Although (16) is a biased estimate of (15), one can easily show that L̂(ν, µ) is an upper
bound of L(ν, µ), i.e. L(ν, µ) ≤ L̂(ν, µ) always holds, where the equality holds when the MDP is
                                                               ∗
deterministic, by Jensen’s inequality and the convexity of f+    (·). Once we get the optimal solution
   ∗    ∗
(ν̂ , µ̂ ) = arg minν,µ L̂(ν, µ), we end up with the stationary distribution corrections of the optimal
               π∗
SEM policy: ddD (s,a)
                 (s,a)
                       = wν̂ ∗ ,µ̂∗ (s, a) by (11). In practice, to deal with continuous state space, we
parameterize νθ : S → R and µω : S → R using simple MLPs, which take the state s as an input
and output a scalar value, and optimize the network parameters.

Policy Extraction The final remaining question is how to obtain an explicit policy, as our method
computes the distribution correction ratios w∗ in (11) instead of the policy itself directly. We follow
the i-projection used in (Lee et al., 2021).
                      min KL dD (s)π(a|s)||dD (s)π ∗ (a|s)

                                                                                                   (17)
                       π
                      = Es∼dD − [log w∗ (s, a) − DKL (π(ā|s)||πD (ā|s))] + C                     (18)
                           a∼π

Essentially, minimizing (18) corresponds to computing a policy π(·|s) that mimics the optimal SEM
policy π ∗ (·|s) for each state s ∈ D. In summary, SEMDICE computes the SEM policy as follows:
First, minimize (16), and Second, extract the policy using the obtained wν ∗ ,µ∗ by i-projection (18).
In practice, rather than training until convergence at each iteration, we perform a single gradient
update for ν, µ, and π. We outline the details of policy extraction (Appendix F) and the full learning
procedure with pseudo-code in Algorithm 1 (Appendix G).
Remark 3.4. Minimizing L(ν,   e µ) in (15) is equivalent to solving the original (regularized) state-
entropy-maximization problem (4-6), demonstrating that computing a (regularized) SEM policy
can, in principle, be achieved by arbitrary off-policy dataset D. Note that this approach directly
optimizes the state entropy of a target policy, rather than optimizing the state entropy of the replay
buffer as in (Yarats et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b). To the best of our knowledge, SEMDICE is
the first principled and practical off-policy SEM algorithm that can learn from arbitrary off-policy
experiences. Also, (Hazan et al., 2019) showed that state entropy is not concave for policy param-
                                                                                ¯
eters, whereas state entropy is concave for the stationary distribution space d(s).   That being said,
our method, which directly optimizes stationary distributions, may offer better convergence prop-
erties compared to existing policy-based algorithms. However, providing a formal analysis for the
convergence guarantee remains as future work.

4   R ELATED W ORK
Unsupervised RL and State Entropy Maximization Our work falls within the realm of unsu-
pervised reinforcement learning, specifically addressing the challenge of task-agnostic exploration.
The reward-free exploration framework has gained significant attention in recent years (Jin et al.,
2020; Tarbouriech et al., 2020; Kaufmann et al., 2020). While these methods share a similar context
to our work, they pursue largely orthogonal objectives.
State entropy maximization is a particular instance of reward-free exploration objective, where the
agent aims to estimate the density of states and maximize entropy (Hazan et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021; Mutti et al., 2022; Tiapkin et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2023; Yang & Spaan, 2023). However, these methods mostly rely on policy gradients with the


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Uniform                           Optimal               CB-SA                                   CB-S            PB-S            SEMDICE (ours)
                                          Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                      Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                 1.0                                                                1.0


            normalized entropy


                                                                               normalized entropy
                                                                                                    0.5
                                 0.5

                                                                                                    0.0

                                 0.0
                                   101      102          103         104                             101            102          103       104
                                         the number of episodes                                                  the number of episodes


Figure 1: Performance of SEMDICE and baselines in randomly generated tabular MDPs. The first
column indicates normalized policy entropy (0: state entropy of uniform policy, 1: state entropy
of optimal SEM policy), the second column indicates normalized entropy of the cumulative experi-
ences. We observe that only SEMDICE converges to an optimal SEM policy, whereas baselines do
not directly maximize the state entropy.


reward function for the estimated state entropy, and they are either sample inefficient due to their
requirements of on-policy samples (Hazan et al., 2019; Mutti et al., 2022), or optimize the biased
objective due to estimating the state entropy of the replay buffer (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al.,
2021). In contrast, our method operates directly in the space of stationary distributions and serves
as the first principled off-policy SEM method.
Besides state entropy maximization, various self-supervised objectives have been explored for unsu-
pervised RL pre-training (Laskin et al., 2021). The goal of pre-training in this context is to compute
a policy without relying on task-specific reward functions, enabling rapid adaptation to future, un-
known downstream tasks defined by reward functions. Unsupervised RL pre-training algorithms are
categorized in three main ways (Laskin et al., 2021). Knowledge-based methods aim to increase
knowledge about the environment by maximizing prediction error (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2019; Pathak et al., 2019). Competence-based methods (Lee et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2019;
Liu & Abbeel, 2021a; Laskin et al., 2022) aim to learn explicit skill representations by maximizing
the mutual information between encoded observation and skill. Lastly, data-based methods (Liu &
Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021) aim to achieve data diversity via particle-based entropy maxi-
mization. Our SEMDICE is categorized into the data-based method when considering unsupervised
RL pre-training.

Stationary DIstribution Correction Estimation (DICE) DICE-family algorithms perform sta-
tionary distribution estimation and have shown significant promise in various off-policy learning sce-
narios in reinforcement learning (RL), such as off-policy evaluation (Nachum et al., 2019a; Zhang*
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020), reinforcement learning (Lee et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024), constrained RL (Lee et al., 2022), imitation learning (Kim et al.,
2022b; Ma et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022a; Sikchi et al., 2024), and more. However, to the best of our
knowledge, no DICE-based algorithms have been proposed to address state entropy maximization.

5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we empirically evaluate our SEMDICE and baselines: to demonstrate (1) SEMDICE
converge to an optimal SEM policy, (2) visualization of SEMDICE’s state visitation, (3) how effi-
ciently SEMDICE pre-trained policy can adapt to downstream tasks on URL benchmarks (Laskin
et al., 2021). Ablation experiments on the choice of f and α for SEMDICE can be found in the
Appendix K.

5.1   S TATE ENTROPY MAXIMIZATION IN FINITE MDP S

We first evaluate SEMDICE and baseline algorithms on randomly generated finite MDPs with 20
states and 4 actions to show how effectively SEMDICE maximizes the state entropy, compared
to baselines, when optimized using the off-policy dataset (the entire replay buffer). We conduct
repeated experiments with different seeds for 100 runs.


                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baselines Baselines are policy-gradient-based methods, with different (non-stationary) intrinsic
reward functions r̂. We consider the following baselines, and they can be thought of as analogies
to existing unsupervised RL approaches. (1) CB-SA: it constructs the state-action-count-based ex-
ploration rewards by r̂(s, a) = √ 1      , where N (s, a) is the cumulative (s, a)-visitation counts
                                     N (s,a)
by the agent. This baseline can be understood as an analogy to the existing count-based methods or
RND (Burda et al., 2019). (2) CB-S: it constructs state-count-based rewards r̂(s) = √ 1 , where
                                                                                              N (s)
N (s) is the s-visitation counts. It is similar to CB-SA but only considers state visitation frequencies,
thus it is expected to be closer to state-entropy maximization. (3) PB-S: it constructs entropy-based
rewards r̂(s) = − log dD (s), where dD is the empirical state distribution of the cumulative experi-
ences (which is not direct estimate of − log dπ (s)). This baseline can be understood as an analogy
to existing SEM methods performing off-policy updates (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Yarats et al., 2021).
(4) Uniform: sample actions uniformly at random.
For all baselines, we first collect trajectories using the current policies and then construct the
non-stationary rewards function based on visitation counts/data-state-entropy measures accordingly.
Lastly, we perform policy gradient ascents along the direction of maximizing the constructed reward
function.

Evalution For each run, we (1) generate a random MDP and initialize the policy as uniform policy;
(2) For each method, use the current policy π to collect 10 episodes and add them to the replay buffer
D; (3) Using D, compute the MLE transition matrix T̂ , the intrinsic reward function r̂, and the value
function Qπr̂ with respect to the intrinsic reward; (4) Perform off-policy policy gradient ascent based
on the estimated Qπr̂ ; (5) Repeat steps (2)-(4) until D contains 1000 episodes. Throughout the
process, we compute the state entropy of the current policy d¯π (s) as well as the entropy of the
replay buffer d¯D (s).

Results Figure 1 presents the results. We observe that CB-S baseline generates a slightly better
SEM policy than CB-SA, which is natural as it focuses on the exploration of the unvisited states
while ignoring action uncertainty. PB-S baseline could obtain nearly maximal state-entropy for the
dataset in the dataset d¯D (s), but it is not directly optimizing the target policy’s state entropy d¯π (s).
SEMDICE is the only algorithm that could converge to an optimal SEM policy efficiently. It also
achieves much better sample efficiency in terms of the state entropy of dataset that PB-S. Although
we didn’t include the result, we also tested on-policy policy-gradient approach for SEM. It could
converge to an optimal SEM policy with a carefully chosen learning rate, but it required ×100 more
samples to reach near-optimal entropy maximization. This results confirm that SEMDICE is capable
of computing an optimal SEM policy even from the arbitrary off-policy dataset. In Appendix I, we
further show that SEMDICE still converges to the optimal SEM policy even when the dataset is
collected by a purely off-policy agent (i.e. uniform random policy).

5.2   S TATE ENTROPY MAXIMIZATION : V ISUALIZATION

This section aims to visualize the behavior of SEMDICE and baselines for their state visitations
during policy learning. To this end, we use MountainCar (Continuous) from Gymnasium (Towers
et al., 2023), a classic control task with a low-dimensional continuous state and action space. The
task involves a deterministic MDP where a car must escape from a sinusoidal valley by building
momentum. The observation space is two-dimensional, consisting of position ∈ [−1.2, 0.6] and
velocity ∈ [−0.07, 0.07], while actions correspond to applying directional forces in the range
[−1, 1]. The low dimensionality allows for clear visualization of state visitation distributions in the
2D plane, facilitating straightforward comparisons between different agents.

Baselines We compare SEMDICE to baselines from three categories of unsupervised RL.
Knowledge-based methods include RND (Burda et al., 2019), which relies on prediction error as an
exploration signal. Data-based methods aim to directly maximize state entropy, which can be our
direct interest, and include ProtoRL (Yarats et al., 2021), APT (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b), and MEPOL
(Mutti et al., 2021). Competence-based methods such as DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019) and CIC
(Laskin et al., 2022) focus on learning diverse skills by maximizing the mutual information between
skills and observations.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Mountaincar state coverage: Visualization of agent pretraining results across SEMDICE
and baselines. During the reward-free pretraining stage, we save model snapshots at 10K, 100K,
and 200K steps. From each snapshot, we draw 30k samples via environment interactions for visu-
alizations. The state space is discretized into uniform 51 × 51 bins, and the empirical distribution
is normalized to compute the entropy shown at the bottom of each subplot. While existing methods
failed to converge to a state-entropy-maximizing policy, SEMDICE successfully did so.

                  SEMDICE (ours)               PROTO                      APT          CIC            Disagreement                       RND               MEPOL
                             Walker                                             Quadruped                                               Jaco
              60                                                   200
  entropy index


                                                       entropy index


                                                                                                           entropy index
                                                                                                                           40
              40
                                                                   100
              20                                                                                                           60
                  0 0.1     0.3 0.5      1.0     2.0                   0 0.1    0.3 0.5       1.0    2.0                        0.1   0.3 0.5      1.0    2.0
                            Iterations          1e6                              Iterations         1e6                               Iterations         1e6

Figure 3: Particle-based entropy estimations of pretrained SEMDICE and baselines in URLB (Laskin et al.,
2021). We follow the setup from URLB and pretrain each agent with 2M environment interactions. We save
policy snapshots at [0.1M, 0.3M, 0.5M, 1M, 2M] steps, and report the change of entropy index along the train-
ing process. We observe that SEMDICE achieves maximum state entropy in both Walker and Jaco Arm do-
main, and close to maximum state entropy in Quadruped domain. It is also the most sample efficient approach
amongst all agents: with as few as 100K environment interactions, SEMDICE learns a proper state entropy
maximizing policy. For example, in Walker domain, multiple agents like RND, Disagreement, and PROTO
managed to achieve similar state entropy as SEMDICE. However, they are much less sample efficient, and only
converged to maximum state entropy policy after close to 2M environment interactions.


Evaluation and Results We evaluate all methods based on their overall state coverage and entropy
during the reward-free pretraining phase. Specifically, we take snapshots of each policy at 10K,
100K, and 200K environment steps under purely intrinsic rewards. For each snapshot, we collect
30,000 state samples by interacting with the environment using the fixed policy, and visualize the
corresponding state visitation distribution. To compute the entropy of the stationary state distribution
induced by each policy, we discretize the 2D continuous observation space into a 51 × 51 grid and
count the number of visits to each grid cell. Note that all methods operate directly in continuous
state and action spaces; discretization is used solely for entropy computation.
Figure 2 shows that existing state entropy maximization methods (PROTO, APT, MEPOL) fail to
converge to a single SEM policy. Instead, their learned policies exhibit non-stationary behavior
throughout training, likely due to their dependence on a non-stationary, learned reward function. In
contrast, SEMDICE progressively increases state coverage over time and eventually converges to a
single, stable SEM policy, which is in contrast to the oscillatory behaviors observed in the baselines.

5.3               URL B ENCHMARK

Finally, we evaluate the state-entropy maximization and fine-tuning RL performance using tasks
from URLB (Laskin et al., 2021). URLB consists of twelve tasks across three different domains:
Walker, Quadruped, and Jaco Arm. During the pre-training phase, SEMDICE and baselines com-


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     IQM              Median                Mean          Optimality Gap
                    SEMDICE
          Data        PROTO
                         APT
    Competence           CIC
                       DIAYN
     Knowledge DISAGREEMENT
                        RND
                               0.15 0.30 0.45   0.15 0.30 0.45       0.15 0.30     0.45    0.60   0.75
                                                     Expert Normalized Score

Figure 4: We evaluate all methods on the 12 tasks provided by the URLB benchmark (Laskin
et al., 2021), covering three domains: Walker (stand, walk, flip, run) and Quadruped (stand, walk,
run, jump) are locomotion tasks that require maintaining balance and strategically controlling the
body; Jaco Arm (reach bottom left, bottom right, top left, top right) consists of manipulation tasks
involving precise control of a 6-DOF robotic arm with a three-finger gripper to reach specified target
positions. To ensure statistically reliable comparisons, we use rliable (Agarwal et al., 2021) to
report aggregate statistics across multiple seeds and tasks, along with stratified bootstrap confidence
intervals. Each plot is generated using a total of 120 runs (3 domains × 4 tasks/domain × 10 seeds).


putes the pre-trained policy without task-specific reward, solely relying on their intrinsic objective
functions. Once the policy pre-training is done after 2M steps, a small amount of environment in-
teractions are allowed with the task-specific rewards (100K steps). We then evaluate how efficiently
each method adapts to the given downstream tasks, specifically examining how well the pre-trained
policies serve as a good initialization for rapid adaptation. We compared SEMDICE with the base-
lines provided by URLB. We follow the experimental protocoal of URLB: we ran 10 seeds per task,
and used the same hyperparameters for baselines, except for using the smaller MLP hidden size
1024 → 256 for fast training/evaluation.

Results In Figure 3, we report the state entropy of the policy checkpoints during pre-training
per method, and SEMDICE shows the highest state entropy estimates across all domains. In Fig-
ure 4, we present the fine-tuning performance. Overall, SEMDICE significantly outperforms all
data-based (i.e. SEM-based) and knowledge-based baselines in terms of rapid adaptation perfor-
mance during fine-tuning phase. This highlights that state entropy maximization is a desirable ob-
jective for RL pre-training, as illustrated in Appendix A. Although SEMDICE underperforms CIC, a
competence-based URL method, we believe its performance can be further enhanced by integrating
representation learning techniques (e.g., those used in CIC). It is important to emphasize that our
results were achieved solely through the SEM objective without additional mechanisms. Moreover,
SEMDICE’s potentially more unbiased and efficient SEM optimization could have resulted in good
policy initialization for fine-tuning. Qualitatively, we observed that even the data-based baselines
sometimes exhibit static behavior, while SEMDICE’s learned policy consistently showed actively
moving behavior across different domains.

6      C ONCLUSION
We presented SEMDICE, a new state-entropy-maximization (SEMDICE) algorithm for RL pre-
training. Existing SEM methods rely on policy gradients, and they either require on-policy samples
or perform (off-policy) biased optimization due to its estimation of state entropy of replay buffer.
In contrast, SEMDICE directly optimizes in the space of stationary distributions, and our derivation
shows that computing an optimal SEM policy can be achieved by solving a single convex minimiza-
tion problem with arbitrary off-policy dataset. To the bast of our knowledge, SEMDICE is the first
principled off-policy SEM algorithm. Through various tabular and continuous domain experiments,
we demonstrated that SEMDICE converges to a single stationary Markov SEM policy, and outper-
forms baselines in terms of maximizing state entropy. As for future work, we plan to incorporate
representation learning components into SEMDICE so that it enables faster meaningful feature de-
tection and better navigation in high-dimensional domains such as pixel-based domains. Another
promising future direction is to devise a DICE-based method for competence-based unsupervised
RL algorithms (e.g. maximizing the mutual information), which can serve as a principled off-policy
algorithm for it.



                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by NSF AI4OPT AI Centre. Pieter Abbeel holds concurrent appointments
as a Professor at UC Berkeley and as an Amazon Scholar. This paper describes work performed at
UC Berkeley and is not associated with Amazon. This work was partly supported by Institute of In-
formation & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00457882, AI Research Hub Project) and the Institute of In-
formation & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant (RS-2020-II201361,
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Yonsei University).

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 29304–29320. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Stephen Boyd, Stephen P Boyd, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge uni-
  versity press, 2004.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–
  1607. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.

Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
  to benchmark reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2048–2056.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, June 2019.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2019.

Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. The information geometry of
  unsupervised reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Matthieu Geist, Bruno Scherrer, and Olivier Pietquin. A theory of regularized markov decision
 processes, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.11275.

Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Cody Wild, Neel Kant, Sergey Levine, and Stuart Russell. Adver-
  sarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum en-
  tropy exploration. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2681–2691. PMLR, 09–15 Jun
  2019.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9726–9735, 2020.

Arnav Kumar Jain, Lucas Lehnert, Irina Rish, and Glen Berseth. Maximum state entropy explo-
  ration using predecessor and successor representations. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration
  for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4870–4879. PMLR,
  13–18 Jul 2020.

Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre Ménard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2006.06294.

Dongyoung Kim, Jinwoo Shin, Pieter Abbeel, and Younggyo Seo. Accelerating reinforcement
  learning with value-conditional state entropy exploration. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2023.

Geon-Hyeong Kim, Jongmin Lee, Youngsoo Jang, Hongseok Yang, and Kee-Eung Kim. LobsDICE:
  Offline learning from observation via stationary distribution correction estimation. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a.

Geon-Hyeong Kim, Seokin Seo, Jongmin Lee, Wonseok Jeon, HyeongJoo Hwang, Hongseok Yang,
  and Kee-Eung Kim. DemoDICE: Offline imitation learning with supplementary imperfect demon-
  strations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b.

Woosung Kim, Donghyeon Ki, and Byung-Jun Lee. Relaxed stationary distribution correction esti-
 mation for improved offline policy optimization. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, 38(12):13185–13192, Mar. 2024.

Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. URLB: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. In Thirty-fifth
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round
 2), 2021.

Michael Laskin, Hao Liu, Xue Bin Peng, Denis Yarats, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel.
 Unsupervised reinforcement learning with contrastive intrinsic control. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Jongmin Lee, Wonseok Jeon, Byung-Jun Lee, Joelle Pineau, and Kee-Eung Kim. Optidice: Offline
  policy optimization via stationary distribution correction estimation. In Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.

Jongmin Lee, Cosmin Paduraru, Daniel J Mankowitz, Nicolas Heess, Doina Precup, Kee-Eung Kim,
  and Arthur Guez. COptiDICE: Offline constrained reinforcement learning via stationary distribu-
  tion correction estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Lisa Lee, Benjain Eysenbach, Emilio Parisotto, Erix Xing, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. Efficient exploration via state marginal matching, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In 4th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2016.

Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. In Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 6736–6747, 18–24 Jul 2021a.

Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.

Qiang Liu, Lihong Li, Ziyang Tang, and Dengyong Zhou. Breaking the curse of horizon: Infinite-
  horizon off-policy estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Yecheng Jason Ma, Andrew Shen, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. Versatile offline imitation
  from observations and examples via regularized state-occupancy matching, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2202.02433.

Liyuan Mao, Haoran Xu, Weinan Zhang, and Xianyuan Zhan. ODICE: Revealing the mystery of
  distribution correction estimation via orthogonal-gradient update. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.

Mirco Mutti, Lorenzo Pratissoli, and Marcello Restelli. Task-agnostic exploration via policy gra-
 dient of a non-parametric state entropy estimate. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9028–9036, 2021.

Mirco Mutti, Riccardo De Santi, and Marcello Restelli. The importance of non-markovianity in
 maximum state entropy exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 16223–16239. PMLR, 2022.

Ofir Nachum and Bo Dai. Reinforcement learning via fenchel-rockafellar duality, 2020.

Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. DualDICE: Efficient estimation of off-policy
  stationary distribution corrections, 2019a.

Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Ilya Kostrikov, Yinlam Chow, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Algaedice:
  Policy gradient from arbitrary experience, 2019b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.
  02074.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2778–2787, 06–11 Aug
  2017.

Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5062–5071, 09–15 Jun 2019.

Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1st edition, 1994. ISBN 0471619779.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1889–1897, Lille, France, 07–09
  Jul 2015. PMLR.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Harshit Sikchi, Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Scott Niekum. Dual rl: Unification and new
  methods for reinforcement and imitation learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2302.08560.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yutian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan
  Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering
  the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature, 550:354–359, 2017.
Harshinder Singh, Neeraj Misra, Vladimir Hnizdo, Adam Fedorowicz, and Eugene Demchuk. Near-
  est neighbor estimates of entropy. American Journal of Mathematical and Management Sciences,
  23:301 – 321, 2003.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press,
  1998.
Jean Tarbouriech, Shubhanshu Shekhar, Matteo Pirotta, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Alessandro
  Lazaric. Active model estimation in markov decision processes, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2003.03297.
Daniil Tiapkin, Denis Belomestny, Daniele Calandriello, Eric Moulines, Remi Munos, Alexey Nau-
  mov, Pierre Perrault, Yunhao Tang, Michal Valko, and Pierre Menard. Fast rates for maximum
  entropy exploration. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 34161–34221. PMLR, 23–29 Jul
  2023.
Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, An-
 drea Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymna-
 sium, March 2023.
Mengjiao Yang, Ofir Nachum, Bo Dai, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Off-policy evaluation via
 the regularized lagrangian. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
 pp. 6551–6561. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Qisong Yang and Matthijs T.J. Spaan. Cem: Constrained entropy maximization for task-agnostic
  safe exploration. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(9):10798–
  10806, Jun. 2023.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with proto-
  typical representations. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11920–11931. PMLR, 18–24
  Jul 2021.
Ruiyi Zhang*, Bo Dai*, Lihong Li, and Dale Schuurmans. Gendice: Generalized offline estimation
  of stationary values. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Shangtong Zhang, Bo Liu, and Shimon Whiteson. Gradientdice: Rethinking generalized offline
  estimation of stationary values. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 11194–11203. PMLR, 2020.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    W HY S TATE - ENTROPY M AXIMIZATION FOR RL P RE - TRAINING
In this section, we illustrate why state-entropy maximization can be a good choice for RL pre-
training. Consider the following information-theoretic regularized regret objective defined by (Ey-
senbach et al., 2022).
A DAPTATION O BJECTIVE d¯pre (s), r(s) := min max Ed¯+ (s) [r(s)] − Ed¯∗ (s) [r(s)] +DKL (d¯∗ (s)||d¯pre (s))

                                          d¯∗ (s) d¯+ (s)
                                                  |           {z                  }
                                                                   regret
                                                                                                         (19)

In the A DAPTATION O BJECTIVE, for a given pre-trained policy’s stationary distribution d¯pre and a
downstream reward function r, it measures the regret of the policy (d¯∗ ) after adaptation from the
pre-trained policy (d¯pre ) with the information cost, where optimal d¯+ (s) denotes the state stationary
distribution of the optimal policy for the reward r (introduced to define regret). Then, a desirable
pre-trained policy (or its corresponding d¯π ) can be defined in terms of minimizing the (regularized)
regret against the worst-case reward function:
                           min max A DAPTATION O BJECTIVE d¯pre (s), r(s)

                                                                                                     (20)
                         d¯pre (s) r(s)

(Eysenbach et al., 2022) has shown that (20) is equivalent to:
                                       min max DKL (d¯+ (s)||d¯pre (s)),                                 (21)
                                     d¯pre (s) d¯+ (s)

and thus maximum-entropy (uniform) d¯pre is the solution of (21) and (20). This means that SEM
policy provides robust policy initialization against the worst-case reward function for fine-tuning,
justifying why state-entropy maximization is useful for unsupervised RL pre-training. Figure 5
visualizes information geometry of RL pre-training (Eysenbach et al., 2022).

                                                   𝑑𝑑(𝑠𝑠2 )

                                                         1

                                   Reward 𝑟𝑟


                                                                    1
                                                                        𝑑𝑑(𝑠𝑠1 )
                                            1
                                 𝑑𝑑(𝑠𝑠0 )

Figure 5: Visualization of reward function and policies as their state stationary distributions in a
3-state MDP. The shaded orange area denotes a set of achievable state stationary distributions that
lie on the probability simplex ∆(S) (shaded blue). The green arrow represents the reward function
r as a vector starting at the origin.       denotes the state stationary distribution of a pretrained SEM
policy, d¯pre = [ 13 , 13 , 13 ], and denotes the state stationary distribution of an optimal policy for r,
d¯+ which is an intersection of r and ∆(S). The distance from to reflects the adaptation cost.


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B                           ¯ ARE USED
      W HY BOTH d(s, a) AND d(s)
        ¯
Without d(s), the main objective becomes:
                                     X             X
                                   −   d(s, a) log   d(s, a′ )                                       (22)
                                              s,a              a′

This makes algorithm derivation complicated due to the summation inside logarithm. Specifically,
                    ¯ results in the following inner-max problem (See (23) in Appendix C):
our derivation with d(s)
         h                                                i
max EdD w(s, a) µ(s)+γEs′ [ν(s′ )]−ν(s) −αf w(s, a) = αf+       ∗ 1                  ′

                                                                   α µ(s)+γEs [ν(s )]−ν(s)
                                                                                ′
w≥0

where inner-maximization problem maxw≥0 could have been easily eliminated by applying Fenchel
                       ∗
conjugate of f , i.e. f+ (y) := maxx≥0 xy − f (x).
                     ¯
In contrast, without d(s), we have the following inner-maximization problem:
                  h                X                                                            i
   max E(s,a)∼dD w(s, a) − log         w(s, a′ )dD (s, a′ ) + γEs′ [ν(s′ )] − ν(s) − αf w(s, a)
    w≥0
                                         a′

where Fenchel conjugate is not directly applicable to eliminate this inner-maximization problem.
                                                                ¯ eliminates the need for solving
To sum up, the introduction of the new optimization variable d(s)
nested min-max optimization, enabling SEM to be formulated as solving a single convex optimiza-
tion problem.

C     P ROOFS
C.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.1

                               𝑎𝑎 = 0           𝑎𝑎 = 1         𝑎𝑎 = 1             𝑎𝑎 = 1

                                        𝑠𝑠0              𝑠𝑠1                𝑠𝑠2

                                                𝑎𝑎 = 0         𝑎𝑎 = 0

Figure 6: An illustrative example of MDP with three states and two actions, where the optimal SEM
policy is stochastic. Specifically, in order to maximize the state entropy, the action selection should
be randomized at s1 . If the agent deterministically takes action a = 0 at s1 , it precludes visiting s2 .
Conversely, if the agent deterministically takes action a = 1 at s1 , it will never visit s0 thereafter.

Proposition 3.1. (Hazan et al., 2019) There always exists a stationary Markovian policy that max-
imizes the entropy of state stationary distribution (i.e., solution of (3)). Such an optimal stationary
Markovian policy is generally stochastic.
Lemma C.1. (Puterman, 1994) For any possibly non-Markovian policy π, define a stationary
Markov policy π ′ as π ′ (a|s) = ddππ(s,a)
                                     (s,a
                                           . Then, dπ = dπ′ .

Proof. Firstly, it is evident that there must exist at least one non-stationary, non-Markovian pol-
icy capable of maximizing the entropy of the state’s stationary distribution. Then, according to
Lemma C.1, we can always obtain its corresponding stationary and Markov policy. This derived
policy is generally stochastic, as any deterministic policy can be arbitrarily bad in terms of maxi-
mization of state entropy, as exemplified in Figure 6.

C.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2

Theorem 3.2. The minimax optimization problem (9) is equivalent to solving the following uncon-
strained minimization problem:
                                  h                  i P
                                     ∗ 1
      min(1 − γ)Ep0 [ν(s0 )] + EdD αf+ α eν,µ (s, a)  + exp(−µ(s) − 1) =: L(ν, µ)          (10)
      ν,µ                                                               s



                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        ∗
where f+  (y) = maxx≥0 xy − f (x). The objective function L(ν, µ) is convex for ν and µ. Fur-
thermore, given the optimal solution (ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν, µ), the stationary distribution
corrections of the optimal SEM policy are given by:
            d∗ (s, a)
                           ′ −1 1    ∗                 ∗ ′        ∗

                      = (f  )   α |µ   (s) + γE  s′ [ν  (s )] − ν   (s)    =: wν∗∗ ,µ∗ (s, a) (11)
            dD (s, a)                               {z                } +
                                               =eν ∗ ,µ∗ (s,a)

where x+ := max(0, x).

Proof. Start with Equation (9)
                                        h               i                                      P¯
  min max (1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 )] − αEdD f    d(s,a)
                                                            +
                                                                  P
                                                                        d(s, a)eν,µ (s, a) −                    ¯
                                                                                                d(s) µ(s) + log d(s)
      ¯
  ν,µ d,d≥0                                  dD (s,a)
                                             | {z }               s,a                          s
                                             =:w(s,a)
                                  h          i X D                           X
                                                                               ¯                 ¯

= min max (1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) − αEdD f w(s, a) +  d (s, a)w(s, a)eν,µ (s, a) −   d(s)   µ(s) + log d(s)
      ¯
  ν,µ d,w≥0
                                                            s,a                                      s
                                                                                                                (23)

First, we can derive the closed-form solution for d¯ in (23):
                                 ∂L                   ¯
                                  ¯ = −(µ(s) + log d(s)) − 1 = 0
                               ∂ d(s)
                                                                                                               (24)

                              ⇒ d¯∗ (s) = exp(−µ(s) − 1)                                                       (25)
                                                                               ¯
Check the second order conditions to confirm that L is concave with respect to d(s):
                                        ∂2L        1
                                         ¯    2
                                                =−¯ <0                                                         (26)
                                       ∂ d(s)     d(s)

We can plug this solution to L, which eliminates the maxd¯:
                                       h                          i X
 min max(1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) − αEdD f w(s, a) − α1 w(s, a)eν,µ (s, a) +

                                                                      exp(−µ(s) − 1)
  ν,µ w≥0
                                                                                                s
                                                                                                               (27)

Consider simplifying the second term in (27) using Fenchel conjugate:
                                  h                                 i
                     max −αEdD f w(s, a) − α1 w(s, a)eν,µ (s, a)

                                                                                                               (28)
                      w≥0
                                h                                i
                     max αEdD α1 w(s, a)eν,µ (s, a) − f w(s, a)                                                (29)
                      w≥0
                              h                                        i
                      = αEdD max w(s, a) α1 eν,µ (s, a) − f w(s, a)

                                                                                                               (30)
                                w(s,a)≥0
                                ∗ 1
                      = αEdD f+ α eν,µ (s, a)                                                                  (31)

Hence, the Equation (9) is equivalent to:
                                      h                    i P
                                          ∗ 1
       min(1 − γ)Ep0 [ν(s0 )] + EdD αf+     α e ν,µ (s, a)  + exp(−µ(s) − 1) =: L(ν, µ)
       ν,µ                                                                s


Consider obtaining the closed-form solution for the inner-maximization for w in (27):
                    ∂L
                             = −αdD (s, a)f ′ w(s, a) + dD (s, a)eν,µ (s, a) = 0

                                                                                                               (32)
                  ∂w(s, a)

                 ⇒ w∗ (s, a) = f ′−1 α1 eν,µ (s, a)                                                            (33)
                                                        +

where x+ := max(0, x).


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Again, we plug w∗ (s, a) into the original objective function, which results in the minimization
problem:
                                    h                                                           i
                                               e   (s,a)                 e (s,a)
     min(1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) − αEdD f f ′−1 ν,µα                − α1 f ′−1 ν,µα

                                                                                     eν,µ (s, a)
      ν,µ                                                 +                        +
        X
     +     exp(−µ(s) − 1)
           s


                                                                                         ∗
We can check that the function L is convex with respect to both ν and µ, by noting that f+ (·) is a
convex function.

C.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3
Theorem 3.3. Define the objective functions L(ν,
                                            e µ) as
                                                h                i
                                                   ∗ 1
           e µ) := (1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) + E(s,a)∼dD αf+                  P
           L(ν,                                         e (s, a) + log exp(−µ(s))
                                                       α ν,µ
                                                                                                          (12)
                                                                                               s

Then, for any optimal solutions (ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν, µ) and (e
                                                                      ν∗, µ
                                                                          e∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν,
                                                                                            e µ),
the following holds:
                                        L(ν ∗ , µ∗ ) = L(e
                                                       e ν∗, µ
                                                             e∗ )                              (13)
Also, there exists a constant C such that the following holds:
                                 µ∗ = µe∗ + C and ν ∗ = νe∗ + 1−γ
                                                               C
                                                                                                          (14)
Lemma C.2. For any functions ν and µ, and a constant C, the following equality holds:
                              L(ν,
                              e µ) = L(ν e + C , µ + C).                                                  (34)
                                                               1−γ


   e + C , µ + C)
   L(ν                                                                                                    (35)
       1−γ
                                              X
                                  C
      = (1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 ) + 1−γ ] + log   exp(−µ(s) − C)                                   (36)
                    h                                                             i
                         ∗ 1                       ′        γC              C

        + E(s,a)∼dD αf+      α µ(s) + C + γEs [ν(s )] + 1−γ − ν(s) −
                                               ′
                                                                           1−γ
                                                h                     i       X
                                                   ∗ 1
      = (1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 )] + C + E(s,a)∼dD αf+    α e ν,µ (s, a)   + log     exp(−µ(s)) − C
                                                                                                          (37)
                                              h                              i           X
                                                    ∗       1
      = (1 − γ)Es0 ∼p0 [ν(s0 )] + E(s,a)∼dD       αf+       α eν,µ (s, a)        + log       exp(−µ(s))   (38)

      = L(ν,
        e µ)                                                                                              (39)
Lemma C.3. For any functions ν and µ, L(ν, µ) ≥ L(ν,
                                                e µ) holds. The equality holds if and only if
                                 X
                                     exp(−µ(s) − 1) = 1.                                (40)
                                       s



Proof. For any x ≥ 0, the inequality x − 1 ≥ log x always holds, where the equality holds if and
only if x = 1. By applying this equality, we have:
                      X                             X
                          exp(−µ(s) − 1) − 1 ≥ log     exp(−µ(s) − 1)                       (41)
                         s                                         s
                         X                                        X
                     ⇔       exp(−µ(s) − 1)
                                            −1
                                              ≥ log                    exp(−µ(s))
                                                                                  exp(−1)
                                                                                                          (42)
                         s                                         s
                         X                                   X
                     ⇔       exp(−µ(s) − 1) ≥ log                 exp(−µ(s))                              (43)
                         s                                    s

                   ⇔L(ν, µ) ≥ L(ν,
                                 e µ)                                                                     (44)
                                       P
where the equality holds if and only if s exp(−µ(s) − 1) = 1.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma C.4. Let (e ν∗, µ
                      e∗ ) = arg minν,µ L(ν,                                              ν∗ +
                                         e µ). Then, there exists a constant C such that (e
    ∗   C
   e + 1−γ ) is an optimal solution of minν,µ L(ν, µ).
C, µ

                                                                                C∗
Proof. Let C ∗ = log s exp(−e  µ∗ (s)−1) be a constant. Also, let ν̄ ∗ = νe∗ + 1−γ and µ̄∗ = µ
                                                                                             e∗ +C ∗ .
                    P

Then,
          X                     X
               exp µ̄∗ (s) − 1 =               µ∗ (s) + C ∗ ) − 1

                                     exp − (e
             s                           s
                                        X                           X
                                    =              e∗ (s) − 1 − log
                                             exp − µ                       µ∗ (s′ ) − 1)
                                                                      exp(−e
                                         s                       s     ′

                                              µ∗ (s) − 1)
                                     P
                                       s exp(−e
                                    =P                      = 1.                                 (45)
                                              µ∗ (s′ ) − 1)
                                      s′ exp(−e
Then, we have
                 L(ν̄ ∗ , µ̄∗ ) = L(ν̄
                                  e ∗ , µ̄∗ )                 (by (45) and Lemma C.3)            (46)
                                  e νe∗ , µ
                                          e∗

                                =L                                      (by Lemma C.2)           (47)
                              = min L(ν,
                                    e µ)                                                         (48)
                                  ν,µ

                              ≤ min L(ν, µ)                             (by Lemma C.3)           (49)
                                  ν,µ

which implies that (ν̄ ∗ , µ̄∗ ) is the optimal solution of minν,µ L(ν, µ).

D    F - DIVERGENCE

In the experiments, we use the softened version of chi-square divergence for f :

                  x log x − x + 1 if 0 < x < 1                        ′ −1         exp(x) if x < 0
 fsoft-χ2 (x) := 1         2                       ⇒    (fsoft-χ 2 (x) )   (x) =
                  2 (x − 1)         if x ≥ 1.                                      x+1    if x ≥ 0
                                         ∗
When f = fsoft-χ2 , its corresponding f+   (y) = maxx≥0 xy − f (x) is given by:
             
             ∞                     if x ≤ 0
                                                         ∗         exp(y) − 1 if y < 0
    f+ (x) = x log x − x + 1 if 0 < x < 1 ⇒ f+ (y) = 1 2                                         (50)
             1            2                                       2y + y       if y ≥ 0
                2 (x − 1)           if x ≥ 1
       ∗
where f+ is the Fenchel conjugate of f+ .

E    H YPERPARAMETERS
Baseline hyperparameters are taken from URLB (Laskin et al., 2021), except for using the smaller
hidden sizes 1000 → 256 for fast training/evaluation.

                        SEMDICE pretraining hyper-parameter                Value
                        Action repeat                                      1
                        α                                                  0.5
                        Batch size                                         1024
                        f -type                                            softchiq
                        Hidden dimension                                   256
                        Learning rate                                      0.0001
                        nsteps                                             1
                        Update every step                                  2

                                     Table 1: Hyperparameter Settings

For the policy network, we use a tanh-Gaussian distributions, following the baselines in URLB.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    P OLICY E XTRACTION
Our practical SEMDICE optimizes (16) that yields ν ∗ and µ∗ . However, ν ∗ itself is not a directly
executable policy, so we should extract a policy from them. Note that the optimal SEM policy π ∗ is
encoded in w∗ :
              d∗ (s, a)
               D
                        = (f ′ )−1 α1 µ∗ (s) + γEs′ [ν ∗ (s′ )] − ν ∗ (s)    =: w∗ (s, a)      (11)
              d (s, a)                |              {z                 } +
                                                =eν ∗ ,µ∗ (s,a)

Then, we extract a policy from w∗ via I-projection policy extraction method (Lee et al., 2021).
          min KL dD (s)π(a|s)||dD (s)π ∗ (a|s)

                                                                                                (51)
             π
            = Es∼dD − [log w∗ (s, a) − DKL (π(ā|s)||πD (ā|s))] + C                             (52)
                a∼π
                                                                                (
                                                                              ((
            = Es∼dD − log(f ′ )−1 α1 eν ∗ ,µ∗ (s, a)    −D   KL
                                                              (  ( (  (  (((ā|s))
                                                                (π(ā|s)||π D      +C            (53)
                a∼π                                    +((

            ≈ Es∼dD − log(f ′ )−1 α1 e(s, a)       +C                                            (54)
                 a∼π                            +

where C is some constraint and π D (a|s) is a data policy. As we perform online optimization, πD
can be considered as an old policy, and we ignored the KL term in our practical implementation.
Finally, to enable eν ∗ ,µ∗ to be evaluated every action a, we train an additional parametric function
(implemented as an MLP that takes (s, a) as an input and outputs a scalar value) by minimizing the
mean squared error:
                                              h                                2 i
                             min E(s,a,s′ )∼dD e(s, a) − êν ∗ ,µ∗ (s, a, s′ )                    (55)
                            e

In the following section, we present the pseudo-code for practical SEMDICE.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G       P SEUDO - CODE FOR SEMDICE
To sum up, SEMDICE computes a SEM policy by optimizing (ν ∗ , µ∗ ), which corresponds to ob-
taining a stationary distribution correction ratios of the optimal SEM policy. Then, we extract a
policy by training a e-network and performing I-projection as described in the previous section.
We assume ν, µ, e, π are parameterized by θ, ω, ψ, ϕ respectively. Then, we optimize the parameters
via stochastic gradient descent. The loss functions are summarized in the following:
                                                                h                                i
                                                                     ∗ 1                     ′

            J(νθ , µω ) :=(1 − γ)Es0 νθ (s0 ) + E(s,a,s′ )∼dD αf+            ê
                                                                          α νθ ,µω  (s, a, s   )
                                           h                                 i
                           + log Es∼d¯D (s) exp(−µω (s) − log d¯D (s))                             (56)
                                       h                                   i
                                                                         2
                J(eψ ) :=E(s,a,s′ )∼dD eψ (s, a) − êνθ ,µω (s, a, s′ )

                                                                                (by (55))          (57)

                J(πϕ ) :=Es∼dD − log(f ′ )−1 α1 eψ (s, a)              (by 54)                     (58)
                              a∼πϕ                                  +

where êνθ ,µω (s, a, s′ ) = µω (s) + γνθ (s′ ) − νθ (s). For − log d¯D (s) in (56), we used  particle-based
density estimation using k-nearnest-neighbor: − log d¯D (si ) ≈ log ∥si − sk-NN       i   ∥2 .4 Instead of
fully optimizing νθ and µω until convergence, we alternatively perform single gradient updates for
νθ , µω , eψ , and πϕ . The pseudocode of SEMDICE is presented in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 SEMDICE
Input: Neural networks νθ , µω , and eψ with parameters θ, ω, and ψ, policy network πϕ with
parameter ϕ, replay buffer D, a learning rate η, a regularization hyperparameter α
 1: for each timestep t do
 2:   Sample an action at ∼ πϕ (st ) for the current state st .
 3:   Observe next state st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ) by taking action to the environment.
 4:   Add transition to replay buffer D ← D ∪ (st , at , st+1 )
 5:   Sample a minibatch from D for the following SGD updates.
 6:   Perform SGD updates:
                                 (θ, ω) ← (θ, ω) − η∇θ,ω J(νθ , µω ) (Eq. (56))
                                      ψ ← ψ − η∇ψ J(eψ ) (Eq. (57))
                                      ϕ ← ϕ − η∇ϕ J(πϕ ) (Eq. (58))
 7: end for


    4
     Though our practical also uses (approximate) estimation of − log dD (s) via kNN, it doesPnot contradict
the main motivation of the paper. In (56), we use Monte Carlo integration to approximate log exp(−µ(s))
as log ÊdD [exp(−µ(s) − log dD (s))]. While this approximation may introduce bias, it still aims to maximize
the entropy of the target policy’s state stationary distribution from an arbitrary off-policy dataset, rather than
maximizing the state entropy of the replay buffer.
   In contrast, existing methods focus on maximizing the intrinsic reward r̂(s) ≈ − log dD (s), which cor-
responds to maximizing the state entropy of the replay buffer. That being said, they are approximating
− log dπ (s) by − log dD (s). As a result, existing methods optimize the biased objective even when the kNN
approximation error vanishes, whereas SEMDICE optimizes the unbiased objective once the kNN approxima-
tion error vanishes. See also Appendix I, which shows that SEMDICE can compute the optimal SEM policy
even with a dataset collected by a uniform random policy. This behavior of computing an optimal SEM policy
from random datasets cannot be achieved by other baselines.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON TABULAR MDP S - C OMPARISON WITH
         M AX E NT (H AZAN ET AL ., 2019)

                                                      Uniform                       Optimal                                     MAXENT                         SEMDICE (ours)
                                                            Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                                        Entropy of d¯D(s)
                         1.0                                                                                                          1.0
    normalized entropy


                                                                                                                 normalized entropy
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                         0.5

                                                                                                                                      0.0
                         0.0
                           101                                102             103             104                                      101             102            103       104
                                                       the number of episodes                                                                    the number of episodes

Figure 7: Performance of SEMDICE and MaxEnt (Hazan et al., 2019) in randomly generated tabular
MDPs. The first column indicates normalized policy entropy (0: state entropy of uniform policy,
1: state entropy of optimal SEM policy), the second column indicates normalized entropy of the
cumulative experiences.

We did not compare SEMDICE with MaxEnt (Hazan et al., 2019) in the main text because Max-
Ent is not designed to compute a single policy but rather to obtain a set of policies. Specifically,
it maximizes the entropy of the state distribution resulting from the weighted average of state dis-
tributions visited by multiple policies. This approach does not align with the scenario we consider,
which focuses on fine-tuning a single policy derived from a pre-trained policy. Still, for quantitative
comparison with MaxEnt, we have conducted additional experiments in tabular MDPs. In the result,
MaxEnt (with tuned hyperparameters) underperforms SEMDICE in terms of learning efficiency.
We also would like to emphasize that SEMDICE computes only a single stationary Markov policy,
whereas MaxEnt continuously increases the number of policies it maintains, making it computation-
ally inefficient.

I   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON TABULAR MDP S - SEMDICE USING
    DATASET COLLECTED BY UNIFORM POLICY

                                                                                  Uniform            Optimal                                   SEMDICE
                                                                     Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                       Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                                      1.0                                                                      1.0
                                 normalized entropy


                                                                                                          normalized entropy


                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                               0.0

                                                      0.0
                                                        101            102          103        104                                101           102          103        104
                                                                    the number of episodes                                                   the number of episodes


Figure 8: Performance of SEMDICE when the dataset is always being collected by uniform random
policy in randomly generated tabular MDPs. The first column indicates normalized policy entropy
(0: state entropy of uniform policy, 1: state entropy of optimal SEM policy), and the second column
indicates normalized entropy of the cumulative experiences. This result demonstrates the capability
of SEMDICE that can be optimized from arbitrary off-policy experiences.


                                                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON TABULAR MDP S : VALUE - BASED
    BASELINES
In Figure 1, we presented the performance of the policy-based baselines: for each iteration, they
compute policy gradients for the intrinsic reward r̂ and perform policy gradient ascents. In this
section, we provide an additional result for value-based RL baselines. The intrinsic rewards are
defined in the same way as described in the main text.
   CB-SA : r̂(s, a) = √ 1      , CB-S : r̂(s, a) = √ 1 , PB-S : r̂(s, a) = − log dD (s) (59)
                                                                    N (s,a)                                                                 N (s)

where N (s, a) is the cumulative (s, a)-visitation counts by the agent, N (s) is the s-visitation counts
by the agent, and dD (s) is the empirical state distribution of the cumulative experiences. Then,
for each value-based baselines, they maintain Q-table (initialized by zeros) and perform Q-learning
updates by:

                   Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + η r̂(s, a) + γ max  ′
                                                              Q(s′ , a′ ) − Q(s, a)                 (60)
                                                                                                                                              a
where η ∈ (0, 1) is a learning rate.
As value-based RL methods do not maintain explicit policy, we evaluated two types of target pol-
icy induced by Q: greedy (deterministic) policy (π(s) = arg maxa Q(s, a)) and softmax policy
(π(a|s) ∝ exp(Q(s, a)/τ )). For exploration, all methods adopt an ϵ-soft behavior policy with
ϵ ∝ O(1/T ) decreasing over time. We also decrease the temperature of softmax policy over time
with the rate of O(1/T ). The result for greedy policy is shown in Figure 9, and the result for the
softmax policy is presented in Figure 10.

     Uniform                                         Optimal                      SEMDICE (ours)                             CB-SA (greedy)                          CB-S (greedy)    PB-S (greedy)
                                                                      Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                              Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                                                                                                                        1
                normalized entropy


                                                                                                                 normalized entropy


                                             0.0

                                                                                                                                        0
                                     −2.5

                                                                                                                                      −1
                                     −5.0

                                                          101          102            103          104                                  101            102           103        104
                                                                    the number of episodes                                                          the number of episodes

Figure 9: Performance of SEMDICE and value-based baselines in randomly generated tabular
MDPs, where the target policy π(s) of baseline is given by the greedy policy w.r.t. Q(s, a).

     Uniform                                   Optimal                           SEMDICE (ours)              CB-SA (softmax)                                       CB-S (softmax)     PB-S (softmax)
                                                                       Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                            Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                                          1.0                                                                         1.0
                                     normalized entropy


                                                                                                                 normalized entropy


                                                          0.5                                                                         0.5


                                                          0.0                                                                         0.0

                                                                1            2              3           4
                                                           10           10             10          10                                  101             102          103        104
                                                                     the number of episodes                                                         the number of episodes


Figure 10: Performance of SEMDICE and value-based baselines in randomly generated tabular
MDPs, where the target policy π(a|s) of baseline is given by the softmax policy w.r.t. Q(s, a).

As can be seen from the left column of Figure 9, the greedy target policy for the estimated Q
exhibits very low state entropy. This result is expected, as the optimal SEM policy should generally
be stochastic (Proposition 3.1), but the greedy target policy is deterministic. Thus, it does NOT
converge to the optimal stochastic SEM policy, leading to significant suboptimality. The entropy of
the cumulative state-visit experiences H[d¯D (s)] (the right column of Figure 9) for PB-S approaches
to the maximum state entropy, but it was achieved by mixture of many non-stationary determinstic
policies. In contarst, SEMDICE yields a single stationary stochastic SEM policy.
In Figure 10, we can see that adopting the softmax (thus stochastic) policy leads to better state
entropy for the target policy (left column). However, there is no guarantee that any of these value-
based baselines with the softmax policy will converge to an optimal SEM policy.


                                                                                                            23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    A BLATION EXPERIMENT RESULTS FOR SEMDICE

                                                                   α = 0.001                      α = 0.01               α = 0.1                                         α = 1.0                  α = 10.0
                                                                                Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                                   Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                       1.00                                                                                                      1.0

                  normalized entropy


                                                                                                                            normalized entropy
                                       0.75
                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                       0.50
                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                       0.25
                                                 101                             102              103           104                                      101           102            103            104
                                                                              the number of episodes                                                                the number of episodes


    Figure 11: Experimental results on varying α (SEMDICE without function approximation).


                                                                                 fχ2 (α = 0.1)                    fsoft−χ2 (α = 0.1)                                            fKL (α = 0.1)
                                                                              Entropy of d¯π (s)                                                                       Entropy of d¯D(s)
                                                                                                                                                         1.0
                               1.0
          normalized entropy


                                                                                                                                    normalized entropy
                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                               0.9
                                                                                                                                                         0.6

                               0.8                                                                                                                       0.4
                                       101                                      102               103           104                                       101            102                103             104
                                                                             the number of episodes                                                                   the number of episodes


Figure 12: Experimental results on different f -divergence (SEMDICE without function approxima-
tion).
                                                                                               f χ2                                                                             fsoft−χ2
                                                                   6.5                                                                                    6.5
                                        state entropy H[d¯π (s)]


                                                                   6.0                                                                                    6.0

                                                                   5.5                                                                                    5.5
                                                                                      α = 0.001              α = 0.1                                                    α = 0.001                 α = 0.1
                                                                   5.0                α = 0.01               α = 1.0                                      5.0           α = 0.01                  α = 1.0
                                                                         0            100K            200K        300K                                          0        100K              200K        300K
                                                                                             timesteps                                                                          timesteps


Figure 13: The effect of the varying α and f on ContinuousMountainCar (SEMDICE with neural
function approximation).

As shown in Figure 11-13 SEMDICE can become numerically unstable with very small values of
α, but it remains not too sensitive to α as long as it is within a reasonable range. Additionally, using
different f didn’t make significant difference.


                                                                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L    G ENERALIZATION TO UNDISCOUNTED (γ = 1) SETTING

SEMDICE can be generalized to deal with γ                 = 1 setting, where d¯π (s) :=
           1
              PT
limT →∞ T +1 t=0 Pr(st = s; π). To this end, the original optimization problem (3-5) in the
                                                                         P
paper should be modified by adding an additional normalization constraint s,a d(s, a) = 1. Then,
for any γ ∈ (0, 1],
                                   P¯             ¯ − αDf d(s, a)||dD (s, a)

                            max − d(s)        log d(s)                                                  (61)
                             ¯
                           d,d≥0    s

                                  d(s′ , a′ ) = (1 − γ)p0 (s′ ) + γ d(s, a)T (s′ |s, a) ∀s′
                                P                                  P
                           s.t.                                                                         (62)
                                 a′                                  s,a
                                P               ¯
                                      d(s, a) = d(s) ∀s                                                 (63)
                                 a
                                P
                                      d(s, a) = 1                                                       (64)
                                s,a

 By taking the similar derivation steps of SEMDICE with the additional constraint (64), we can
show that solving the following unconstrained convex optimization problem is equivalent to solving
(61-64), which additionally includes a single scalar variable λ:
                                           h                   i P
                                              ∗ 1
              min (1 − γ)Ep0 [ν(s0 )] + EdD αf+   e
                                                α ν,µ,λ
                                                        (s, a) + s exp(−µ(s) − 1) − λ                   (65)
              ν,µ,λ

where eν,µ,λ (s, a) := λ + µ(s) + γEs′ [ν(s′ )] − ν(s) and λ is Lagrange multiplier for the normal-
ization constraint (64). The detailed derivation will be included in the final version of the paper.

M     E XTENSION TO UNDISCOUNTED ( NON - STATIONARY ) FINITE - HORIZON
      SETTING

SEMDICE can be extended to a finite horizon setting, where the goal is to maximize the entropy of
                                               PT
the average state distribution d¯π (s) := T +1
                                            1
                                                t=0 Pr(st = s; π). The following formulation results
                                                                                d∗ (s,a)
in a non-stationary (timestep-dependent) policy by πt (a|s) = P ′td∗ (s,a′ ) .
                                                                               a   t
                                       PT    P ¯           ¯          PT                  D

                         max −           t=0  s dt (s) log dt (s) − α  t=0 Df dt (s, a)||d (s, a)       (66)
                        dt ,d¯t ≥0
                            P
                       s.t.   a d0 (s, a) = p0 (s)                                                      (67)
                            P         ′   ′     P                      ′       ′
                     ∀s      a′ dt (s , a ) =     s,a dt−1 (s, a)T (s |s, a) ∀s , t ∈ {1, . . . , T }   (68)
                                dt (s, a) = d¯t (s) ∀s, t ∈ {0, . . . , t}
                            P
                                a                                                                       (69)

 We can show that solving (66-69) is equivalent to solving the following unconstrained convex
optimization problem, where the difference to the original objective function is that ν, µ are timestep-
dependent (i.e. νt , µt ).
                                      PT        h                       i PT P
                                                     ∗ 1
     min       (1 − γ)Ep0 [ν0 (s0 )] + t=0 EdD αf+      α et,ν,µ (s, a)  + t=0 s exp(−µt (s) − 1)
{νt }T         T
     t=0 ,{µt }t=0
                                                                                                        (70)
where et,ν,µ (s, a) := µt (s) + Es′ [νt+1 (s′ )] − νt (s), and νT +1 (·) := 0. The detailed derivation will
be included in the final version of the paper.


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N      M ORE DISCUSSIONS ON SEMDICE’ S O BJECTIVE
Despite its inclusion of f -divergence regularization, SEMDICE is not fundamentally opposed to
particle-based state-entropy estimation; rather, it addresses the same objective of maximizing state
entropy, with the additional inclusion of f -divergence regularization to enhance the stability of the
learning process. It is important to note that this regularizer is not intended to impose a strong
constraint on the optimal policy, and its influence can be controlled by adjusting the hyperparam-
eter α. Note that many successful standard reward-maximizing RL algorithms have made use of
regularizations such as entropy (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and KL-divergence (Schulman et al., 2015),
f-divergence (Nachum et al., 2019b), Bregman-divergence (Geist et al., 2019), and so on. Although
these regularizations might appear contrary to pure reward maximization, their inclusion actually
stabilizes the overall learning process, and improves the overall reward performance of the resulting
policy. In a similar vein, our state-entropy maximization method employs f-divergence regulariza-
tion to prevent abrupt distribution shift (analogous to TRPO), enhancing the robustness and stability
of learning process. Additionally, from a technical perspective, f-divergence regularization makes
the objective function strictly concave, guaranteeing the global optimality of any local optimum (i.e.
ensuring the uniqueness of the optimal solution).
Also, SEMDICE’s objective function indeed aims to maximize the state entropy, i.e. encourag-
ing exploration of unvisited states more. To see this more intuitively, consider the main objective
function of OptiDICE (Lee et al., 2021), a reward-maximizing RL algorithm:
                                                  h                                    i
                                                      ∗ 1                  ′

           min(1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) + E(s,a,s′ )∼dD αf+      α r(s, a) +  γν(s   ) − ν(s)          (71)
             ν

Then, the following is the main objective function of our SEMDICE, a state-entropy maximization
method:
                                       h                                 i       X
                                            ∗ 1              ′

 min(1 − γ)Es0 ν(s0 ) + E(s,a,s′ )∼dD αf+      α µ(s)  + γν(s  ) − ν(s)    + log   exp(−µ(s))
 ν,µ
                                                                                     s
                                                                                                 (72)
That being said, the for a fixed µ, SEMDICE can be interpreted as OptiDICE with the reward
function defined by µ(s). Of course, we are jointly optimizing the µ instead of using fixed µ.
                                                         ∗
Also, due to the second term of the objective function (f+ is increasing function), µ(s) is pressured
to decrease more in regions of high data density and less where the data density is low. Conse-
quently, SEMDICE’s resulting policy will tend to explore unvisited states more actively, which is
well-aligned with the goal of state entropy maximization.

O      M ACHINE AND S ETUP
We run the experiments on machines with Titan XP GPUs. Pretraining took approximately 10 hrs
and finetuning took around 30 minutes.


                                                 26
