Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M INIMAL I MPACT C ONTROL N ET:
A DVANCING M ULTI -C ONTROL N ET I NTEGRATION
 Shikun Sun1∗, Min Zhou2 , Zixuan Wang1 , Xubin Li2 , Tiezheng Ge2 , Zijie Ye1 ,
 Xiaoyu Qin1† , Junliang Xing1 , Bo Zheng2 , Jia Jia1,3,4†
 1
   Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
 2
   Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba
 3
   BNRist, Tsinghua University
 4
   Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
 {ssk21,wangzixu21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yzjscwy@gmail.com
 {yunqi.zm,lxb204722,tiezheng.gtz,bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com
 {xyqin,jlxing,jjia}@tsinghua.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

             With the advancement of diffusion models, there is a growing demand for high-
             quality, controllable image generation, particularly through methods that utilize
             one or multiple control signals based on ControlNet. However, in current Control-
             Net training, each control is designed to influence all areas of an image, which can
             lead to conflicts when different control signals are expected to manage different
             parts of the image in practical applications. This issue is especially pronounced
             with edge-type control conditions, where regions lacking boundary information
             often represent low-frequency signals, referred to as silent control signals. When
             combining multiple ControlNets, these silent control signals can suppress the gen-
             eration of textures in related areas, resulting in suboptimal outcomes. To address
             this problem, we propose Minimal Impact ControlNet. Our approach mitigates
             conflicts through three key strategies: constructing a balanced dataset, combining
             and injecting feature signals in a balanced manner, and addressing the asymmetry
             in the score function’s Jacobian matrix induced by ControlNet. These improve-
             ments enhance the compatibility of control signals, allowing for freer and more
             harmonious generation in areas with silent control signals.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Recent advancements in diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Rombach
et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023) have significantly bolstered the field of image generation. These
innovations are particularly notable for the incorporation of controlled generation techniques, such
as ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) and IP-Adapter (Ye et al., 2023), which allow precise manipula-
tions using one or more control signals. Despite these advancements, challenges remain, particularly
when integrating multiple control signals.
The primary difficulty arises from the fact that during the training of ControlNet, each control is
designed to influence all areas of an image. This can lead to conflicts when different control signals
are expected to manage different parts of the image in practical applications. This issue is especially
pronounced with edge-type control conditions, where regions lacking boundary information often
represent low-frequency signals, referred to as silent control signals by us.
As shown in Figure 1, our observations suggest that when combining multiple ControlNets, these
silent control signals can suppress the generation of textures in areas where other control signals aim
to generate details, resulting in suboptimal outcomes. This not only compromises the fidelity of the
generated images but also restricts the flexibility and effectiveness of the control mechanisms within
the model.
    ∗
        Work done when Shikun Sun was an intern at Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba.
    †
        Corresponding author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To tackle these challenges, adhering to the principle of “less is more”, we introduce the Minimal
Impact ControlNet (MIControlNet), a novel framework designed to refine the integration of mul-
tiple control signals within diffusion models. Our approach includes strategic modifications to the
training data to reduce biases and utilizes a multi-objective optimization strategy during the feature
combination phase, as well as addressing the asymmetry in the score function’s Jacobian matrix
induced by ControlNet. These methods aim to minimize conflicts between different control sig-
nals and between control signals and the inherent features of the dataset, thereby ensuring better
compatibility and fidelity in the generated images.


       Canny             ControlNet            ControlNet*     MIControlNet(1-stage) MIControlNet(2-stage)


      Openpose          ControlNet!.#         ControlNet$.#       Uni-ControlNet


Figure 1: The silent control signal from OpenPose ControlNet (outside the blue box) suppresses
the high-frequency control signal from Canny ControlNet (inside the red box). The black regions of
the control signals represent the silent control signals.
To summarize, our main contributions are three-fold as follows:

    • Introduce silent control signals: First introduce silent control signals that should remain in-
      active when other control signals are engaged, improving the compactness of the generation.
    • Feature injection and combination: Employ strategies based on multi-objective optimization
      principles to improve model performance.
    • Theoretical contribution: Develop and integrate a conservativity loss function within a large
      modular network architecture to ensure more stable learning dynamics.

By addressing the fundamental issues in training data preparation and signal integration, MICon-
trolNet enhances the model’s ability to follow the correct control signals in areas previously affected
by control signal conflicts. Additionally, it improves controllability in high-frequency regions.


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1     D IFFUSION M ODELS FOR T EXT TO I MAGE G ENERATION

Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2021) has gain great success as a generative models, especially in the text to image
generation task (Rombach et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023).
Suppose the image data distribution is q(x) = q0 (x0 ), where x ∈ X ⊂ RCHW . We define a
forward process through a sequence of distributions, qt (xt ) = N (αt x0 , (1 − αt2 )I), with {αt }
decreasing for t ∈ [0, T ] ∩ Z. Here, α0 = 1 and αT ≈ 0. In the generation process, we initiate from
xT ∼ N (0, I) and iteratively generate a sample of the previous timestep using a denoising network
ϵϕ (xt , t), trained by minimizing the prediction of added noise as follows:

                        Ex0 ∼q0 (x0 ),t,ϵ∼N (0,I) w(t)∥ϵϕ (αt x0 + σt ϵ, t) − ϵ∥22 ,                    (1)


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


wherepw(t) balances the losses across different timesteps, t is uniformly selected from 0 to T , and
σt = 1 − αt2 . This loss also serves as the learning objective for numerous control methods, such
as ControlNet as described by Zhang et al. (2023).
Researchers Song et al. (2021); Vincent (2011) have developed the theory of score-based diffusion
models. They established a connection between the score of qt and ϵϕ (xt , t) as:
                                                                ϵϕ (xt , t)
                           s (xt , t) = ∇xt log qt (xt , t) ≈ −             .                 (2)
                                                                    σt

2.2   C ONTROL N ET

ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) marks a substantial breakthrough in controlled generation for diffu-
sion models, utilizing low-level features such as edges, poses, and depth maps to refine the generative
process. The original ControlNet Zhang et al. (2023) paper and Figure 2 provide a more intuitive
explanation through graph; here, we opt for a formulaic approach to introduce symbols that facilitate
the proofs in subsequent sections.
Consider a U-Net architecture where the encoder E θ and decoder Dψ consist of layers {Eiθ }l+1    i=1 and
{Diψ }1i=l , respectively, with i indicating the layer index and θ, ψ representing the model parameters.
The architecture of ControlNet, C ϕ = {Ciϕ }l+1                             θ
                                                   i=1 , parallels that of E but also integrates a control
image as an input.
Ignoring the input and output layers, we start with f0e = x and f0c = x + conv(c). The input of Ei ,
                               dres
Di and Ci are fie , fce and {fi+1   , add (fieres , ficres )}; the output of Ei , Di and Ci are {fi+1
                                                                                                    e      eres
                                                                                                        , fi+1  },
fid and {fi+1
          c      cres
              , fi+1  } respectively, where f e , f d , f c are the direct outputs and f eres and f cres are the
residual outputs.
For the convenience of calculating the Jacobian matrix of the score function, we clearly define the
components of the whole encoder E, ControlNet C, and decoder D as follows:

                                      E(x) = (f1eres , f2eres , . . . , fl+1
                                                                         eres
                                                                              ),                              (3)

                                    C(x, c) = (f1cres , f2cres , . . . , fl+1
                                                                          cres
                                                                               ),                             (4)
and

                                           D(f1d , f2d , . . . , fl+1
                                                                  d
                                                                      ) = s,                                  (5)

where fid = add (fieres , ficres ) and s represents the score function.

2.3   S CORE F UNCTION AND I TS C ONSERVATIVITY

During the parameterization of the score function s(xt , t) with a neural network, there are no inher-
ent constraints on the conservativity of score functions (Salimans & Ho, 2021). The conservativity
of a vector field indicates that the field can be represented as the gradient of a scalar-valued function.
For instance, the score function s(xt , t) can be modeled as the gradient of log qt (xt , t). A straight-
forward method to verify if a vector field is conservative involves computing the Jacobian matrix of
the vector field and checking if this matrix is symmetric. This symmetry is a consequence of the
commutativity of the partial derivatives of the scalar function.
However, directly calculating the Jacobian matrix of the score function poses significant challenges.
As an alternative, we utilize stochastic estimators and leverage the capabilities of modern neural
network frameworks, such as the vector-Jacobian computation features in PyTorch, to obtain an
unbiased estimation of the trace of the Jacobian matrix and related values.
To enforce the conservativity of the score function directly, suppose the Jacobian matrix of st with
respect to xt is denoted as Jst ,xt . We propose using the following loss function:
                                           1                         2
                                  LQC = Et,xt Jst ,xt − JT    st ,xt F ,                         (6)
                                           2

                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where F represents the Frobenius norm. That formula can be equivalently expressed as (Chao et al.,
2022):
                       LQC = Et,xt tr(Jst ,xt JT

                                               st ,xt ) − tr(Jst ,xt Jst ,xt ) ,              (7)
where the trace of the product of Jacobian matrices can be efficiently estimated using Hutchinson’s
trace estimator (Hutchinson, 1989). However, even such an estimator can be computationally ex-
pensive, especially when dealing with large-scale neural networks.

2.4   M ULTI -O BJECTIVE O PTIMIZATION

The goal of multi-objective optimization is to find the Pareto optimal solution, a state where no sin-
gle objective can be improved without degrading others. Similar to single-objective optimization,
local Pareto optimality can also be achieved using gradient descent techniques. The Multiple Gra-
dient Descent Algorithm (MGDA) (Désidéri, 2012), is one such method for attaining local Pareto
optimal solutions. The central concept of MGDA is to balance all gradients towards a direction
that forms acute angles with each gradient, thereby ensuring that no objective worsens as a result of
an optimization step. It also has applications in image and 3D generation tasks (Sun et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2024). We think the idea of forming an acute angle with each gradient is a good way
to balance the gradients, and we will use this idea in the feature combination and feature injection.

3     P ROBLEMS IN M ULTI -C ONTROL N ET C OMBINATION

Our problem setting aligns with the current standard in the community, wherein each ControlNet
is trained individually. At the sampling stage, these networks are combined according to different
control signals, functioning as plug-ins. This setup ensures flexibility and modularity, allowing for
the seamless integration of various control signals to enhance the model’s generative capabilities.
However, this approach has several limitations, particularly when combining multiple ControlNets.

Data Bias in Areas with “Silent” Control Signals. In the training of ControlNet models, a sig-
nificant issue arises from the presence of “silent” control signals, particularly with edge condition
signals. These “silent” control signals are characterized by empty conditions where the correspond-
ing paired image areas are often blurred or lack high-frequency information. This leads to a data
bias during training, causing the model to suppress high-frequency information in the generated im-
ages. While this suppression can be advantageous for strict generations in single-control scenarios,
it poses a challenge in multi-ControlNet combination scenarios. When two control signals coexist
in an area—one with high-frequency information and the other being a “silent” control signal—a
conflict arises. The model, influenced by the “silent” control signal, may undesirably suppress high-
frequency information in the generated images. This conflict is problematic in multi-ControlNet
combination scenarios, where the preservation of high-frequency details is crucial.

Optimal Ratios for Multi-ControlNet Combination. Another challenge in combining multiple
ControlNets is determining the optimal ratios for merging various control signals. There is currently
no clear guideline for the combination of different control signals, making this process difficult. The
current practice involves combining control signals as plug-ins at the sampling stage, relying on user
experimentation. This approach may lead to suboptimal results, as the model may not effectively
balance the different control signals.

Conservativity of Conditional Score Function. Although the conservativity of diffusion models
is well researched, the situation differs for ControlNet, where another network is tuned to control
the diffusion model with much less data compared to the original diffusion model. Therefore, it
is essential to consider the conservativity of the enhanced score function when combining multiple
ControlNets to ensure stability or seek improved performance.

4     M INIMAL I MPACT C ONTROL N ET

To address the aforementioned issues, we introduce the MIControlNet. The key idea of MIControl-
Net is to minimize the impact of the ControlNet on the original U-Net by reducing the conflicts of


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  +prompt
                       +Noise                     +timestep
                                                                    Encoder     Decoder


      Original Image                 Image



                       +Mask                                                              Calculating

                                                                   ControlNet             Calculating

                                                                                    Frozen     Trainable

       Canny Edge               Masked Canny Edge c


Figure 2: Overview of our data flow. Masking specific areas of the conditions allows the silent
control signals to generate more diverse patterns, while exhibiting reduced controllability when
interacting with high-frequency control signals.

each ControlNet, thereby achieving the best combination of multiple ControlNets. We will intro-
duce the details of MIControlNet in the following sections following the order of problem setting,
training strategies and sampling strategies.


4.1   R EBALANCE THE D ISTRIBUTION

To solve the first problem, we apply simple but effective data augmentation techniques to rebalance
the distribution of areas lacking control signals. Specifically, we will apply segmentation masks
from images on the control signals, enhancing the diversity of the image areas corresponding to the
silent control signals, which is the same as inpainting the image area with the silent control signals.
This process will help the model learn to generate high-frequency information in areas with silent
control signals, thereby reducing data bias during training. Further details will be explained in the
Appendix F.1.


4.2   M INIMAL I MPACT ON F EATURE I NJECTION AND C OMBINATION

To minimize the impact of the ControlNet signal of each layer ficres on the original U-Net en-
coder feature fieres , we draw inspiration from the MGDA algorithm Désidéri (2012), which involves
forming acute angles with each vector. We employ a restricted MGDA-based balancing algorithm
to regulate the injection of control signals into each layer, which will keep the coefficient of original
feature fieres . In detail, we will apply the following new dynamic addinj function to the feature
injection process.



                                    Feasible Domain
           Combined
                                                                Feasible Domain
            Feature


                                                 Feature of

                                                   U-Net


Figure 3: The left image shows the feature injection process in MIControlNet, while the right image
illustrates the feature combination process. The Feasible Domain is where the combined optimiza-
tion direction aligns with the U-Net feature or both control signal features f1 and f2 .


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Firstly, we calculate the coefficient of injected control signal λi for each layer i as follows:
                                                         (v2 − v1 )T v2

                           ∗
                          λi (v1 , v2 ) = min 1, max                     ,0 ,                                         (8)
                                                           ∥v2 − v1 ∥22

and then

                                                              λ∗i (v1 , v2 )
                                          λi (v1 , v2 ) =                      .                                      (9)
                                                            1 − λ∗i (v1 , v2 )
The new add function is defined as follows:
                          addinj (fieres , ficres ) = fieres + λi (fieres , ficres ) · ficres .                      (10)

The key constraint we impose is to maintain the coefficient of fieres at 1, ensuring the preservation of
the original U-Net data flow architecture. Practically, the range of λi is limited to [0, 20] to mitigate
the risk of overpowering control signals that could suppress the original features. Further details on
the connection to MGDA are elaborated in the Appendix E.
To balance different control signals during the sampling stage, we also utilize the concept of forming
an acute angle with each gradient, which initially balances the various control signals before the
injection.
For the feature maps associated with different control signals, denoted as ficres,1 and ficres,2 , we
employ a combination strategy defined by the following equation:

                                        ficres = addcom (ficres,1 , ficres,2 ),                                      (11)

where the addcom function is explicitly defined as:


   addcom (ficres,1 , ficres,2 ) = (1 − λ∗i (ficres,1 , ficres,2 ))ficres,1 + λ∗i (ficres,1 , ficres,2 )ficres,2 .   (12)

Then we follow the same process as in the feature injection stage to calculate the coefficient of the
combined feature map λi for each layer i.

4.3   M INIMAL I MPACT ON C ONSERVATIVITY

To estimate the LQC in Eqn. 7, we need to apply the Hutchinson’s estimator to the Jacobian matrix
of the model. However, such estimation still needs to construct second order derivatives, which is
computationally expensive.
Our insight is that the parameters of ControlNet primarily manage the additional conservativity
it introduces. By decomposing the Jacobian matrix of the model into two components, we can
isolate and only calculate the conservativity loss specific to ControlNet, which follows the red line in
Figure 2, making the process simpler and more efficient. Additionally, applying this conservativity
loss ensures control over all the extra unconservativity introduced by ControlNet.
Suppose v fits a distribution whose expectation is 0 and variance is I, by the Hutchinson’s estimator,
we have a unbiased estimation of LQC , which is
                        Lest
                                        T          T         T

                         QC = Ev,t,xt v Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v − v Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v .                (13)

We propose the following proposition to decompose the Jacobian matrix of the model into the orig-
inal Jacobian matrix from the U-Net and the additional Jacobian matrix introduced by ControlNet.

Proposition 4.1 (Decomposition of Jacobian Matrix) In a U-Net model augmented with Control-
Net, the overall Jacobian matrix Jst ,xt can be decomposed into the original Jacobian matrix Jest ,xt
from the U-Net and an additional Jacobian matrix Jcst ,xt introduced by ControlNet:
                                             Jst ,xt = Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt .                                         (14)


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


And due to the large training data gap between traing the U-Net and ControlNet, we propose the
following assumption to depart them in parameters level.

Assumption 4.1 (Responsibility for Conservativity) In the U-Net model equipped with Control-
Net, the conservativity of the original Jacobian matrix is governed by the parameters of the U-Net.
Meanwhile, the parameters of ControlNet are principally tasked with managing the additional con-
servativity introduced by ControlNet, which can be described as
                                              ∇ϕ Jest ,xt = 0,                                        (15)
where ϕ is the parameters of ControlNet.

Then, we can ignore the parts does not containing Jcst ,xt in Eqn. 13 and got a new loss for optimiza-
tion of the ControlNet, which is

      LcQC = Ev,t,xt vT 2Jest ,xt JcT         e       c         c       cT        c       c

                                   st ,xt − 2Jst ,xt Jst ,xt + Jst ,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v.   (16)

We have

Proposition 4.2 Under Assumption 4.1, the gradient of the conservativity loss of ControlNet is
equal to the gradient of the estimated conservativity loss, which is given by
                                           ∇ϕ LcQC = ∇ϕ Lest
                                                         QC .                                         (17)

However, due to computation limitations, we still want to fully remove the Jest ,xt term. We have the
following simplified loss for the ControlNet optimization, which is

                        Lsimple = Ev,t,xt vT Jcst ,xt JcT        c       c

                         QC                            st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v.                    (18)

And we have the following proposition for the relationship between the simplified loss and the
original loss.

Theorem 4.1 Suppose the Frobenius norm of Jest ,xt is uniformly bounded by M , we have
                                    √     q
                           LcQC ≤ 2 2M Lsimple  QC      + Lsimple
                                                            QC    ,                                   (19)

which indicates that if the simplied loss is zero, the original loss is also zero.

In practice, we just apply the simplified loss to optimize the ControlNet.

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E XPERIMENT SETUP

Dataset. For training, we primarily use the MultiGen-20M dataset (Qin et al., 2023), a subset
of LAION-Aesthetics (Schuhmann et al., 2022), which provides conditions such as Canny (Canny,
1986), Hed (Xie & Tu, 2015), and OpenPose (Cao et al., 2017). This dataset also includes segmenta-
tions, which facilitate balancing the ground truth of areas with silent control signals. For evaluation,
we randomly sample images from LAION-Aesthetics and use them and their extracted conditions.
For single control signal, we use the original prompts from the dataset. For multi control signals, we
directly concate the corresponding prompts as the prompts.

Implementation. We initially train our model using balanced data and feature injection for the
Canny, HED, Depth, and OpenPose conditions. Once the model converges, we label this phase as
1-stage. We then continue training the model with an additional conservativity loss, labeling this
phase as 2-stage. Further details are provided in the Appendix. F. For sampling, we apply balanced
feature injection and combination in our models. More results are in the Appendix H.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baseline. We select the newest ControlNet v1.1 and Uni-ControlNet (Zhao et al., 2024) as our
baseline. For the ControlNet baseline, we provide both the original feature combination and a bal-
anced version, labeled as ControlNet*. We also introduce fixed scaling factors for the first control
signals, labeled ControlNet0.5 and ControlNet1.5 , maintaining a total scaling factor of 2.0 to match
the original ControlNet and our feature combination method. Additionally, we include Control-
Net**, which is trained with the same data augmentation as our method.
Some other models, such as ControlNet++ (Li et al., 2024), are optimized for precise control, making
them less suitable as baselines in our experimental settings.

5.2                            S INGLE C ONTROL S IGNAL

In this subsection, we primarily examine the improvements our method brings when using a single
control signal. The main improvement lies in the inpainting ability of the silent control signal.

5.2.1                           Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON
We mainly conduct two qualitative comparisons:

Total Variance under Silent Control Signals. For the calculation of the total variance, we sam-
ple 500 images from the LAION-Aesthetics dataset and calculate the total variance in the regions
controlled by the silent control signals. We then compare the results with ControlNet. As shown in
Figure 4a, the results indicate the ability of our method to generate more diverse texture patterns in
these situations.
Asymmetry in the Jacobian Matrix. We analyze the asymmetry of the extra part of the Jaco-
bian matrix introduced by ControlNet, as discussed in Asym metric defined by Chao et al. (2022).
This indicates the asymmetry of the Jacobian matrix. As shown in Figure 4b, our method reduces
the asymmetry, leading to more stable and consistent control. The Asym metric is estimated on
the MultiGen-20M dataset, using a batch size of 64 for 100 steps. We observed that after the
second-stage training, the asymmetry introduced by ControlNet significantly diminishes, indicat-
ing a smaller impact on the original U-Net, There is also an interesting phenomenon where the
decreases in Asym are similar on a logarithmic scale.
We also compare the FID and convergence speed as described in Appendix G. Our model achieves
similar image quality with faster convergence compared to the ControlNet baseline.
                         3.6                                                                                    102
                                                          ControlNet                                                                                     Ours (1-stage)
                                                                                                                                        38.28
                         3.4                              Ours (1-stage)                                               29.87                             Ours (2-stage)
                                                          Ours (2-stage)
                                                                               Jacobian Asymmetry (log scale)


                         3.2                                                                                    101
Total Variance (1x104)


                                                                                                                                                             3.98
                         3.0

                         2.8                                                                                    100
                         2.6
                                                                                                                                                0.1894
                                                                                                                               0.1174
                         2.4                                                                                    10 1
                                                                                                                                                                    0.0274
                         2.2

                         2.0
                                 Canny        Hed          Openpose                                             10 2    Canny              Hed              Openpose

            (a) Total variance under silent control signals.                                                       (b) Asymmetry in the Jacobian Matrix.

                                         Figure 4: Two qualitative comparisons for single control signal.


5.2.2                           V ISUAL C OMPARISON
We compare the visual results for single control signals of the ControlNet and our MIControlNet in
Figure 5. More results are in the Appendix H. Our method demonstrates the ability to generate more
texture patterns in areas corresponding to silent control signals, which aligns with the quantitative
results shown in Figure 4a.


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Canny / Hed            ControlNet       MIControlNet (1-stage)   MIControlNet (2-stage)


      Figure 5: Comparision of ControlNet and MIControlNet for single condition generation.


5.3     M ULTI -C ONTROL S IGNALS

In this subsection, we examine the improvements introduced by our method when using multiple
control signals. We randomly selected 2,000 images from the LAION-Aesthetics dataset and ex-
tracted the central portion of two conditions in equal measure for sampling. These conditions were
randomly resized and placed on either the left or right side, with the remaining area filled by silent
signals. We then used these modified control signals to generate images. To save space, we present
both conditions in a single image in Figure 7.

Table 1: The FID of the multi-condition scenario. Each condition is associated with its own FID.
the FID scores are presented with the best result highlighted in bold and the second best underlined.
      Methods           Openpose-Canny        Openpose-Hed         Canny-Hed            Hed-Depth
    ControlNet           80.37 / 111.30        76.98 / 84.20      123.59 / 86.43       91.98 / 86.25
   ControlNet0.5         105.86 / 123.13      145.88 / 107.52     143.67 / 106.40           -/-
   ControlNet1.5          74.37 / 99.44        74.52 / 86.57       120.84 / 88.38           -/-
   ControlNet∗            77.43 / 89.57        76.69 / 78.31      122.10 / 85.45       78.14 / 90.65
   ControlNet∗∗           92.98 / 84.02        87.33 / 78.49       77.02 / 75.46       74.28 / 81.16
  Uni-ControlNet          96.50 / 74.55       139.87 / 76.06       88.77 / 75.47       73.68 / 89.94
  Ours (1-stage)          76.13 / 77.22        70.32 / 68.42       74.19 / 70.26       71.16 / 71.93
  Ours (2-stage)          75.77 / 72.25        73.45 / 71.74       71.34 / 69.35       69.68 / 71.18



5.3.1    Q UALITATIVE C OMPARISON

FIDs for each control signals. We calculate the FIDs for two conditions in a multi-condition
scenario. For each condition, we extract the relevant part of the generated image and compute the
FID against the original 1,000 images. As shown in Table 1, our 2-stage MIControlNet achieves
the best FIDs in most cases, indicating that our method outperforms the baselines and highlights its
effectiveness in multi-condition scenarios. Our feature injection and combination technique achieves
an average improvement of 9.79 over the vanilla ControlNet with silent control signal targeted data
augmentation. The data augmentation alone achieves an average improvement of 11.26.
Cycle consistency for each control signal. Table 2 in Appendix G.2 shows the L1 distance be-
tween the extracted condition from the generated images and the original condition. Our MICon-
trolNet achieves the lowest values in most cases, indicating better preservation of control signals
(excluding silent control signals) in the generated images.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.3.2   V ISUAL C OMPARISON
Visual comparisons are shown in Figure 7. In the first case, ControlNet fails to apply the openpose
condition, while ControlNet* succeeds. In the second case, ControlNet fails to meet the canny
condition. In the final case, ControlNet fails both control signals. Our method effectively silences
silent control signals when other control signals are active, allowing the useful control signals to
dominate. Additional visual results are provided in Appendix H.

6   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced MIControlNet, designed to minimize the impact of ControlNet for im-
proved multi-control signal integration. Our approach involves rebalancing the data distribution in
areas controlled by silent control signals, introducing a multi-objective perspective to feature com-
bination, and reducing the asymmetry in the Jacobian matrix of the score function. These strategies
enhance the balance and compatibility of multiple ControlNets without necessitating joint training,
enabling more free and harmonious generation using multiple control signals.

7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is funded by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant No. 2024QY1400, the
National Natural Science Foundation of China No. 62425604. This work is supported by Tsinghua
University Initiative Scientific Research Program. This work is also supported by Alibaba Group
through Alibaba Innovative Research Program. We sincerely thank Qixin Wang for her assistance
in creating the pretty figures for this paper.

R EFERENCES
John Canny. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis
  and machine intelligence, 1986.
Zhe Cao, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh. Realtime multi-person 2d pose estimation
  using part affinity fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2017.
Chen-Hao Chao, Wei-Fang Sun, Bo-Wun Cheng, and Chun-Yi Lee. On investigating the conserva-
  tive property of score-based generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12753, 2022.
Jean-Antoine Désidéri. Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (MGDA) for multiobjective optimiza-
  tion. Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 350(5-6):313–318, 2012.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
Christian Horvat and Jean-Pascal Pfister. On gauge freedom, conservativity and intrinsic dimension-
  ality estimation in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03845, 2024.
Shuo Huang, Shikun Sun, Zixuan Wang, Xiaoyu Qin, Yanmin Xiong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan,
  Di Zhang, and Jia Jia. Placiddreamer: Advancing harmony in text-to-3d generation. In Proceed-
  ings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 6880–6889, 2024.
Michael F Hutchinson. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian
 smoothing splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, 1989.
Chieh-Hsin Lai, Yuhta Takida, Naoki Murata, Toshimitsu Uesaka, Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Er-
  mon. Fp-diffusion: Improving score-based diffusion models by enforcing the underlying score
  fokker-planck equation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Ming Li, Taojiannan Yang, Huafeng Kuang, Jie Wu, Zhaoning Wang, Xuefeng Xiao, and Chen
 Chen. Controlnet++: Improving conditional controls with efficient consistency feedback. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2404.07987, 2024.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.01073, 2021.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Can Qin, Shu Zhang, Ning Yu, Yihao Feng, Xinyi Yang, Yingbo Zhou, Huan Wang, Juan Car-
  los Niebles, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, et al. Unicontrol: A unified diffusion model for
  controllable visual generation in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11147, 2023.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Should ebms model the energy or the score? In Energy Based
  Models Workshop-ICLR 2021, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An
  open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Proceedings of International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2015.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shikun Sun, Longhui Wei, Junliang Xing, Jia Jia, and Qi Tian. Sddm: Score-decomposed diffusion
  models on manifolds for unpaired image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Compu-
  tation, 2011.
Saining Xie and Zhuowen Tu. Holistically-nested edge detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  international conference on computer vision, 2015.
Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-adapter: Text compatible image prompt
  adapter for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arxiv:2308.06721, 2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jianmin Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-
  Yee K Wong. Uni-controlnet: All-in-one control to text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     R ELATED W ORK
A.1   I MAGE - BASED C ONTROL M ETHODS FOR D IFFUSION M ODELS

Image-based control methods are crucial for image generation. Following the success of diffusion
models, numerous algorithms for controlled image generation have been developed, leading to the
creation of techniques such as SDEdit (Meng et al., 2021), ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023), and
DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023).

A.2   C ONSERVATIVITY IN D IFFUSION M ODELS

With the significant success of score matching training algorithms in the unconstrained score ap-
proach, this method has become a focal point in research. The score functions learned in this manner
are no longer conservative, meaning they may not strictly adhere to the constraints of the original
data distribution. This lack of conservativity could impact model performance, and numerous stud-
ies have explored this phenomenon (Salimans & Ho, 2021; Chao et al., 2022; Horvat & Pfister,
2024; Lai et al., 2023). Researchers have attempted to adjust for this by incorporating either soft or
hard conservativity constraints, producing some interesting theoretical results in the process.
However, while conservativity has been extensively studied in foundational models, there is a rel-
ative lack of research on conservativity in diffusion models that enhance control over generative
capabilities through the addition of modules. Given the unique generation process of diffusion mod-
els, implementing effective conservativity controls is particularly critical, potentially offering new
perspectives on improving model stability and generation quality.

B     D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
Compared with mainstream methods developed from ControlNet, which exert control influence
across the entire image, our approach have distinct use cases. While mainstream ControlNet meth-
ods offer broad control capabilities, MIControlNet focuses on precise control in targeted areas, ad-
dressing conflicts arising from multiple control signals.
Our primary focus is on improving controllability. However, our method has not yet fully explored
the potential of prompt engineering and related techniques, such as using negative prompts and
sampling algorithms. There is significant room for improvement in these areas, which could further
enhance the effectiveness and flexibility of controlled image generation.
The necessity of incorporating a conservativity loss is another crucial aspect of our approach. Due
to resource constraints, we could not fully implement the conservativity loss in large-scale models.
We hope future work will address this limitation, potentially leading to more robust implementa-
tions. Additionally, with the theoretical advancements in conservativity constraints, similar to the
development of score matching, we anticipate the emergence of unbiased estimation algorithms for
the trace Jacobian matrix that does not require second-order gradient backpropagation.

C     B ROADER I MPACT AND S AFEGUARDS
Generative AI has the potential to produce harmful information. To mitigate these risks, it is crucial
to implement comprehensive safeguards. Accordingly, we will integrate a safety checker into our
released code.

D     P ROOFS
D.1   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.1

Proposition D.1 (Decomposition of Jacobian Matrix) In a U-Net model augmented with Control-
Net, the overall Jacobian matrix Jst ,xt can be decomposed into the original Jacobian matrix Jest ,xt


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from the U-Net and an additional Jacobian matrix Jcst ,xt introduced by ControlNet:

                                             Jst ,xt = Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt .                                  (20)



                                l+1
                                X
                    Jst ,xt =         Jst ,fid Jfid ,xt
                                i=1
                                l+1
                                X             h                                                    i
                           =          Jst ,fid Jfid ,fieres Jfieres ,xt + Jfid ,ficres Jficres ,xt
                                i=1
                                l+1
                                X
                           =          Jst ,fid Jfid ,fieres Jfieres ,xt + Jst ,fid Jfid ,ficres Jficres ,xt
                                i=1
                                                                                                              (21)
                                l+1
                                X
                           =          Jst ,fieres Jfieres ,xt + Jst ,ficres Jficres ,xt
                                i=1
                                l+1
                                X                                 l+1
                                                                  X
                           =          Jst ,fieres Jfieres ,xt +         Jst ,ficres Jficres ,xt
                             i=1                                  i=1
                           = Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt .


D.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4.2

Proposition D.2 Under Assumption 4.1, the gradient of the conservativity loss of ControlNet is
equal to the gradient of the estimated conservativity loss, which is given by

                                                ∇ϕ LcQC = ∇ϕ Lest
                                                              QC .                                            (22)


         Lest
                          T          T             T

          QC = Ev,t,xt v Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v − v Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v

              = Ev,t,xt vT 2Jest ,xt JcT            e      c          c     cT        c       c

                                       st ,xt − 2Jst ,xt Jst ,xt + Jst ,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v
                                                                                                              (23)
              + Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt JeT         e      e

                                     st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v

              = LcQC + Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt JeT             e     e

                                               st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v.



Because ∇ϕ vT Jest ,xt JeT        e       e
                        st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v = 0, therefore, we have


                                                ∇ϕ Lest      c
                                                    QC = ∇ϕ LQC .                                             (24)


D.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

Theorem D.1 Suppose the Frobenius norm of Jest ,xt is uniformly bounded by M , we have

                                          √  q
                                  LcQC ≤ 2 2M Lsimple
                                               QC     + Lsimple
                                                         QC     ,                                             (25)

which indicates that if the simplied loss is zero, the original loss is also zero.


                                                             13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LcQC =Ev,t,xt vT 2Jest ,xt JcT            e      c          c     cT       c       c

                            st ,xt − 2Jst ,xt Jst ,xt + Jst ,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v

      + Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt JeT            e      e

                               st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v

      − Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt JeT            e      e

                               st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v
                 h                                           T                                              i
     =Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt − Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt v


      − Ev,t,xt vT Jest ,xt JeT            e      e

                               st ,xt − Jst ,xt Jst ,xt v
            h                                               T                                                    i
     =Et,xt tr Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt          − tr Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt


      − Et,xt tr Jest ,xt JeT                 e       e

                             st ,xt − tr Jst ,xt Jst ,xt
      1                                                      T 2      1                                2
     = Et,xt Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt − Jest ,xt + Jcst ,xt            − Et,xt Jest ,xt − JeT

                                                                                              st ,xt F
      2                                                         F     2
      1                                                       2     1                                2
     = Et,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt + Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F − Et,xt Jest ,xt − JeT
                   e        eT              c          cT

                                                                                            st ,xt F
      2                                                             2
      1                                                            2 1                                   2
                                              c           cT
     ≤ Et,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F + Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F − Et,xt Jest ,xt − JeT
                   e         eT
                                                                                                  st ,xt F
      2                                                                 2
                                                               1                             2
               e         eT             c          cT
     =Et,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F + Et,xt Jcst ,xt − JcT           st ,xt F
                                                               2
                                                                                                              (26)
Because that Jest ,xt F ≤ M , we have:

                            Jcst ,xt − JcT          c           cT
                                        st ,xt F ≤ Jst ,xt F + Jst ,xt F ≤ 2M.                              (27)

Then, we have
                                                       1                        2
                 LcQC ≤ 2M Et,xt Jest ,xt − JeT                c         cT
                                             st ,xt F + Et,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F .                         (28)
                                                       2

By Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality, we have
                 h                            i2                            2
                   Et,xt Jest ,xt − JeT
                                     st ,xt F    ≤ Et,xt Jcst ,xt − JcT
                                                                     st ,xt F .                             (29)

Therefore, we have
                                                          q
                                                                                    2
                        Et,xt    Jest ,xt − JeT
                                             st ,xt F ≤    Et,xt Jcst ,xt − JcT
                                                                             st ,xt F .                     (30)

Then,

                        √
                                 r
                                     1                          2  1                        2
             LcQC ≤ 2       2M         Et,xt Jcst ,xt − JcT                c         cT
                                                         st ,xt F + Et,xt Jst ,xt − Jst ,xt F ,             (31)
                                     2                             2
which indicades

                                             √  q
                                     LcQC ≤ 2 2M Lsimple
                                                  QC     + Lsimple
                                                            QC     .                                        (32)

E    MGDA FOR F EATURE I NJECTION AND C OMBINATION

The score function st (xt ) is defined as the gradient of the scalar value log p(xt ), we can interpret
addition operation in the score domain as the combination of gradients from different optimization
objectives. Thus, MGDA is applicable for optimizing this blend of diverse gradients. While the
feature domain of U-Net may not present a straightforward optimization objective, we adapt the


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


principle of forming acute angles between each feature map to mitigate conflicts among various
features.
The distinction between feature injection and combination lies in the architecture of ControlNet.
Feature injection involves adding the control signal to the original U-Net feature map, which sug-
gests that the original U-Net feature map should ideally remain unchanged. Therefore, after balanc-
ing the coefficients with MGDA, additional scaling is required to ensure this. In contrast, for feature
combinations, we can directly apply MGDA to balance the feature maps without such constraints.

F     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS ABOUT MIC ONTROL N ET
F.1   DATA R EBALANCE D ETAILS

Firstly, we segment the images into distinct regions. Subsequently, we randomly select portions of
these segmentations, utilizing both the edge-like features within these selected areas and the original
images to construct our training dataset. This approach ensures that edge-like features not included
in the segmentations are converted into silent control signals. Consequently, the corresponding
image regions retain high-frequency information, crucial for detailed image generation in silent
control signals.

F.2   T RAINING D ETAILS

Our training process comprises two stages, all of which are conducted on the MultiGen-20M
dataset (Qin et al., 2023) using our balanced control signals. In the first stage, we train the model
using the addinj operation for 2 epochs. For the OpenPose Model, which has less training data, the
duration extends to 9 epochs. In the subsequent stage, we integrate the Lsimple
                                                                          QC     loss into the original
diffusion predicting noise loss with a coefficient of 0.01, and continue training for 2000 steps with
an equivalent batch size of 128. All experiments are executed on eight NVIDIA A800 GPUs, each
with 80GB of memory. The first stage requires approximately 2 days, while the second stage is
completed in about 7 hours.

F.3   S AMPLING D ETAILS

For sampling with multi MIControlNets, we first apply the addcom operation for the feature com-
bination of different MIControlNets. Then we apply the addinj operation to add the feature maps
of MIControlNets to that of the original U-Net.

G     M ORE E XPERIMENTS
G.1    T HE S UDDEN C ONVERGENCE OF MIC ONTROL N ET AND FID

We evaluate the rapid convergence behavior of MIControlNet compared to the original ControlNet,
as illustrated in Figure 6. Notably, ControlNet often experiences sudden shifts in performance at
particular training steps. To investigate further, we focused on these critical training milestones for
both MIControlNet and ControlNet. Our results demonstrate that MIControlNet achieves earlier
convergence while maintaining similar or improved generation quality compared to ControlNet.

G.2    M ORE Q UALITATIVE M ETRICS FOR M ULTI - CONDITION E VALUATION

Table 2 shows the L1 distance between the extracted condition from the generated images and the
original condition. Our MIControlNet achieves the lowest values in most cases, indicating better
preservation of control signals (excluding silent control signals) in the generated images.
Table 3 presents the FID scores of various models using a new conditioning approach, where the
ground truth image is split into left and right sections, and conditions are extracted for each part.
In Table 4, the ground truth image is divided into the central object and the surrounding areas, with
conditions extracted accordingly. Our MIControlNet consistently suppresses baseline models across
nearly all conditions, demonstrating its superior performance in multi-condition image generation.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               Hed                                           Model
             100                                                                       ControlNet - OpenPose
                                                                                       MIControlNet - OpenPose
                                         OpenPose
              98
                                                                                                            OpenPose
              96


              94
       FID


              92


              90         Canny
                                                          Canny

              88   Hed
                     6000        7000       8000     9000          10000       11000           12000
                                                     Steps


Figure 6: FID-convergence steps. circle represents ControlNet and square represents MIControlNet.

Table 2: The distance between the condition extracted from the generated image and the ground
truth in the conflict area. The distances are L1 norm expressed in units of 1 × 104 .

        Methods                  Openpose-Canny                   Openpose-Hed                      Canny-Hed
        ControlNet                      1.3903                        1.7851                            2.8626
       ControlNet0.5                    1.3223                        1.8310                            2.8881
       ControlNet1.5                    1.3848                        1.9009                            2.8123
       ControlNet∗                      1.3833                        1.9066                            2.9381
      Ours (1-stage)                    0.9638                        1.5080                            1.9634
      Ours (2-stage)                    1.0729                        1.6600                            2.1954
      Uni-ControlNet                    1.0808                        1.7232                            2.0951



G.3    Q UALITATIVE M ETRICS UNDER D IFFERENT P ROMPT C ONDITIONS

Table 5 presents the FID and Total Variance (TV, in units of 1 × 104 ) for Canny and OpenPose
conditions under three scenarios: no prompts, brief prompts, and detailed prompts.
We have the following findings:

       • MIControlNet, with or without the conservativity loss, demonstrates similar FID perfor-
         mance. However, with conservativity loss, MIControlNet exhibits improved pattern gener-
         ation ability under silent control signals, as highlighted in Table 5.
       • MIControlNet achieves comparable FID performance to the baseline but demonstrates sig-
         nificantly stronger performance in terms of total variance.
       • When comparing no prompts, brief prompts, and detailed prompts, providing more detailed
         prompts generally leads to better FID performance and smaller total variance.
       • Interestingly, for detailed prompts, the total variance tends to slightly increase. We hypoth-
         esize that this is due to the more detailed prompts offering finer control under silent control
         signals, thereby generating more diverse patterns.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: The FIDs for the left-right split condition. ControlNet*** denotes ControlNet** with our
balanced feature combination sampling. ControlNet**0.5 and ControlNet**1.5 represent Control-
Net** sampling where the first control signal is scaled by 0.5 and 1.5, respectively.

         Methods         Openpose-Canny        Openpose-Hed       Canny-Hed       HED-Depth
        ControlNet            63.8590             75.2076           58.8519        69.3344
       ControlNet**           68.7007             69.4012           61.9949        62.1554
      ControlNet***           67.5028             65.9667           66.9362        62.9284
      ControlNet**0.5         80.1214             84.4420           68.6729        61.8351
      ControlNet**1.5         66.1629             65.2359           65.5698        71.7198
       ControlNet*            68.8815             68.0828           56.7660        71.9574
       ControlNet0.5          65.9972             108.2335          81.5698        75.4173
       ControlNet1.5          69.2258              66.4017          58.4945        93.3087
       Ours(1-stage)          64.7937             64.0063           55.9595        56.3233
       Ours(2-stage)          62.5830             66.4729           54.3970        57.9421
      Uni-ControlNet          71.2586              89.4048          56.8694        65.9861


                     Table 4: The FIDs for the central-outside split condition.

         Methods         Openpose-Canny        Openpose-Hed       Canny-Hed       Hed-Depth
        ControlNet            65.2961             75.3146           60.8962        73.4688
       ControlNet**           68.1883             63.8602           58.9864        59.8399
      ControlNet***           66.6215             66.4260           62.1626        62.1199
      ControlNet**0.5         70.8668              71.1370          63.1586        61.1704
      ControlNet**1.5         67.3933              65.0094          61.3308        62.3237
       ControlNet*            72.1651             72.1254           67.7424        78.5825
       ControlNet0.5          72.5424             104.6354          82.8161        81.8447
       ControlNet1.5          67.6942              67.9931          62.5344        89.5242
       Ours(1-stage)          62.9185             59.0101           54.9762        56.8017
       Ours(2-stage)          61.6007              61.2391          56.3576        57.4142
      Uni-ControlNet          60.5932             68.3847           57.8282        61.7094



G.4   A SYMMETRY A NALYSIS FOR R EGULAR C ONTROL N ET

We calculate the asymmetry (Asym) for Regular ControlNet and compare it with our MIControlNet
(1-stage) and MIControlNet (2-stage). The results are shown in Table 6:
We have the following findings:

       • MIControlNet (1-stage) performs slightly better than ControlNet in terms of asymmetry
         (Asym).
       • MIControlNet (2-stage) significantly outperforms both ControlNet and MIControlNet (1-
         stage) on Asym.
       • For each condition, MIControlNet (2-stage) demonstrates consistent improvements on a
         logarithmic scale.

G.5   A M ORE C LEAR A BLATION

The FID scores for a thorough ablation study are shown in Table 7. We observe that:

       • Our silent control signal-targeted data augmentation, feature injection & combination, and
         conservativity loss all lead to improvements in FID scores.
       • The conservativity loss, particularly for Canny combined with other conditions, achieves a
         consistent improvement of approximately 3 points in FID.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: FID and Total Variance (TV) for Canny and OpenPose conditions under different prompt
scenarios.

 (FID, TV)                       ControlNet      MIControlNet (1-stage)      MIControlNet (2-stage)
 Canny No Prompts               (109.6, 2.62)         (114.4, 3.54)               (123.9, 3.79)
 Canny Brief Prompts            (89.34, 2.48)         (89.77, 3.24)               (90.18, 3.15)
 Canny Detailed Prompts         (88.55, 2.47)         (90.21, 3.28)               (89.37, 3.36)
 OpenPose No Prompts            (132.5, 3.34)         (131.9, 3.39)               (133.0, 3.67)
 OpenPose Brief Prompts         (97.08, 2.52)         (98.32, 2.71)               (98.14, 2.74)
 OpenPose Detailed Prompts      (99.09, 2.70)         (95.34, 2.92)               (94.16, 2.91)

              Table 6: Asymmetry (Asym) comparison across different conditions.

                    Condition                   Canny       Hed       Openpose
                    ControlNet                   56.75     22.41        6.454
                    MIControlNet (1-stage)       29.87    38.28         3.980
                    MIControlNet (2-stage)      0.1174    0.1894       0.0274


      • The improvements achieved through the conservativity loss are consistent, and we have
        further strengthened its theoretical foundation, particularly in the context of modular neural
        networks designed to optimize GPU memory usage and computational efficiency.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: FID scores for different methods under various conditions. Lower scores indicate better
performance.

    Method                                    Openpose-Canny        Canny-Hed           Hed-Depth
    Vanilla ControlNet                          80.37 / 111.30     123.59 / 86.43      91.98 / 86.25
    + Data Augmentation                          92.98 / 84.02      77.02 / 75.46      74.28 / 81.16
    + Our Feature Injection & Combination       76.13 / 77.22      74.19 / 70.26       71.16 / 71.93
    + Conservativity Loss                       75.77 / 72.25      71.34 / 69.35       69.68 / 71.18


H     S AMPLES


 Multi-Conditions       ControlNet          ControlNet*     MIControlNet (1-stage) MIControlNet (2-stage)

      Figure 7: Comparison of ControlNet and MIControlNet for multi-conditions generation.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Canny                 ControlNet          MIControlNet (1-stage)     MIControlNet (2-stage)


                     Figure 8: More visual results for single control signal.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Hed                  ControlNet          MIControlNet (1-stage)    MIControlNet (2-stage)


                     Figure 9: More visual results for single control signal.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Openpose-Canny       ControlNet         ControlNet*      MIControlNet (1-stage) MIControlNet (2-stage)


                    Figure 10: More visual results for multi-control signals.


   Openpose-Hed         ControlNet        ControlNet*      MIControlNet (1-stage) MIControlNet (2-stage)


                    Figure 11: More visual results for multi-control signals.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Canny-Hed          ControlNet         ControlNet*     MIControlNet (1-stage) MIControlNet (2-stage)


                    Figure 12: More visual results for multi-control signals.


                                               23
