Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A RTICULATE -A NYTHING :
AUTOMATIC M ODELING OF A RTICULATED O BJECTS
VIA A V ISION -L ANGUAGE F OUNDATION M ODEL

 Long Le, Jason Xie, William Liang, Hung-Ju Wang, Yue Yang, Yecheng Jason Ma,
 Kyle Vedder, Arjun Krishna, Dinesh Jayaraman, Eric Eaton
                           University of Pennsylvania
                               https://articulate-anything.github.io/
                                                A BSTRACT
         Interactive 3D simulated objects are crucial in AR/VR, animations, and robotics,
         driving immersive experiences and advanced automation. However, creating these
         articulated objects requires extensive human effort and expertise, limiting their
         broader applications. To overcome this challenge, we present A RTICULATE -
         A NYTHING, a system that automates the articulation of diverse, complex objects
         from many input modalities, including text, images, and videos. A RTICULATE -
         A NYTHING leverages vision-language models (VLMs) to generate code that can
         be compiled into an interactable digital twin for use in standard 3D simulators.
         Our system exploits existing 3D asset datasets via a mesh retrieval mechanism,
         along with an actor-critic system that iteratively proposes, evaluates, and refines
         solutions for articulating the objects, self-correcting errors to achieve a robust out-
         come. Qualitative evaluations demonstrate A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s capability
         to articulate complex and even ambiguous object affordances by leveraging rich
         grounded inputs. In extensive quantitative experiments on the standard PartNet-
         Mobility dataset, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING substantially outperforms prior work,
         increasing the success rate from 8.7–12.2% to 75% and setting a new bar for
         state-of-the-art performance. We further showcase the utility of our system by
         generating 3D assets from in-the-wild video inputs, which are then used to train
         robotic policies for fine-grained manipulation tasks in simulation that go beyond
         basic pick and place. These policies are then transferred to a real robotic system.

                In-the-Wild Objects                                  Sim2Real Robot Learning
           Text “Three-drawer filing cabinet”
           Images



                                                Articulate
                Articulation
                                                Anything
           Videos


Figure 1: Given text, images, or videos showing an object’s motion, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING auto-
matically generates its 3D interactable digital twin, handling a wide variety of objects and affordances.
Among other applications, these articulated assets can be used to train robotic manipulation policies
in Sim2Real. Full video demonstrations and source code are available on the website.

1    I NTRODUCTION
One of the most promising avenues in the quest for generally capable robots is the pursuit of scaling
robot training in simulation for deployment in the real world. We have developed fast, accurate


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


simulators that scale to millions of FPS and hundreds of GPUs (Xiang et al., 2020; Makoviychuk
et al., 2021), enabling policy learning on a staggering scale. However, a critical bottleneck in this
research direction persists: the immense human labor required to construct realistic, interactable
environments for these agents to learn within. Despite the existence of large, open libraries of static
object geometries — with the largest open dataset containing over 10 million objects (Deitke et al.,
2024) — we have comparatively minuscule open libraries of articulated 3D objects (only around
2,300 objects (Xiang et al., 2020)). This scarcity stems from the time-consuming, labor-intensive,
and expertise-demanding nature of the manual annotation process.
To address this challenge, we present A RTICULATE -A NYTHING, a novel approach in automatic
articulation that harnesses the power of leading foundation vision-language models (VLMs) to
articulate a diverse range of objects of arbitrary complexity through iterative feedback (Fig. 1).
A RTICULATE -A NYTHING represents a step function improvement in quality, accuracy (8.7-12.2%
to 75%), and generalizability over prior art (Chen et al., 2024; Mandi et al., 2024), overcoming
previous limitations that restricted success to only a narrow range of object categories and joint
types. Unlike prior art, which has been limited by the impoverished input of bounding boxes or static
images, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING affords the flexibility of consuming rich, grounded inputs from
text, images, or even videos, enabling users to request exotic articulation descriptions or resolve
articulation ambiguities. For example, the right column of Fig. 7 features a digital model of a window
that could plausibly slide or tip to open; when A RTICULATE -A NYTHING is shown an in-the-wild
video demonstration, it accurately produces the desired sliding motion.
To achieve this level of flexibility and accuracy, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING employs an actor-critic
system with two core components: (1) a vision-language actor that synthesizes high-level Python code,
which can be compiled into Unified Robot Description Format (URDF) files and (2) a vision-language
critic that provides feedback on the rendered prediction compared against available ground-truth.
The result is an agentic system that can automatically self-evaluate and iteratively improve the
articulation of complex objects. Beyond robotics, the flexibility of A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s inputs
married with its high-quality outputs puts automatic generation of rich, high-quality, and diverse
virtual environments within reach with broad-reaching applications to 3D/VR (Kim et al., 2024),
human-computer interaction (Jiang et al., 2023), and animation (Yang et al., 2022).
Our key contributions include:
1. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING: We present a vision-language actor-critic system that accurately
   articulates objects from diverse input modalities, including texts, images, and videos.
2. Articulation as program synthesis: We develop a high-level Python API compilable into URDFs,
   enabling the VLM actor to generate compact, easily debuggable programs.
3. Visually grounded inputs enable closed-loop iterative refinement: We highlight the critical
   role of grounded visual inputs in articulating ambiguous and complex objects, leveraging such
   inputs in a closed-loop system that self-evaluates and self-improves its articulations.
4. Extensive evaluation demonstrates superior performance: Prior works in automatic articulation
   are only evaluated on a handful of object categories. Quantitative analysis on the entire PartNet-
   Mobility dataset shows dramatic improvement over existing methods, increasing the success rate
   from 8.7–12.2% of prior work to 75%.

2   R ELATED W ORK
3D Asset Datasets. Large open datasets of 3D objects, such as 3D Warehouse and Objaverse (Deitke
et al., 2024), provide extensive collections of 3D models uploaded by independent artists. However,
most objects in these repositories lack articulation. Datasets like ShapeNet (Chang et al., 2015) and
PartNet (Mo et al., 2018) decompose objects into parts (links) but do not include kinematic joints.
Some datasets, such as PartNet-Mobility (Xiang et al., 2020) and GAPartNet (Geng et al., 2022), do
feature articulated objects with links and joints, but these annotations are manually created so their
number of objects is modest. Our work aims to automate the creation of articulated 3D assets suitable
for robotic tasks, reducing the reliance on manual annotation.
Articulated Object Modeling. Articulated object modeling is a significant area of research, encom-
passing tasks such as perception, reconstruction, and generation (Liu et al., 2024). In perception,
works like (Zeng et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2017) focus on identifying and understanding articulated
objects. Reconstruction efforts from single RGB images (Chen et al., 2024), RGBD images (Weng


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2024), multi-view images (Liu et al., 2023a), or point clouds (Jiang et al., 2022) aim to rebuild
articulated models. Generation methods, including those leveraging connectivity graphs (Liu et al.,
2023b) or neural approaches (Lei et al., 2023), focus on creating new articulated objects. Our goal
is to develop an end-to-end pipeline that spans from perception to reconstruction and generation,
utilizing intuitive and easily accessible inputs from humans, such as language or videos, instead of
relying on more specialized modalities, such as point clouds or graphs.

3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
To ensure compatibility with standard 3D simulators, we represent 3D models in the Unified Robot
Description Format (URDF). In URDF, an object is structured in a hierarchical tree consisting of
nodes (links) and edges (joints). The links represent parts of an object (e.g., drawers and doors of a
kitchen island), and joints specify how each part moves. The two most common joints are prismatic,
representing a translational movement (e.g., a sliding drawer), and revolute, representing a rotation
(e.g., a pivoting door).
Given an input x of text, image, or video depicting an object, we assume there exists a ground-truth
URDF u∗ (e.g., one that a human could create). The goal of articulation is to automatically construct
a URDF model û that comprises the same set of links as u∗ while minimizing the difference between
URDF models via the following loss:
                                      Ltotal = Lmesh + Llink + Ljoint ,                                 (1)
                  PN
 where Lmesh = i=1 Chamfer(P̂i , Pi∗ ) measures the discrepancy in visual appearances between
the predicted and ground-truth links using point clouds P̂i and Pi∗ . N is the number of links. Llink
captures 3D pose differences between predicted and ground-truth links:
                                      N
                                      X
                            Llink =         ∥x̂i − x∗ i ∥2 + 2 arccos(|q̂i · qi∗ |) ,                   (2)
                                            |     {z     } |        {z            }
                                      i=1
                                             position error       orientation error

where xi is a 3D coordinate and qi is a quaternion. Ljoint quantifies the joint discrepancies.
                        Ljoint = Ljoint type + Ljoint axis + Ljoint origin + Ljoint limit ,             (3)
where Ljoint type is a cross entropy loss, Ljoint axis is the angular difference between axes, Ljoint origin
is the 3D pose difference between joint origins, and Ljoint limit measures the difference in range and
direction of motion. In practice, jointly optimizing this objective becomes intractable. Consequently,
we instead tackle each loss sequentially, decomposing the problem into three phases: (1) Mesh
Retrieval, (2) Link Placement, and (3) Joint Prediction. Furthermore, access to u∗ is often limited,
making traditional optimization methods for computing these losses impractical. To overcome this,
we leverage vision-language model (VLM) agents to approximate the loss functions directly from
visual inputs. Additionally, instead of refining solutions through a conventional optimizer, VLM
agents are also used to propose solutions in the form of code and iteratively refine them based on
feedback from a critic module. This process is detailed in the following sections.

4    A RTICULATED O BJECT G ENERATION VIA ACTOR -C RITIC VLM S
In this section, we introduce A RTICULATE -A NYTHING, a system capable of generating articulated
objects from various input modalities. Figure 2 presents an overview of our method, which includes
three main components: (1) Mesh Retrieval (Sec. 4.1), which reconstructs the 3D structure for each
object part by retrieving meshes from a 3D asset library, (2) Link Placement (Sec. 4.2), which spatially
arranges the parts, and (3) Joint Prediction (Sec. 4.3), which determines the potential kinematic
movements between parts. Additionally, we describe an optional step, targeted affordance extraction,
in Sec. 4.4. Our system consists of many specialized VLM agents. Each agent is a Google’s Gemini
Flash-1.5 visual language model (Team et al., 2023) prompted with no more than 20 in-context
examples to perform different tasks. All system and task instruction prompts are provided in the
source code.
Crucially, our system produces high-level Python code compilable into URDFs via a custom API we
have developed. Directly generating URDFs is challenging due to (1) the verbosity of URDF/XML,
which increases the likelihood of hallucination in long contexts, and more importantly, (2) the need
for performing complex mathematics in-place in many cases. For instance, articulating a rotation


                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            1 Input Text, Image, or Video                  2 Mesh Retrieval          3.5 Targeted Affordance
            Double-hung
            window,
            white frame.
            Two glass                                                                           Selecte
                                                                                                        d
            panes.


           3 Link Placement                                Actor
                           pred_robot.add_link(links['window'])
     "realism_rating": "10",

                           pred_robot.place_relative_to(
            "description": "The prediction is
                             'window', 'window_frame',
              visually identical to the groundtruth."

                             placement="inside",

                             clearance=0.0

                           )

                                                            Critic


           4 Joint Prediction                              Actor
                           pred_robot.place_relative_to(
            “gt_desc”: “window slides up and down
                              'window', 'window_frame',
             along the z axis”,

                              ...
                                   “Pred_desc”: “window rotates forward
                           )
                                        along y”,

                           ...
                                      “Suggestion”: “use
                           pred_robot.make_prismatic_joint(
         ‘make_prismatic_joint’”,

                              target_window_link, "window_frame",
   “realism_rating”: 0
                              lower_point, upper_point

                           )

                                                            Critic

Figure 2: Method Overview. Given a text, image or video input, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING operates
in three stages: (1) Mesh Retrieval (Sec. 4.1) retrieves a mesh for each object part from a 3D asset
library, (2) Link Placement (Sec. 4.2) places the parts together, and (3) Joint Prediction (Sec. 4.3)
predicts the allowed kinematic movements between parts. Optionally, instead of generating all
possible kinematic joints, we can target a specific joint from the input video (Sec. 4.4). The link
placement and joint prediction systems consist of an actor and a critic, which are VLMs working
together. The actor proposes solutions, and the critic examines those solutions and gives feedback.
along the global z-axis for a door requires forward kinematics calculations down the URDF tree to
translate it to the relative frame. Even seemingly simple tasks, like positioning a toilet seat above the
bowl, can be complicated due to non-trivial mesh geometries. However, this can easily be remedied
by performing iterative collision checks in a physics engine.
4.1   M ESH R ETRIEVAL
We employ two separate mechanisms for reconstructing meshes from visual (i.e., image or video)
and text inputs. An overview of these processes is provided in Fig. 3.
Visual Inputs. For visual inputs, we perform mesh retrieval by matching the input to a 3D object
from the PartNet-Mobility dataset (Mo et al., 2018). First, a VLM is instructed to detect an object of
interest from the input. Since there might be multiple objects in the frame, when a video is provided,
the VLM is instructed to take advantage of motion cues for more accurate identification. Then, to
reduce the search space, we identify the top-k most similar object categories in the library using CLIP
similarity (Radford et al., 2021). Lastly, a VLM agent Hierarchical ObjectSelector is tasked
with selecting a candidate among several simulated objects based on their visual similarity to the
ground truth. This visual similarity estimate is a proxy for the Lmesh loss described in Sec. 3. To
manage the potentially large candidate pool, we adopt a divide-and-conquer tournament approach.
Specifically, we recursively select the best candidate among a batch of max num images images until
there is only one candidate left.
Text Inputs. For text prompts, we employ a multi-step process using large language model (LLM)
agents. First, a TaskSpecifier densifies the potentially sparse prompt (please see Fig. 3 (b) for
an example). Then, a LayoutPlanner is instructed to describe each object part along with its
dimensions. Finally, mesh retrieval is performed for each part by matching the object parts’ CLIP
language embeddings to the mesh descriptions in the PartNet-Mobility dataset via cosine similarity.


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Visual Input          VLM Description              Top-K       Candidate Selection
                                                              Laptop

                                “object”: “a
                                                              Camera

                                computer monitor”,

                                                              Display
                                “affordance”: “the
                                monitor can be
                                lifted”
                                                               CLIP

                                Dataset Categories                                              (a)

              Input Text                   Layout Planner
           Drawer                  {
                                    Part Dims
                                       "name": "filing_cabinet_body",

                                       "description": "The main body
                                   of the filing cabinet",

            Task Specifier             "dimensions": [0.46, 0.38,
                                   0.66]

           A three-drawer          },

           filing cabinet          {...}                                   CLIP
           with three drawers                                                        Part Ids
           on the bottom and
           a body on the top        Dataset Part Descriptions                                   (b)

Figure 3: Mesh retrieval. The top and bottom diagrams provide overviews for reconstructing visual
(i.e., image or video) and text inputs, respectively. For visual input, we match the ground-truth object
to a template object in the library using an efficient divide-and-conquer retrieval mechanism. For
text input, we first prompt an LLM to predict the different object parts and their dimensions. Then,
we retrieve a mesh for each part using precomputed CLIP embeddings and subsequently scale the
meshes to specifications. More details in Sec. 4.1.
Since the original mesh descriptions from the dataset are coarse, we compute our own annotations
by prompting a VLM to describe each mesh (e.g., material, shape, function) given its image. The
retrieved meshes are finally rescaled to fit the specified dimensions.
4.2   L INK P LACEMENT
The link placement system can handle text inputs containing the semantic names of each part, along
with an optional input image. For videos, we extract the first frame as the image input. The system
consists of an actor and a critic. The link actor is responsible for placing links together in the 3D
space. In the API, placement is done by aligning aligning the child and parent’s link centers along an
axis and perform collision checks to ensure tight placement without intersection. When processing
visual inputs, a critic is also employed to verify the actor’s solution. The critic is prompted to describe
any visual dissimilarity between the input image and the predicted 3D model rendered in simulation,
pinpoint the source of error in the actor’s code, and give a realism rating between 0 and 10. This
realism rating serves as a proxy for the Llink loss. The actor is instructed to take the feedback into
account and adjust its Python code accordingly. This process terminates when the rating exceeds a
threshold of 5. Figure 4 (Left) provides an illustrative example of this process.
4.3   J OINT P REDICTION
Similar to link placement, the joint prediction system accepts inputs in the form of text containing the
Python code for link placement, as well as an optional input image or video. The actor then extends
the Python code to include kinematic joint prediction between parts. For video inputs, a critic is also
utilized to verify the actor’s solution. The critic is instructed to compare the input against a video of
the predicted joint moving in simulation and examine the source code to identify either success or
one of 4 failure cases. A realism rating between 0 and 10, serving as a proxy for the Ljoint loss,
is also used to categorize the most egregious error (incorrect joint type) to the least (incorrect joint
limit). As before, the actor is instructed to rewrite its code, taking the critic’s feedback into account
as long as the realism rating falls below a threshold of 5. See an example in Fig. 4 (Right).
4.4   TARGETED A FFORDANCE E XTRACTION
Optionally, instead of generating all possible kinematic joints, we can target a specific joint from the
input video. This can be useful to reduce the number of input tokens to VLMs, thereby lowering
the cost or making automatic debugging of predictions easier. To achieve this, we prompt a VLM
agent targeted affordance extractor to determine which child link should be annotated with a


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Actor                                                                         Actor


 pred_robot.add_link(links['door'])      pred_robot.add_link(links['door'])    # Front-Right-Bottom (FRB)
        # Front-Left-Bottom (FLB)
         # Front-Left-Bottom (FLB)

 pred_robot.place_relative_to(
          # door goes in front of the
          pivot_point = door_vertices[3]

   pivot_point = door_vertices[2]

   pivot_point = door_vertices[2]


     'door',
                            # furniture body.

     'furniture_body',
                  pred_robot.place_relative_to(
        pred_robot.make_revolute_joint(
   pred_robot.make_revolute_joint(
   pred_robot.make_revolute_joint(

     placement="left",
                      'door',
                             target_door_link,
                 target_door_link,
                 target_door_link,

     clearance=0.0
                          'furniture_body',                     "furniture_body",
                 "furniture_body",
                 "furniture_body",

 )                                           placement="front",                    global_axis=[0, 0, 1],
            global_axis=[0, 0, 1],
            global_axis=[0, 0, -1],

                                             clearance=0.0
                        lower_angle_deg=0,
                lower_angle_deg=0,
                lower_angle_deg=0,

                                         )                                         upper_angle_deg=90,
               upper_angle_deg=90,
               upper_angle_deg=90,


                                                                                   pivot_point=pivot_point,
          pivot_point=pivot_point,
          pivot_point=pivot_point,


                                                                               )                                  )                                  )


 "description" : "The model is not       "description": "The prediction        "improvement_suggestion": "Try     "improvement_suggestion": "In      "improvement_suggestion":

 very realistic. The door is placed      is visually identical to the          changing the pivot to the left     our convention, left is            "None",


 on the side instead of the front of     groundtruth.",
                       side of the door (e.g. Front-      negative and the limit is set      "realism_rating": 10

 the cabinet”,                           "realism_rating": 10                  Left-Bottom) to make the joint     from 0 to 90 so in order to

 "realism_rating": 4                                                           more like the groundtruth          open outward, the axis must be

                                                                               video.",
                          [0, 0, -1] not [0, 0, 1].",


                                                                               "realism_rating": 2                "realism_rating": 3



 Critic                                                                        Critic

                              (a) Link Placement                                                                        (b) Joint Prediction

Figure 4: Both link placement and joint prediction systems consist of an actor and a critic. The actor
produces Python code, which is automatically compiled into URDFs and rendered in simulation.
Source code, predicted, and input modalities (images for link and videos for joint) are given to the
critic for evaluation. The synergy between the actor and critic enables self-correction of errors (red
border) and successful articulation (green border).
kinematic joint given the input video and a segmented image of the simulated asset, where each part
is distinctively colored.

5         E XPERIMENTS
Datasets: We use the Partnet-Mobility dataset (Mo et al., 2018) which includes human annotations
for ∼2.3K objects, ∼1.9K revolute joints, and ∼7.6K prismatic joints.
Tasks: Given a ground-truth articulated URDF from PartNet-Mobility, we mask out all link and joint
information. The objective is to reconstruct the masked URDF. Solving this objective includes two
primary tasks: (1) link placement—determine the spatial arrangement of object parts, and (2) joint
prediction—infer the movement capabilities between parts.
Evaluation Metrics: We assess performance using success rates for each task.
1. Link placement: Success is determined by the pose difference between predicted and ground-truth
   links falling below a small threshold.
2. Joint prediction: We evaluate differences in joint type, axis, origin, and limit. Success requires
   all criteria to be within a small threshold.
The position threshold is set to 50mm and the angular threshold to 0.25 radian (∼ 14.3 degree). When
evaluating A RTICULATE -A NYTHING, if an object’s link placement is incorrect, all of its joints are
also counted as incorrect. More mathematical details and some visualizations of the different joint
errors are available in Appendix A.1.
Baselines: We compare against two prior state-of-the-art methods: URDFormer (Chen et al., 2024)
and Real2Code (Mandi et al., 2024). Both methods were trained or fine-tuned on five object categories
in the PartNet-Mobility dataset. We evaluate the performance of these five (in-distribution) and the
remaining 41 (out-of-distribution) classes. Implementation details are provided in Appendix A.4.
Implementation Details for A RTICULATE -A NYTHING: Our system employs Google’s Gemini
Flash-1.5 (Team et al., 2023) as the vision-language model (VLM). Physics computations are
performed using PyBullet (Coumans & Bai, 2016), while rendering is done in Sapien (Xiang et al.,
2020). Motion traces in videos are annotated using CoTracker (Karaev et al., 2023) for visualization.
We use few-shot prompting with around 20 in-context examples.
5.1          H OW WELL DOES A RTICULATE -A NYTHING PERFORM VERSUS PRIOR WORK ?
We benchmark A RTICULATE -A NYTHING against two prior works in automatic articulation. In this ex-
periment, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING is fed input videos. The key differences between A RTICULATE -


                                                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                   100
                   80   75.0                                        Articulate Anything                                          Text     Image       Video
                                                                    URDFormer Oracle                                              88.6
                                                                    URDFormer DINO
                   60


                                                                                                Success Rate (%)
Success Rate (%)
                                                                    Real2Code Oracle                                80                                     77.7
                   40                                                                                                     68.6
                                                   24.7
                                                          20.2                                                      60
                   20          14.6         12.2                 13.5                11.1
                                                                                                                                                    54.4
                                      8.7                                8.2                                                                 48.9
                                                                               1.3
                   0
                           All classes             Seen classes         Unseen classes                              40
                          (ID + OOD)                  (ID)                 (OOD)                                         Link Placement       Joint Prediction
Figure 5: Comparison against the baselines.                                                     Figure 6: Input modality ablation. Perfor-
Our approach significantly outperforms all base-                                                mance on articulation tasks improves with more
lines in the joint prediction task. We use few-shot                                             grounded modalities. Videos are only used for
prompting and make no distinction between ID                                                    joint prediction. Input videos provided to the link
and OOD classes, so we only report results for all                                              placement system are automatically transformed
classes. 95% confidence intervals are included.                                                 into image inputs by extracting the first frames.

A NYTHING and prior work include (1) our system operates on high-level Python abstraction instead
of low-level inputs, (2) our system can handle more grounded instruction inputs, including videos,
and (3) our actor-critic system allows iterative refinement on more difficult objects. In contrast,
URDFormer directly predicts part position (discretized) coordinates, and Real2code operates on
oriented bounding box coordinate inputs. Prior works are also limited to simplified inputs as they
cannot handle videos. This also means that their articulation must be done in an open loop.
Our innovations allow A RTICULATE -A NYTHING to achieve superior performance as demonstrated
in Fig. 5. In Appendix A.6, table 1 reveals the raw joint prediction errors behind the success rate of
Fig. 5, including errors of joint type, joint origin, and joint axis. The error distribution is visualized
via violin plots in Fig. 20. Fig. 8 breaks down the failure reasons for each method. The breakdowns
of success rate of our method by object categories are provided in Fig. 21 and 22. We also provide
an ablation where our method is given the same impoverished input modality as the baselines in
Appendix A.5. Mesh reconstruction comparison is given in Appendix A.7.
Figure 7 compares A RTICULATE -A NYTHING against the baselines on in-the-wild object reconstruc-
tion. As before, we select both OOD and ID objects. Our video-based method performs the best while
baselines fail on all tasks, susceptible to minor misalignments or segmentation inaccuracies. Notably,
leveraging rich video input allows A RTICULATE -A NYTHING to resolve articulation ambiguities. For
example, our non-video methods predict the chair leg sliding up and down (for adjusting height), and
the window tipping to open. These predictions are actually reasonable given the input images and
texts but turn out to be wrong when the ground-truth videos are revealed.

5.2                     H OW DO DIFFERENT INPUT MODALITIES AFFECT ARTICULATION ACCURACY ?

While LLMs trained on internet-scale data possess remarkable common sense abilities, we hypothe-
size that visual inputs are still crucial for accurate object articulation. For example, consider a simple
faucet with a spout and a lever. Where should the lever be placed? In fact, there is no standard answer:
there are faucets whose levers are on top and those whose levers are to the side. Joint prediction
without videos is similarly difficult (e.g., see Fig. 7). Thus we contend that more grounded input
modalities such as videos are crucial in resolving difficult or ambiguous articulation.
In this section, we compare the articulation success rates across three input modalities: text, image,
and video. For the text modality, we provide only the semantic part names for link placement;
during joint prediction, the model receives the Python code for link placement and is tasked with
inferring the joints. With the image modality, we additionally supply a static image of the ground-
truth object in addition to the textual information. For the video modality, a video showcasing the
object’s motion is provided in addition to the text. Note that videos are only used for joint prediction.
Input videos provided to the link placement system are automatically turned into images by extracting
the first frames.


                                                                                            7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Public wall-
                                      mountable
                                                                                 Double-hung
               Input Texts            toilet that has a
                                                              Office chair with       Three-drawer          Suitcase with a
                                                                                                                                 window, white
                                      seat and
                                                                                  frame. Two glass
                                      a lever for flushing.   wheels                  filing cabinet        retractable handle   panes.


               Input Images


               Input Videos


               Ours w/

               Text


               Ours w/

               Image


               Ours w/

               Video


               Ours w/

               Video +

               Generation


               URDFormer
               (use cropped images)

                                                   OOD                     OOD                         ID               OOD                  OOD


               Real2Code
               (use OBB texts)
                                                   OOD                     OOD                         ID               OOD                  OOD


Figure 7: In-the-wild Reconstruction. We demonstrate A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s performance
input modalities compared to prior works URDFormer and Real2Code. Green and red borders denote
correct and incorrect predictions with respect to the input videos. Our simulated videos are generated
by varying joint limits and annotated with Cotracker. Casual inputs: Our video-based approach excels
with casually captured inputs in cluttered environments while baselines require extensive manual
curation (more details in Appendix A.4 Fig. 17 and 18). Ambiguous articulation: Interestingly, our
video-based method can resolve ambiguities in static inputs (e.g., chair rotation vs. height adjustment,
window sliding vs. tipping). Baseline limitations: URDFormer consistently predicts drawer-like
structures and is sensitive to minor misalignments (e.g., slightly tilted drawers). Real2Code, which
uses multi-view images for mesh reconstruction and text-oriented bounding boxes (OBBs) for joint
prediction, achieves good global alignment from DUSt3R but produces low-quality 3D segmentation
using a finetuned SAM, leading to joint prediction errors. We also included some results using a
mesh generation model instead of retrieval to allow for even more customized asset creation with
more details in Appendix A.8. Mesh reconstruction quality result is included in Tab. ?? in Appendix
A.6. Please visit our website for additional demos: https://articulate-anything.github.io/.


                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Articulate Anything (ours)                                       URDFormer DINO                                                        Real2Code Oracle
                                   joint_limit                                        success                                                             success
                                 0.4       incorrect link placement                         8.7                                                                 12.2             invalid output
                                       14.7                                                                                                                               17.5
                                                 joint origin          joint type
                                            2.6                                     18.8
                                             5.5 joint axis                                                                                                                      2.4 joint origin
                                              1.7 joint type
                                                                      joint axis 3.7
                                                                                                                      59.1 invalid output                43.9
                                                                                    9.7                                                     joint type                       24.0
                     75.0                                              joint origin                                                                                                  joint axis
  success


Figure 8: Breakdown of failure percentages in all classes. In A RTICULATE -A NYTHING, incorrect
link placement leads to all predicted joints being marked incorrect. For baselines, 59.1% of URD-
Former’s and 17.5% of Real2Code’s outputs are invalid, containing cyclic structures, repeated links,
or syntax errors. Details are in Appendix A.1.

                   100                            Link Placement                                                     80                        Joint Prediction
                            Ground Truth                                                                                    Ground Truth                                               77.6
Success Rate (%)


                            Critic                                                         90.1                             Critic                              77.3
                    90                                       89.4
                                   84.0             85.5                        86.0                                               75.1           74.8                     75.0
                                                                                                                     75
                    80      80.2
                                                                                                                            72.6

                    70                              70
                            2    1        3                  1              2            3
                        Iteration                                       Iteration
Figure 9: Iterative Improvement. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING employs a critic agent for self-
evaluation and refinement over subsequent iterations. We gain around 5.8% and 2.4% improvement
on link placement and joint prediction, respectively. While the ground-truth success (based on
human annotations) is not available to the agent, our critic’s evaluation closely correlates with
ground-truth. The confusion matrix is provided in Appendix Fig. 15.
                                              Link Placement                                                                                  Joint Prediction
                                                                                                                     100
                   100                                                              96.5
Success Rate (%)


                                                                                                  Success Rate (%)


                                                        90.2                                                                                                                        77.7
                                                                                                                      75
                                58.4                                                                                  50                                           44.5
                    50
                                                                                                                      25                      17.8
                                                                                                                                 4.6
                    0                                0
                           5      0    10                            5          10       20                                       0
                   Number of Examples                              Number of Examples
Figure 10: In-context learning. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING improves with the number of prompting
examples, demonstrating in-context learning. The zero-shot performance (0 example) is included.
We conduct this ablation study on the Faucet object category for link placement and
StorageFurniture for joint prediction. We run an actor-only system for one iteration without
the critic to isolate the effect of input modalities. Results in Fig. 6 demonstrate that richer input
modalities consistently improve success rates, underscoring the importance of visual information in
articulation tasks.
5.3                      C AN ARTICULATE - ANYTHING EVALUATE AND REFINE ITS OWN PREDICTIONS ?
We show quantitatively the iterative improvement capability of articulate-anything in Fig. 9. The
critic success rate is computed as the percentage of predictions that are deemed successful by our
VLM critic while the ground-truth success rate is computed from human annotations. Via iterative
refinement, we gain around 5.8% and 2.4% improvement in accuracy for link placement and joint
prediction, respectively. The critic evaluation shows a very high correlation with the ground truth,
although it tends to overestimate success (please see Appendix Fig. 15 for the confusion matrix).
5.4                      H OW DO THE NUMBER OF IN - CONTEXT EXAMPLES AND THE CHOICE OF
                         VISION - LANGUAGE MODELS AFFECT OUR PERFORMANCE ?

Frontier VLMs are known to benefit from in-context examples. Furthermore, the performance of
these models can vary across architectures. In this section, we investigate how these factors affect
our system. We conduct this ablation study on the StorageFurniture category using an actor-only
system from input videos. Figure 10 shows A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s ability to perform in-context


                                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learning, improving the success rate with increasing number of prompting examples. Figure 11
shows A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s robustness to different choices of leading VLMs, maintaining
high success rates throughout.
                   100
                                                           85.7                  Toilet                                                                   51.52
                   80                      77.7
                            70.4
Success Rate (%)


                                                                              Laptop                                             30.54
                   60
                                                                           Microwave                                     26.10
                   40

                   20                                                        Cabinet                                                                            54.16

                    0                                                                     0     10           20              30               40     50
                           GPT-4o       Gemini          Claude-3.5                                                       Minutes
                                       Flash-1.5          Sonnet                              Scan and processing Time             Cut Time        Joint Time


Figure 11: Base VLMs. Our method is robust to                              Figure 12: Human annotation time. Our
the choice of VLMs, maintaining high success                               method on average saves 40.58 minutes in hu-
rates throughout.                                                          man manual labor per task.

6                        A N A PPLICATION IN ROBOTICS
A 3D model without articulation can only afford trivial interaction such as pick and place. In this
section, we show that generated assets from A RTICULATE -A NYTHING can be leveraged to train
reinforcement learning (RL) policies in simulation to perform four finer-grained manipulation tasks.
We train these policies using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) in Robosuite (Zhu et al., 2020; Todorov
et al., 2012), with details given in Appendix A.3. These policies are then executed on a real Franka
arm. For comparison, we also use a human expert to manually annotate the assets via the RialTo
(Torne et al. (2024)) GUI, which had been explicitly designed to facilitate the scanning and annotation
process. Both policies trained via A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s and human-annotated assets achieve
100% success rate in the real world. However, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING would have saved an
average of 40.58 minutes in human labor per task as shown in Fig. 12.

          1 Articulate real-world videos           2 RL training in simulation                        3 Transfer to real


Figure 13: Robotic Application: A RTICULATE -A NYTHING can automatically generate assets given
in-the-wild input videos. We then train manipulation policies for four tasks in simulation via RL. The
policies are deployed back on a real Franka Panda arm, successfully completing all tasks. Please visit
our website for the video demonstration: https://articulate-anything.github.io/.

7                        C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATION
In this paper, we have presented A RTICULATE -A NYTHING, a novel vision-language agentic system
capable of accurately articulating diverse objects from various input modalities. By reimagining artic-
ulation as a program synthesis problem and leveraging the power of VLMs within a self-improving
actor-critic framework, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING automates a process previously constrained by
intensive human labor and expertise. We hope that our work contributes to bridging the gap between
the digital and physical worlds, enabling 3D creators to focus on artistic vision rather than tedious
tasks, and paving the way for richer simulated environments that can massively scale up robot
learning and interaction. Our current approach relies on mesh retrieval to ensure high-quality 3D
assets and focus on the problem of automatic articulation. Integrating A RTICULATE -A NYTHING with
an upstream foundation mesh reconstruction model could allow users to generate more customized
assets, thereby broadening the system’s generality. Some preliminary results on this direction is
included in Appendix A.8.


                                                                      10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was partially supported by the Army Research Office under MURI award
W911NF201-0080, the DARPA Triage Challenge under award HR00112420305, DARPA TIA-
MAT HR00112490421, Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics and National Center
for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
UL1TR001878, the National Science Foundation under NSF CAREER 2239301, NSF 2331783, and
the University of Pennsylvania ASSET center. Any opinions, findings, and conclusion or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of
DARPA, the Army, the NIH, or the US government.

R EFERENCES
Mark Boss, Zixuan Huang, Aaryaman Vasishta, and Varun Jampani. Sf3d: Stable fast 3d mesh recon-
 struction with uv-unwrapping and illumination disentanglement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00653,
 2024.
Angel X. Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
  Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, Li Yi, and Fisher Yu.
  Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository, 2015.
Zoey Chen, Aaron Walsman, Marius Memmel, Kaichun Mo, Alex Fang, Karthikeya Vemuri, Alan Wu,
  Dieter Fox, and Abhishek Gupta. Urdformer: A pipeline for constructing articulated simulation
  environments from real-world images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11656, 2024.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics
  and machine learning, 2016.
Deemos. Rodin text-to-3D gen-1 (0525) v0.5, 2024. URL https://hyperhuman.deemos.com/
  rodin.
Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan
 Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of
 10m+ 3d objects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Herbert Edelsbrunner, David Kirkpatrick, and Raimund Seidel. On the shape of a set of points in the
  plane. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 29(4):551–559, 1983.
Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for
 discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, volume 96, pp. 226–231, 1996.
Haoran Geng, Helin Xu, Chengyang Zhao, Chao Xu, Li Yi, Siyuan Huang, and He Wang. Gapartnet:
  Cross-category domain-generalizable object perception and manipulation via generalizable and
  actionable parts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05272, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Ruizhen Hu, Wenchao Li, Oliver van Kaick, Ariel Shamir, Hao Zhang, and Hui Huang. Learning
  to predict part mobility from a single static snapshot. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc.
  SIGGRAPH Asia), 36(6):227:1–13, 2017.
Nan Jiang, Tengyu Liu, Zhexuan Cao, Jieming Cui, Yixin Chen, He Wang, Yixin Zhu, and Siyuan
  Huang. Full-body articulated human-object interaction. In ICCV, 2023.
Zhenyu Jiang, Cheng-Chun Hsu, and Yuke Zhu. Ditto: Building digital twins of articulated objects
  from interaction. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian
  Rupprecht. Cotracker: It is better to track together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07635, 2023.
Dooyoung Kim, Taewook Ha, Jinseok Hong, Seonji Kim, Selin Choi, Heejeong Ko, and Woontack
 Woo. Meta-object: Interactive and multisensory virtual object learned from the real world for the
  post-metaverse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17179, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jiahui Lei, Congyue Deng, Bokui Shen, Leonidas Guibas, and Kostas Daniilidis. NAP: Neural 3d
   articulated object prior. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
   2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=TTkklyFv7e.
Jiayi Liu, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, and Manolis Savva. PARIS: Part-level reconstruction and motion
   analysis for articulated objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
   Vision (ICCV), 2023a.
Jiayi Liu, Hou In Ivan Tam, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, and Manolis Savva. CAGE: Controllable Articulation
   GEneration. 2023b.
Jiayi Liu, Manolis Savva, and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Survey on modeling of articulated objects, 2024.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023c.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
Zhao Mandi, Yijia Weng, Dominik Bauer, and Shuran Song. Real2code: Reconstruct articulated
  objects via code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08474, 2024.
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X. Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao
  Su. Partnet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3d object
  understanding, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.
Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang,
  Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, Zhaoyang Zeng, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Jie Yang, Hongyang Li, Qing Jiang,
  and Lei Zhang. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks, 2024.
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu
  Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable
  multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
 IEEE, 2012.
Marcel Torne, Anthony Simeonov, Zechu Li, April Chan, Tao Chen, Abhishek Gupta, and Pulkit
 Agrawal. Reconciling reality through simulation: A real-to-sim-to-real approach for robust
 manipulation. Arxiv, 2024.
Yijia Weng, Bowen Wen, Jonathan Tremblay, Valts Blukis, Dieter Fox, Leonidas Guibas, and Stan
  Birchfield. Neural implicit representation for building digital twins of unknown articulated objects.
  In CVPR, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao
  Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. Sapien: A
  simulated part-based interactive environment, 2020.
Jiale Xu, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Xintao Wang, Shenghua Gao, and Ying Shan. Instantmesh:
   Efficient 3d mesh generation from a single image with sparse-view large reconstruction models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07191, 2024.
Gengshan Yang, Minh Vo, Natalia Neverova, Deva Ramanan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Hanbyul Joo.
  Banmo: Building animatable 3d neural models from many casual videos. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2863–2873, 2022.
Vicky Zeng, Tabitha Edith Lee, Jacky Liang, and Oliver Kroemer. Visual identification of articulated
  object parts, 2021.
Qian-Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. Open3D: A modern library for 3D data processing.
  arXiv:1801.09847, 2018.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Abhishek Joshi, Soroush Nasiriany,
  and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A modular simulation framework and benchmark for robot learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A PPENDIX


Figure 14: Joint prediction failure visualization. We visualize different types of joint failures,
ranging from the most egregious, joint type, to the least, joint limit.


A.1     L INK AND J OINT P REDICTION E RROR C OMPUTATION

A.1.1    L INK E RROR

A link is represented by a position x ∈ R3 and quaternion orientation q ∈ H, where H is the space of
unit quaternions. Given a predicted link state (xp , qp ) and ground truth state (xg , qg ), we define two
error metrics:
Position Error: The Euclidean distance between predicted and ground truth positions:

                                           epos = |xp − xg |2                                          (4)

Orientation Error: The geodesic distance on the unit sphere, computed as:

                                      eorient = 2 arccos(|qp · qg |)                                   (5)

where · denotes the quaternion dot product. This metric represents the smallest rotation angle between
the predicted and ground truth orientations. The total link error is an average of these components.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    /                                Code 1: Joint failure attribution.                         /
  def compute_joint_diff_score(
      joint_diff,
      angular_cutoff,
      euclidean_cutoff,
      angular_limit_cutoff,
      limit_cutoff,
  ):
      """
      return outcome (i.e., `success` or error failure reason)
      """
      if joint_diff["joint_type"] != 1:
          # joint type is not predicted correctly
          return "joint_type"
      elif joint_diff["joint_axis"] > angular_cutoff:
          return "joint_axis"
      elif joint_diff["joint_origin"] > euclidean_cutoff:
          return "joint_origin"
      elif joint_diff["joint_limit"] > limit_cutoff:
          return "joint_limit"
      return "success"


A.1.2    J OINT E RROR
Joint error is computed by comparing several components of the predicted joint state against the
ground truth. Let Jp and Jg denote the predicted and ground truth joint states, respectively. The joint
error components, from most to least egregious, are as follows:
1. Joint Type Error: A binary measure indicating whether the predicted joint type matches the
   ground truth:
                                       0 if type(Jp ) = type(Jg )
                             etype =                                                       (6)
                                       1 otherwise
2. Joint Axis Error: The angle between predicted and ground truth joint axes:

                                            ap · ag                   −ap · ag
                    eaxis = min arccos                    , arccos                                  (7)
                                          |ap |2 |ag |2              |ap |2 |ag |2
   where a ∈ R is the axis of rotation for revolute joints or of translation for prismatic joints, and
   eaxis ∈ [0, π].
3. Joint Origin Error: For revolute joints, we compute the shortest distance between the joint axes
   using cross product:
                                                    |p · (ap × ag )|
                                      eorigin pos =                                                 (8)
                                                       |ap × ag |
   where p = xp − xg is the difference between predicted and ground truth origins, and ap , ag are
   the predicted and ground truth joint axes. For prismatic joints, we use the Euclidean distance:
                                            eorigin pos = |xp − xg |2                               (9)
4. Joint Limit Error: Comprises two sub-components:
    (a) Motion Range Difference:
                                          elimit range = |mp − mg |2                              (10)
        where mi = ai (ui − li ), with ui and li being the upper and lower joint limits.
    (b) Motion Direction Difference:
                                                           mp · mg
                                        elimit dir = 1 −                                          (11)
                                                          |mp |2 |mg |2
        This metric ranges from 0 (identical direction) to 2 (opposite direction), with 1 indicating
        perpendicular directions.
A joint prediction succeeds when all of the joint component predictions are within a tolerance.
Otherwise, a joint failure is attributed in a natural order as in Code 1 where is the most egregious
error – joint type – is detected first and the least – joint limit – last.
A visualization of different joint failure types is given in Fig. 14.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Link Placement                                        Joint Prediction

                                 True Pos                     False Neg                True Pos                       False Neg


          Ground Truth Success


                                                                             Success
                                 84.42%                        1.59%                   73.06%                          1.99%


                                 False Pos                    True Neg                 False Pos                      True Neg
                  Failure


                                                                             Failure
                                  5.68%                        8.30%                    4.57%                          20.38%


                                  Success                      Failure                  Success                        Failure
                                                                          Predicted

Figure 15: Critic-groundtruth confusion matrix. Our visual critic is highly correlated with the
ground-truth. The largest disagreement comes from false positive case i.e., the critic falsely declares
an incorrect articulation as correct. These cases include difficult-to-notice errors.


A.2     C RITIC - GROUNDTRUTH AGREEMENT
Fig. 15 visualizes the confusion matrices between the ground-truth and our own critic predictions
of success in two articulation tasks. Our visual critic is highly correlated with the groundtruth.
The largest disagreement comes from false positive case i.e., the critic falsely declares an incorrect
articulation as correct. These cases include difficult-to-notice errors.

A.3     ROBOTIC T RAINING D ETAILS
We train a Franka arm to perform four robotic manipulation tasks in the Robosuite simulator using
PPO and our generated assets.The policy outputs joint and gripper positions. We train policies over 3
random seeds per task for 2 million environment steps using PPO in Stable-Baselines3 library Raffin
et al. (2021). We randomize physics (friction, damping, frictionloss ect), objects’ scales and poses to
obtain robust policies.

A.4     BASELINES
URDFormer requires a bounding box for each object part in the input image, which can be obtained
via a fine-tuned Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023c) or an oracle using ground-truth boxes from a
physics engine. Real2Code requires oriented object bounding boxes (OBBs) as input texts to query
a LLM. On PartNet-Mobility, these were obtained using oracle RGB-D images and ground-truth
segmentation masks from Blender.

A.4.1    C ASUAL I NPUTS

Our video-based approach excels with casually captured inputs in cluttered environments while
baselines require extensive manual curation: we adjusted DINO bounding boxes for URDFormer
and carefully curated foreground segmentation and other hyper-parameters for Real2code. On our
project website, we show a diversity of object categories casually captured on an iPhone. The inputs
have different view angles and are sometimes inadvertently titled. This kind of inputs presents great
difficult for the baselines. For example, Fig. 18 shows the manual adjustment needed for URDFormer.
Fig. 17 shows the manually curated foreground segmentation mask and other tuned hyper-parameters
to clean up object-part masks and point clouds for real2code.

A.4.2    R EPRODUCING R EAL 2 CODE

Real2code LLM Training Real2code has not released their LLM model checkpoint nor training code.
We therefore have done our best to reproduce their LLM model based on their paper description
and other code. We obtain the LLM training dataset using their preprocessing code, and finetune


                                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   [INST] You are an AI assistant trained to understand 3D scenes and object
   relationships. Given the following Oriented Bounding Box (OBB) information, your
   task is to generate a list of child joints that describes the articulations between
   object parts.

   OBB Information:{...}

   Generate a list of child joints. Each joint should be described by a dictionary
   with the following keys:
   - box: The ID of the child bounding box
   - type: The joint type (’hinge’ for revolute joints, ’slide’ for prismatic joints)
   - idx: The rotation axis index (0 for x-axis, 1 for y-axis, 2 for z-axis)
   - edge: Edge coordinates on the OBB, for example [1, -1]
   - sign: Direction of the joint (+1 or -1)

   IMPORTANT: Your response must contain ONLY the child joints list, exactly
   as shown below, with no additional text before or after:
   child joints = [
   dict(box=[child OBB ID], type=[joint type], idx=[rotation axis index], edge=[edge
   coordinates], sign=[direction]),
   # Additional joints as needed ]

   Generate the child joints list: [/INST]


Figure 16: Our instruction prompt for real2code reproduction. Neither training code nor model
checkpoint were available from the original work’s Github.


the CodeLLama-7B-Instruct model Roziere et al. (2023) using LoRA Hu et al. (2021) with 4-bit
quantization as described in their paper. The prompt for the LLM is given in Fig. 16.

Real2code In-the-wild reconstruction We were not able to reproduce the shape completion model
based on the released code. Thus, we instead use alpha surface reconstruction Edelsbrunner et al.
(1983) from Open3D Zhou et al. (2018) to reconstruct meshes from point clouds, and manually tune
the hyper-parameters. We found that this method produces on-par or higher quality meshes from their
meshes that were publicly released.
We manually select query points for SAM to ensure near-perfect foreground segmentation masks,
tune hyper-parameters for the 3D segmentation scheme (e.g., the input images, number of query
points, minimum point-cloud size et cetera), clean up point-clouds, masks and tune mesh extraction.
The kinematic-aware SAM model was finetuned using the code from the baseline’s authors.
We manually curate the foreground segmentation masks, remove incorrectly segmented point-clouds,
tune hyper-parameters and manually parse their LLM outputs. Fig. 17 visualizes the inputs and
intermediate outputs from real2code.

A.4.3   E VALUATING URDF ORMER
URDFormer predicts one link per bounding box, with each non-root link associated with a joint. To
evaluate URDFormer’s predictions against ground truth, we employ a link matching algorithm that
aligns predicted links with ground truth links. Each URDFormer bounding box is matched with a
ground-truth link by computing the overlap between the box and link’s segmentation mask given by
the physics engine. For in-the-wild reconstruction, we manually corrected the object-part bounding
boxes as shown in Fig. 18.


                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Input Image      Foreground Seg       SAM Output           Segmented          Segmented
    (one of many     Mask (one of        (one of many)       Point Clouds         Meshes
     multi-view           many)
      images)


Figure 17: Real2code manually curated inputs and intermediate outputs. We used about 3
to 7 input images per object from different views to obtain good global alignment from DUSt3R.
Foreground segmentation masks were manually curated by querying the base SAM model. The
segmented point-clouds and meshes were curated by tuning various segmentation hyper-parameters
(e.g., which input images to use, number of query points, minimum point-cloud size et cetera)
and surface reconstruction parameters (i.e., α). Incorrectly segmented point clouds were manually
removed and spurious points were removed using Open3D’s radius outlier removal and only keeping
the largest connected component from DBSCAN clustering Ester et al. (1996) per segmented mask.
LLM outputs contain incorrect syntax and extra rambling which were parsed manually.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       DINO                                 Manual


Figure 18: URDFormer manual correction. Comparison of bounding boxes from their fine-tuned
DINO and our manual correction.


                                               19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     60                     Text-based Methods                                     60                             Image-based Methods
                                                      Articulate Anything (Text)                                        48.5               Articulate Anything (Image)
  Success Rate (%)                     40.3           Real2Code Oracle                                                                     URDFormer Oracle
                     40                                                                            40                                      URDFormer DINO
                                                                                                                                         24.7
                     20                                                                            20                                                      20.2
                                                                    13.5

                      0                                                                                    0

 Figure 19: Comparable Inputs. We compare A RTICULATE -A NYTHING with two baselines,
 Real2Code and UDRFormer using the same input modalities. The ablation is done on the cor-
 responding seen classes of the baselines.
Table 1: Comparison of average joint prediction errors across methods (lower is better). ‘Type’
shows the fraction of incorrect joint type predictions, ‘Axis’ error is measured in radians, and
‘Origin’ error in meters. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING substantially outperforms all previous works.
A RTICULATE -A NYTHING uses few-shot prompting and makes no distinction between ID and OOD
classes, so we only report results for All Classes. 95% confidence interval is included for classification
error (joint type) and standard deviation for continuous errors (axis and origin).
                                                        All Classes                                            ID Classes                             OOD Classes
    Method                                    Type ↓       Axis ↓      Origin ↓        Type ↓                    Axis ↓        Origin ↓      Type ↓      Axis ↓      Origin ↓
    Real2Code Oracle                        0.537 ±0.014 1.006 ±0.723 0.294 ±0.417 0.410 ±0.029 1.164 ±0.671 0.344 ±0.479 0.576 ±0.016 0.937 ±0.734 0.272 ±0.386
    URDFormer Oracle                        0.556 ±0.025 0.374 ±0.666 0.581 ±0.355 0.418 ±0.036 0.208 ±0.532 0.609 ±0.357 0.679 ±0.032 0.643 ±0.766 0.513 ±0.340
    URDFormer DINO                          0.460 ±0.033 0.261 ±0.583 0.547 ±0.317 0.288 ±0.039 0.133 ±0.437 0.582 ±0.281 0.722 ±0.047 0.758 ±0.782 0.438 ±0.385
    A RTICULATE -A NYTHING 0.021 ±0.003 0.141 ±0.441 0.200 ±0.380                        -                          -             -            -           -            -

                                          Joint Origin Error                                                                          Joint Axis Error
                 2.5
                                                                                                           3
                 2.0
                                                                                         Error (radians)
Error (meters)


                 1.5                                                                                       2
                 1.0
                                                                                                           1
                 0.5
                 0.0                                                                                       0
                          Articulate      Real2Code      URDFormer         URDFormer                            Articulate       Real2Code         URDFormer      URDFormer
                          Anything          Oracle         Oracle            DINO                               Anything           Oracle            Oracle         DINO

 Figure 20: Violin plots of the continuous errors. Joint type is binary error and is not applicable
 for this plot. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING has the smallest average origin and axis error as presented
 in Tab. 1. For joint axis, we notice two distinct modes in the baselines, indicating the errors for
 in-distribution and OOD data.


 A.5                      C OMPARABLE I NPUT M ODALITIES
 Fig. 19 compares A RTICULATE -A NYTHING against the baselines using the same input modalities. We
 achieve a higher accuracy than previous work using the same impoverished modalities by leveraging
 foundation models’ common sense and high-level planning capability.
 A.6                      A DDITIONAL S TATISTICS
 Figures 21 and 22 provide a breakdown of the success rate by each object category for the link
 placement and joint prediction tasks respectively. We use the camera pose for all tasks. Small
 object parts or exotic irregular movement tend to pose greater difficulty to A RTICULATE -A NYTHING.
 Further optimizations such as zooming in with camera might improve performance. Table 1 provides
 the raw average errors for our method and prior work with statistical confidences included. Figure 20
 further visualizes the distribution of errors via violin plots.


                                                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Keyboard                                                                                                     1.00
               Box                                                                                                  1.00
         Window                                                                                                   0.98
StorageFurniture                                                                                                  0.98
          Laptop                                                                                                 0.98
     Refrigerator                                                                                                0.98
     Dishwasher                                                                                                  0.98
               Fan                                                                                               0.98
            Clock                                                                                               0.97
             Knife                                                                                            0.95
           Switch                                                                                            0.94
             Oven                                                                                          0.93
      Microwave                                                                                           0.92
      KitchenPot                                                                                          0.92
             Door                                                                                        0.91
            Bottle                                                                                      0.91
           Faucet                                                                                      0.90
              Cart                                                                                     0.90
       TrashCan                                                                                        0.90
          Printer                                                                                     0.90
          Remote                                                                                    0.88
            Kettle                                                                                0.86
            Table                                                                                 0.86
            Toilet                                                                               0.86
            Globe                                                                               0.85
            Lamp                                                                               0.84
           Phone                                                                              0.83
      Eyeglasses                                                                              0.83
       Dispenser                                                                             0.82
WashingMachine                                                                               0.82
            Chair                                                                          0.81
            Pliers                                                                        0.80
          Display                                                                       0.78
  CoffeeMachine                                                                        0.78
              Safe                                                                    0.77         Average
                                                                                                   0.86
         Suitcase                                                              0.71
         Camera                                                               0.70
          Toaster                                                          0.68
         Scissors                                                       0.65
               Pen                                                   0.62
              USB                                               0.59
          Bucket                                                0.58
           Mouse                                              0.57
    FoldingChair                                           0.54
          Lighter                            0.39
          Stapler                            0.39
                                                    Success Rate
      Figure 21: A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s link placement success rate by object categories.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Remote                                                                                                             0.98
       Keyboard                                                                                                          0.95
      Microwave                                                                                                       0.92
          Laptop                                                                                                     0.92
StorageFurniture                                                                                                 0.88
            Table                                                                                         0.80
           Phone                                                                                          0.80
         Window                                                                                         0.79
      KitchenPot                                                                                        0.79
     Dishwasher                                                                                  0.73
          Printer                                                                         0.68
WashingMachine                                                                           0.67
  CoffeeMachine                                                                   0.55
          Toaster                                                               0.53
           Mouse                                                              0.52
               Pen                                                           0.51
           Switch                                                          0.50
       TrashCan                                                     0.42
     Refrigerator                                                  0.41
            Chair                                                  0.41
         Camera                                                0.38
              USB                                              0.38
            Kettle                                          0.35
             Door                                           0.35
             Oven                                          0.34
         Suitcase                                         0.33
       Dispenser                                       0.31
            Toilet                                   0.29
            Bottle                            0.22
          Lighter                            0.21
               Box                          0.20
             Knife                   0.13
              Safe                   0.13
           Faucet             0.08                                                                 Average
                                                                                                   0.75
          Display           0.06
            Lamp           0.06
          Bucket           0.05
          Stapler         0.04
      Eyeglasses      0.01
    FoldingChair     0.00
            Clock    0.00
            Globe    0.00
            Pliers   0.00
               Fan   0.00
         Scissors    0.00
                                                                     Success Rate
      Figure 22: A RTICULATE -A NYTHING’s joint prediction success rate by object categories.


                                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.7   M ESH R ECONSTRUCTION


Table 2: Mesh reconstruction quality. Chamfer distance is included (lower is better) for different
models for in-the-wild results. Best results are bolded, second best are underlined. A RTICULATE -
A NYTHING integrated with a mesh generation is far better than any other baselines. Even with
retrieval, our system is still better than all prior works, including Real2Code which uses DUSt3R to
do explicit 3D scene reconstruction.
                                       Toilet Cabinet Suitcase Chair         Avg.
                    Ours (Generation) 0.0637    0.0740    0.0735   0.0698 0.0703
                    Ours (Retrieved) 0.1133     0.1215    0.0781   0.1210 0.1102
                    Real2Code         0.1192    0.1397    0.0877   0.0987 0.1085
                    URDFormer         0.4191    0.2164    0.1531   0.1278 0.2291



Table 3: Comparison of Chamfer distances across different methods. Lower values indicate better
mesh reconstruction quality. Means and standard deviations are included.
                          Method                          Chamfer distance
                          Articulate-Anything (retrieval) 0.1007 ± 0.062
                          Real2Code (Oracle)               0.229 ± 0.166
                          URDFormer (Oracle)               0.429 ± 0.267
                          URDFormer (DINO)                 0.437 ± 0.217


Table 2 includes the mesh reconstruction results for in-the-wild objects in Fig. 7. The ground-
truth meshes are captured on a Lidar-equipped iPhone. Window is not included as Lidar does not
capture glasses well. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING integrated with a mesh generation is far better than
any other baselines. Even with retrieval, our system is still better than all prior works, including
Real2Code which uses DUSt3R to do explicit 3D scene reconstruction. Table 3 compares the
reconstruction quality on the PartNet-Mobility dataset. Ground-truth RGBD images were used by
Real2Code. When evaluating an object, we remove that object from the candidate pool, preventing
A RTICULATE -A NYTHING from retrieving the exact same object.
A.8   G ENERATING N EW A SSETS


          Cabinet            Chair             Suitcase            Toilet           Window

Figure 23: A RTICULATE -A NYTHING with mesh generation. A RTICULATE -A NYTHING can be
integrated with a mesh generation model to produce high-quality articulated objects. Please see our
website for the video demonstrations: https://articulate-anything.github.io/.

Currently, A RTICULATE -A NYTHING employs a mesh retrieval mechanism to utilize existing 3D
datasets. Open repositories such as Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2024), which contain over 10 million
static objects, offer a rich source of assets that our system can bring to life through articulation.
However, to generate even more customized assets, a promising future direction is to leverage
large-scale mesh generation models.
In this section, we present preliminary results toward this goal. Given visual inputs to A RTICULATE -
A NYTHING —such as videos or images—we first extract a single image of the target object. A mesh
generation model is then used to produce a 3D model of the object. 24 compares the mesh quality
produced by three models: Rodin (Deemos, 2024), Instant Mesh (Xu et al., 2024), and Stable-Fast-3D
(Boss et al., 2024).


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We select Rodin for its high-quality output. Subsequently, we use Grounded Segment-Anything (Ren
et al., 2024) to obtain a 3D segmentation of the object into parts. Unconditional segmentation is
unreliable because object parts may be under- or over-segmented, depending on the task. To address
this, we condition the segmentation on the video inputs by instructing a VLM to identify the moving
part, which serves as the segmentation target. We then render the 3D model from multiple camera
views. For each view, we apply Grounded SAM, which first obtains a bounding box for the object
part and then runs SAM to obtain a fine-grained segmentation mask. Figure 25 visualizes the 2D
segmentation masks for each view.

    Source image                    Rodin               Instant Mesh            Stable-Fast-3D


                                 (a) front                (a) front               (a) front


                                 (b) side                 (b) side                (b) side

Figure 24: Mesh generation. Comparison of 3D mesh generation from a single source image using
different models. Each model’s output is shown from the front and side views.


Figure 25: Grounded SAM. A 2D segmentation mask is obtained for each view of an object using
Grounded SAM. For each view, the input RGB image is shown on the left, and the resulting mask
overlaid in red is shown on the right.

The 2D masks are lifted into 3D via projective geometry. For each view, we use the camera parameters
and depth maps to project the 3D points into pixels. Then, the 2D segmentation masks are queried
to obtain segmentation labels for the 3D points. We merge these segmented 3D points across all


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


views to obtain a complete 3D segmentation of the object into its semantic parts. The potentially
sparse segmented point clouds are used to segment the dense meshes via nearest neighbor matching.
With the 3D object now properly segmented, we can apply A RTICULATE -A NYTHING as before. The
resulting 3D objects not only possess high material quality that matches the ground truth but also
exhibit realistic movement when articulated in simulation. Please refer to our website for the video
demonstrations.


                                                25
