Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C AFE -TALK : G ENERATING 3D TALKING FACE A N -
IMATION WITH M ULTIMODAL C OARSE - AND F INE -
GRAINED C ONTROL

 Hejia Chen1,♣,♠    Haoxian Zhang2,♣     Shoulong Zhang3,♣                          Xiaoqiang Liu2
             1              2
 Sisi Zhuang     Yuan Zhang      Pengfei Wan2     Di Zhang2                          Shuai Li1,3,♡
 1
     State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Systems and Technology, Beihang University
 2
     Kuaishou Technology 3 Zhongguancun Laboratory
 ♣                         ♠                                      ♡
     Equal contribution        Intern at Kuaishou Technology          Corresponding author


 … how to lau-              gh!         <mute>     Ha!         Ha!     Something like             this?

                                     “Angry” & “A senior actor”

                                                  “Laugh”
      speech       coarse ctrl       fine ctrl     render video          language      portrait     label

Figure 1: Adding multimodal coarse- and fine-grained control enables more flexible animations:
Scenario: A senior actor is arguing with the director about how to smile. Action: The actor responds
with anger and concludes with a sudden sarcastic laugh.


                                                 A BSTRACT
           Speech-driven 3D talking face method should offer both accurate lip synchroniza-
           tion and controllable expressions. Previous methods solely adopt discrete emotion
           labels to globally control expressions throughout sequences while limiting flexi-
           ble fine-grained facial control within the spatiotemporal domain. We propose a
           diffusion-transformer-based 3D talking face generation model, Cafe-Talk, which
           simultaneously incorporates coarse- and fine-grained multimodal control condi-
           tions. Nevertheless, the entanglement of multiple conditions challenges achiev-
           ing satisfying performance. To disentangle speech audio and fine-grained con-
           ditions, we employ a two-stage training pipeline. Specifically, Cafe-Talk is ini-
           tially trained using only speech audio and coarse-grained conditions. Then, a pro-
           posed fine-grained control adapter gradually adds fine-grained instructions rep-
           resented by action units (AUs), preventing unfavorable speech-lip synchroniza-
           tion. To disentangle coarse- and fine-grained conditions, we design a swap-label
           training mechanism, which enables the dominance of the fine-grained conditions.
           We also devise a mask-based CFG technique to regulate the occurrence and in-
           tensity of fine-grained control. In addition, a text-based detector is introduced
           with text-AU alignment to enable natural language user input and further sup-
           port multimodal control. Extensive experimental results prove that Cafe-Talk
           achieves state-of-the-art lip synchronization and expressiveness performance and
           receives wide acceptance in fine-grained control in user studies. Project page:
           https://harryxd2018.github.io/cafe-talk/


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1   I NTRODUCTION


Generating realistic speech-driven 3D facial animation holds significant application value in the
traditional film industries and advanced AI applications. It is a challenging task that necessitates
synchronized lip motions and the conveyance of vivid, compelling facial expressions. Moreover,
an animator-friendly and agent-driven application, as illustrated in Fig. 1, requires fine-grained and
multimodal control capabilities. Although existing methods have achieved impressive progress in
facial expression control by using emotion labels (Daněček et al., 2023; Haque & Yumak, 2023) or
multimodal emotional references (Xu et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023b) for entire sequences, modeling
and flexibly controlling fine-grained facial expressions during the speech is still unexplored.
Our motivation is to present a 3D talking face method with effective, precise, and flexible con-
trollability. To achieve this, the controlling condition is spatiotemporally modeled as coarse- and
fine-grained conditions, where the coarse-grained condition establishes a foundation for the pro-
duced facial movements and the fine-grained condition enriches the details. Spatially, the coarse-
grained conditions abstractly depict overall facial movements through talking style and emotion.
Conversely, the fine-grained condition emphasizes specific and localized muscle movements, such
as blinking and raising the eyebrows. Temporally, the coarse-grained condition remains constant
during speaking, while the fine-grained condition describes the instant facial expressions. Existing
methods (Daněček et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023b) focus on modeling the talking style and emotion
temporal-consistently, neglecting fine-grained facial movements in spatiotemporal domains, which
results in an inability to control intricate local motions and flexible expression changes.
To tackle the aforementioned challenge, in this paper, we present Cafe-Talk as the first 3D talking
face generation method with coarse- and fine-grained multimodal control. In order to achieve de-
tailed and flexible control within the current diffusion-based framework, an intuitive approach is to
directly implement additional fine-grained conditions and jointly train the network alongside speech
audio and coarse-grained conditions.
However, the entanglement of the three conditions results in unsynchronized lip movements and
an inability to fine-grained control based on our preliminary experimental findings. Specifically,
(1) the entanglement of the audio and fine-grained condition provides a shortcut to producing lip
movements and weakening speech audio guidance, as the fine-grained conditions can also describe
local muscle motions around the mouth. To this end, Cafe-Talk is designed as a coarse-to-fine
structure with a two-stage pipeline. In the first stage, a diffusion-based transformer (Ng et al., 2024;
Zhao et al., 2024) generates the facial movements with encoded speech audio and incorporates the
multimodal coarse-grained condition following Peebles & Xie (2023) to achieve efficient global
control. In the second stage, the fine-grained conditions represent a sequence of action units (AUs),
which flexibly guide the corresponding muscles to stay excited. Although existing methods (Ma
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024) utilize AUs to control facial motions, they merely
refine the coarse-grained control instead of disentangle the detail controllability. With the frozen
base model, we design a fine-grained control adapter to gradually add the fine-grained condition into
the pipeline without jeopardizing lip movements benefiting from a zero convolution layer (Zhang
et al., 2023a). Moreover, (2) to achieve effective, precise, and flexible fine-grained control, we first
build a swap-label training mechanism upon the two-stage pipeline to introduce conflict coarse- and
fine-grained conditions, enabling predominant fine-grained conditional control. We then design a
mask-based classifier-free guidance (CFG) technique for inference, which ensures the occurrence of
fine-grained conditions and allows for effective and accurate intensity control. We finally introduce
a text-based detector for language-based emotion and expression description by aligning it with AUs
on a projected CLIP space (Radford et al., 2021), extending flexible multimodal fine-grained control.
We thoroughly validate the effectiveness of our proposed controllable talking face generation
method through extensive experiments. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to address
the fine-grained 3D talking face control task. Thus, we compare the lip synchronization and coarse-
grained expression control capabilities with existing methods and achieve state-of-the-art perfor-
mances. Additionally, we conduct ablation experiments to demonstrate the importance of each pro-
posed module in achieving fine-grained control. Finally, we execute a user study and received wide
acceptance of the effectiveness of our control. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      1. We propose Cafe-Talk, the first 3D talking face generation model enabling coarse- and
         fine-grained multimodal conditional control in an effective, precise, and flexible manner.
      2. We design a two-stage training pipeline that explicitly disentangles speech audio and fine-
         grained conditions. Additionally, we devise a fine-grained control adapter that gradually
         introduces fine-grained conditions without jeopardizing lip synchronization.
      3. We introduce a swap-label training mechanism and mask-based CFG technique in the infer-
         ence process to disentangle coarse- and fine-grained conditions, which achieves dominant
         and precise localized facial control.
      4. We devise a text-based AU detector to efficiently extract AU fine-grained conditions from
         natural language descriptions based on user intent, which enables our model to support
         multimodal control.


2   R ELATED WORK

Talking face animation has attracted considerable attention due to its significant application potential
and market demand. This technology can be broadly divided into two categories based on the output
format: video-based and 3D-based methods. Video-based methods (Zhou et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024) focus on generating realistic portrait videos, particularly
benefiting from advanced neural rendering techniques (Guo et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2022; Ye et al.,
2023; Peng et al., 2024). In contrast, this paper focuses on 3D-based methods, which produce 3D
meshes or 3DMM coefficients that are compatible with academic 3D face reconstruction methods
(Bao et al., 2021; Chai et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2023) and industrial game engines, offering broader
practical applications. Within the domain of 3D-based methods, previous works (Cudeiro et al.,
2019; Fan et al., 2022; Xing et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023a)
leveraging discriminative models have successfully achieved precise lip movement regression from
speech audio. These methods typically use a pretrained speech audio encoder (e.g., from automatic
speech recognition models (Hannun et al., 2014; Baevski et al., 2020)) and a decoder to translate
audio features into lip movements. While these methods effectively synchronize lip movements,
the facial expressions generated are often lacking in diversity and emotional expressiveness. With
the advancement of generative models, recent methods (Aneja et al., 2024; Ng et al., 2024) have
constructed diffusion-based pipelines to achieve more diverse and accurate facial movements. To
improve expressiveness in talking face animation, some methods extract emotion cues from the
input speech. For example, EmoTalk (Peng et al., 2023b) disentangles content and emotion from the
speech audio using cross-reconstruction techniques. However, emotion cues derived from speech
are often person-specific, which limits the generalization capability of such methods. An alternative
approach involves incorporating explicit emotion labels into the talking face animation pipeline, as
seen in (Karras et al., 2017; Haque & Yumak, 2023; Daněček et al., 2023). These methods, trained
on datasets with emotion annotations, enable better control over expressiveness. Unlike previous
methods that use one-hot encoding for emotion labels, Xu et al. (2023) proposed encoding emotion
annotations using CLIP, leveraging its semantic space to model unseen emotions, thus enabling more
flexible control.
Fine-grained control in body motion generation has been widely studied, evolving from generating
motions based on single actions (Petrovich et al., 2021) to more sophisticated control using natural
language (Tevet et al., 2022; 2023). Some works (Wang et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024) have focused
on enhancing the spatial precision of motion described by text, while others (Zhang et al., 2023b;
Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Petrovich et al., 2024) model the temporal aspects of motion to
generate coherent sequences for motion control. Inspired by these advancements, recent methods
have extended emotion control in talking face animation from label-based approaches to fine-grained
control. Methods (Ma et al., 2023; Gan et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Zhao et al.,
2024; Sun et al., 2024) have explored generating talking face animations using emotion or expres-
sion descriptions. In these works, AUs (Friesen & Ekman, 1978) have been frequently used to create
precise descriptions of facial movements — TalkCLIP (Ma et al., 2023) obtained rule-based expres-
sion descriptions by summarizing frequently activated AUs from ground truth videos, alongside the
corresponding emotion category and intensity from datasets (Wang et al., 2020). Style2 Talker (Tan
et al., 2024) and InstructAvatar (Wang et al., 2024) further improved these descriptions with the
help of large language models (LLMs). However, due to the entanglement between emotion la-
bels and AUs, these methods only refine emotion labels using AUs rather than providing temporally
                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fine-grained control. To enable multimodal control, TalkCLIP aligned the modalities of text, video,
and audio with a CLIP adapter, while InstructAvatar utilized two separate adapters for emotion and
expression description. EAT (Gan et al., 2023), on the other hand, leverages CLIP’s text-image
alignment capabilities, minimizing the CLIP loss between generated images and text descriptions to
achieve zero-shot expression editing. Although AU-based text descriptions provide more detailed
control over facial movements, this approach is computationally inefficient compared to directly
encoding AUs. Additionally, the semantic space of AU-based text differs significantly from that of
natural language, limiting the controlling ability. In conclusion, even though the aforementioned
methods model the fine-grained condition with AUs, there are still limitations: 1) Usage of AUs:
Previous methods primarily regarded AUs as a refinement of the emotion label, failing to achieve
spatiotemporal fine-grained control. 2) Language control: Previous methods that utilized CLIP to
encode AU-based text descriptions not only lost computational efficiency but also failed to ensure
control capability over natural language.


3     C AFE -TALK

Overview. The fine-grained condition encodes subtle facial muscle movements intertwined with
speech audio and the coarse-grained emotional label. Consequently, the lip movements could also
be influenced by the fine-grained guidance instead of speech audio if we directly train the generative
model conditioned on the three entangled conditions. Thus, we propose a coarse-to-fine pipeline
with a two-stage training strategy – a base model with coarse-grained conditional control is trained
in stage 1 with a similar structure validated in (Zhao et al., 2024; Ng et al., 2024), and the fine-
grained condition is added to the base model with an adapter in stage 2. We denote the speech
audio as A, coarse-grained condition C, and fine-grained condition as F . Concretely, the coarse-
grained condition consists of the talking style Cts , emotion label Cemo , and emotion intensity Cint .
Meanwhile, the fine-grained condition is formulated as n triplets with expression description Fd , the
start and end frame index timestamp Fs , Fe , as:

                      F = (Fd0 , Fs0 , Fe0 ), (Fd1 , Fs1 , Fe1 ), · · · , (Fdn , Fsn , Fen ) ,

                                                                                                   (1)

where the expression description Fd is represented by binary AUs, where activated AUs guide the
corresponding muscles engaged to generate local facial movements. The generator is G, while the
facial movement is noted as M 0:T with T frames.

3.1   BASE MODEL WITH COARSE - GRAINED CONTROL

In stage 1, we intend to train a base model that generates accurate lip movement with multimodal
coarse-grained control, conditioning on the talking style and emotion status referred to facial images
or emotional text descriptions. The base model, illustrated in Fig. 2, consists of stacked diffusion
transformer blocks, integrating the encoded speech audio Af and coarse-grained condition Cf with
attention layers.

         Portrait image
                                                                                                        Diffusion Transformer Block


                                "A young man",
                                                        CLIP


                                 "A teenager",
                                       ...
                                                                                      FiLM Cross Attn
         Emotion label
        Happy: cheerful, overjoyed, pleased, ...                                      AdaLN Self Attn
                                                                                add
                                                        CLIP


         Angry: furious, irritated, enraged, ...               C
       Sad: heartbroken, sorrowful, downcast, ...                  concat
                                                                                      FiLM Self Attn
         Emotion intensity intensity
                              emb
           {1, 2, 3}
                                                    scale


Figure 2: Stage 1 pipeline: a base model under transformer-diffusion structure is proposed to enable
coarse-grained conditional control of temporal-consistent talking style, emotion status, and intensity.



                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1.1    M ODEL STRUCTURE
Coarse-grained condition. In this work, we define the talking style, emotional status, and inten-
sity as coarse-grained conditions that control the facial movement temporal-consistently in a multi-
modal fashion. Unlike existing methods (Fan et al., 2022; Daněček et al., 2023) utilized one-hot em-
bedding for talking styles and emotion labels, Cafe-Talk takes CLIP embeddings as coarse-grained
condition inputs. Inspired by Oh et al. (2019) inferring the speakers’ appearances from speech audio,
we obtain the talking style from the facial images or appearance attributes of the speakers. Mean-
while, the emotion label is encoded by the CLIP text encoder, which is augmented by synonyms (Xu
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023). We learn a trainable embedding for the emotion intensity, which is
scaled by a numerical emotion intensity factor, guiding the model to learn the ordinal nature of the
intensity. The coarse-grained condition feature Cf is the linear mapping result of the concatenation
of talking style embedding, emotion embedding, and the emotion intensity on the feature dimension.
Then, we merge the coarse-grained condition into the transformer diffusion block (Peebles & Xie,
2023) with a self-attention and feed-forward layer for efficient global conditional control.

Speech audio condition. We utilize a fixed pre-trained audio encoder (Conneau et al., 2020) to
encode the speech audio, and then the acoustic feature is interpolated to 25fps to match the facial
movement. We merge the acoustic feature Af with FiLM-based cross-attention layer (Perez et al.,
2018), where an attention mask Zalign is introduced within the cross-attention layer for lip syn-
chronization, where the elements on and adjacent to the diagonal are 0, and all other elements are
−∞.
Moreover, a self-attention layer with FiLM is also included, which is formed similarly to the speech
audio, and the diffusion transformer block is constructed as stacked aforementioned layers and re-
peated 8 times in the generator G. We list detailed hyperparameters in the App. C.1.

3.1.2    D ENOISING PROCESS
Following the DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) definition, the forward noising process is defined as:
                                                √
                     q Mτ0:T | Mτ0:T               ατ Mτ0:T

                                    −1 ∼ N               −1 , (1 − ατ )I ,                           (2)
where M00:T denotes the predicted noise-free facial representation sequence, τ ∈ [1, · · · , Ṫ ] denotes
the forward diffusion step, and ατ ∈ (0, 1) follows a monotonically decreasing noise schedule such
that as τ approaches Ṫ , Mτ0:T is sampled from the normal distribution.
We follow Ng et al. (2024) that predict M00:T directly from Mτ0:T , and the next step Mτ0:T
                                                                                         −1 of the
reverse process can then be obtained by applying the forward process to the predicted M00:T . The
prediction process can be mathematically formulated as Eq. 3:
                                    M̂00:T = G(Mτ0:T ; τ, A, C).                                 (3)
For the training objective, we adopt the simple loss (Ho et al., 2020)(Eq. 4). The speech audio and
coarse-grained conditions are independently masked with a probability of 20% during training for
the CFG technique (Ho & Salimans, 2021), which enhances the controllability (shown in App. B).
                                    Lsimple = ||M01:T − M̂01:T ||22 .                                (4)

3.2     A DDING FINE - GRAINED CONDITIONAL CONTROL

Fine-grained control adapter. Natural facial expressions controlled by localized muscle move-
ments should be generated automatically, instead of relying on hand-crafted post-processing. Thus,
we integrate the fine-grained conditions into the base model to enable detailed facial control in the
facial movement generation process. We choose binary AU sequences as the fine-grained conditions
due to their ability to describe spatiotemporal localized movements and multimodal scalability. In
our design, the activated AUs guide the excitation of the generated facial muscles rather than main-
taining activation within a controlled interval. In order to add fine-grained control to the base model,
we devise an adapter with the structure of FiLM self-attention layer (in Fig. 3) as extra network
layers, which is optimized only in stage 2 while keeping the base model fixed. Additionally, a zero
convolution layer (Zhang et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2024) is added after the FiLM attention layer,
which is initialized with zeros and is gradually optimized during training, ensuring a stable training
process.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                 Regular
                                                                        Emo label


                                      Diffusion Transformer Block
                                                                         Audio      Pred          GT
                     zero conv
                                                                        AU seq

                  FiLM Cross Attn

                                                                                              Swap label
                  FiLM Cross Attn                                       Emo label

                                                                         Audio      Pred          GT
                  AdaLN Self Attn
                                                                        AU seq
                                                                                       Control Mask
                   FiLM Self Attn



Figure 3: Stage 2 training pipeline: A fine-grained control adapter is inserted into the fixed base
model and optimized in stage 2 with shuffling regular paired data or swapped emotion label.


Swap-label mechanism. The entanglement of the coarse- and fine-grained control cannot be com-
pletely eliminated only by network design because 1) Entangled supervision: the model is only
trained on paired data (A, C, F, M 0:T ), where coarse- and fine-grained conditions are entangled,
therefore failing to generate, for instance, an angry facial movement with a sudden smile since no
such data exists in the dataset; 2) Insufficient training: since the adapter is trained on the same
emotion-annotated dataset as the base model, which generates a facial movement M̂00:T that is sim-
ilar to the ground truth M 0:T , the AU sequence may be treated as a condition for refinement rather
than control; 3) Impractical modeling: users tend to apply fine-grained control over specific mus-
cles within designated time intervals in the practical application, instead of the AU sequence with
complete spatiotemporal movement information provided by the annotated training dataset. This
inconsistency between training and inference can lead to suboptimal performance. To address the
challenges above, we propose a swap-label training mechanism to break the provided coarse- and
fine-grained condition pair and ensure the dominance of fine-grained control instead of the coarse-
grained conditions. We visualize the swap-label mechanism in Fig. 3. During training, we replace
the coarse-grained emotion label and obtain a swapped pair of data (A, C ′ , F, M 0:T ) while keeping
the original AU sequence as fine-grained condition F and the ground truth M 0:T . At the beginning
of the training process, the generator initially produces M̂0′,0:T according to the swapped emotion
label C ′ . In order to disentangle the paired coarse- and fine-grained conditions and emphasize the
controllability of the fine-grained condition, we optimize the adapter so that M̂0′,0:T is as close as
possible to M00:T when F is given. The loss function is as follows:

                                       0:T
                            Lswap = ||Zctrl ⊙ M 0:T − Zctrl
                                                       0:T
                                                            ⊙ M̂0′,0:T ||,                                 (5)
       0:T
where Zctrl is a spatiotemporal mask representing the activated AUs within the fine-grained con-
dition, and ⊙ denotes the element-wise product. The swap-label mechanism can disentangle the
coarse- and fine-grained conditions by sufficiently optimizing the adapter with swapped training
pairs. While keeping the base model fixed, the swap-label mechanism consistently supervises the
adapter to learn facial movement controlled by the AU sequences in the non-masked region. Mean-
while, the swap-label mechanism is randomly replaced with the regular simple loss (as Eq. 4),
preserving accurate facial movements in the non-fine-grained controlled region. To effectively sim-
ulate the fine-grained conditions users provide in practical applications, the AU sequence requires
sparsification in both temporal and spatial dimensions. Considering the temporal continuity of the
conditions, we randomly drop elements triplets (Fd , Fs , Fe ) with a probability of 80% from the AU
sequence F . Within a specific remaining triplet, each activated AU is discarded with probability,
preventing the suppression of the corresponding facial movements of non-activated AUs.

Mask-based classifier-free guidance technique. The influence of the fine-grained condition
could spill over to the neighbor non-conditional temporal intervals due to the continuity of facial
movements, as illustrated in the fourth row of Fig. 4. This issue cannot be rectified through training
alone. Hence, we address it by employing a mask-based CFG technique based on Ho & Salimans


                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(2021) during inference, as:
                      M̂00:T = GΦ + α(GA,C − GΦ ) + βZcf
                                                      0:T
                                                         g ⊙ (GA,C,F − GΦ ),                        (6)

where we abbreviate the notation of G(Mt0:T ; t, ·) as G· . Zcf0:T
                                                                 g is a temporal mask that marks the
frames with user-provided fine-grained conditions. This temporal guidance prevents the leaking
issue and performs seamless transitions under the denoising process. The α and β are the guidance
scale, and we leverage β as the intensity control of the fine-grained condition shown in App. B.

Text-based AU detector. The choice of using AUs as the fine-grained condition facilitates multi-
modal control, including facial image and text-based descriptions. Although we can employ off-the-
shelf AU detectors (Baltrušaitis et al., 2016) from the facial portraits as the fine-grained condition,
detecting AUs from textual descriptions of emotions or expressions remains an unexplored and
challenging endeavor due to insufficient application. In order to train a text-based AU detector, we
collect a dataset comprising text description-AU pairs from two data sources: on the one hand, we
utilized the knowledge of LLM to obtain a limited number of high-quality emotions and expressions,
along with their corresponding activated AUs. On the other hand, we supplement the dataset with
a substantial number of emotion-AU pairs sourced from an image-based expression dataset (Mol-
lahosseini et al., 2017). The lightweight detector employs CLIP-Adapter (Gao et al., 2024) as the
backbone, considering CLIP’s sensitivity to emotions and expressions when aligning textual and vi-
sual modalities. After passing through the adapter, the textual CLIP features are fed into the detector
head to predict the activated AUs. Additionally, we use AU-based text descriptions for alignment
to enhance generalization capabilities. We train our detector with a binary cross-entropy loss, while
an InfoNCE loss is also included to mitigate the gap between AU and natural language descriptions.
More technical details are listed in the App. E.

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1      DATASETS

We use the public-available emotional talking face datasets MEAD (Wang et al., 2020) and
RAVDESS (Livingstone & Russo, 2018) to train our model. MEAD captures approximately 40
hours of 48 participants’ talking face clips in RGB video. It covers neutral and seven expression cat-
egories (angry, contempt, disgusted, fear, happy, sad, and surprised) in 3 intensity levels. Each par-
ticipant is required to record 30 selected sentences for each expression type and intensity. RAVDESS
contains 24 speakers and features over 6.5 hours of data, including 8 emotion categories (neutral,
calm, happy, sad, angry, fearful, disgusted, and surprised). We split two participants from MEAD
for validation and test set each and split RAVDESS following Peng et al. (2023b). Moreover, to
enhance the generalization of lips synchronization, we collect approximately 252 hours of multilin-
gual speaking videos from the internet to obtain a diverse range of speaking motions and obtain the
ready-to-go dataset with a total duration of 157 hours after manually removing the segments with
unsynchronized audio or occluded faces. We represent facial movements with a sequence of Apple
ARKit blendshape coefficients1 , as each frame is a 51-dimension vector, and each dimension has
specific facial muscle movements corresponding to it. An in-the-house video-based motion-capture
model is utilized to obtain the facial movement. For semantic consistency, the AU sequence for each
clip is obtained from the facial movements with a handcrafted rule (App. C.2).

4.2      E VALUATIONS

4.2.1      M ETRICS
In our experiment, we adopt several metrics for comparison considering the following factors: 1)
lip synchronicity, 2) emotion expressiveness and expression diversity, and 3) fine-grained condition
control ability. Hence, we adopt lips vertices error (LVE↓, Richard et al. (2021)) and SyncNet score
(SyncD↓ and SyncC↑, Chung & Zisserman (2017)) for lip synchronicity, and Acc ↑ and Div ↑ for
expression. The calculation method for the metrics is detailed in App. D. Notably, we propose
Control Rate (CR ↑) to evaluate the fine-grained control ability on the AU level, which is applied
    1
        https://arkit-face-blendshapes.com/


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on a fine-grained condition (Fd , Fs , Fe ) and a generated facial movements counterpart M 0:T , where
Fd contains K activated AUs. For the k-th activated AU, the CRk is computed as the gap between
the maximum coefficients in the controlled slot and the average of its non-controlled neighbors (5
frames, for 0.2s is the minimum duration of a noticeable expression (Ekman & Friesen, 1969)) as:
                                        F i :Fei             F i −5:Fsi      F i :Fei +5
                        CRk = max(Bk s             ) − avg(Bk s           , Bk e           ),                   (7)
where Bk0:T is the blendshape coefficient sequence from M 0:T corresponding to the k-th activated
AU. The larger CR value indicates more obvious and intense controlling effects.

4.2.2   C OMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS
Since no previous methods exist on 3D talking faces with fine-grained spacial-temporal expression
control, we individually train the base model on the MEAD and RAVDESS datasets and compare
these methods on the benchmarks for lip synchronicity. We undertake further comparisons with
the methods that utilize ARKit as the output. We report the emotion accuracy and diversity on the
MEAD test set and the SyncNet score on a new benchmark with randomly selected audios from
the LibriSpeech dataset (Panayotov et al., 2015). As shown in Tab. 1, our method outperforms the
existing methods on both lip synchronization and expression generation.

Table 1: Comparison with SOTA methods: our method outperforms the existing SOTA methods
on both lip synchronization and expression generation.

                                               MEAD                        RAVDESS                LibriSpeech
                 Rep      Emo
                                  LVE ↓        Acc ↑         Div ↑            LVE ↓             SyncD ↓   SyncC ↑
FaceFormer       Disp      é       16.36         -            -               9.24                  -        -
TalkSHOW        Coeff      é       13.21         -            -               12.54                 -        -
EMOTE           Coeff      Ë        9.37         -            -               14.67                 -        -
EmoTalk         ARKit      Ë        7.90      9.97%         62.02              4.31              11.09     3.30
UniTalker       ARKit      é       10.14     12.44%         12.64              4.93               9.70     4.72
Ours            ARKit      Ë        7.21     59.48%         119.36            3.93                9.76     5.55

Similarly, we evaluate the SyncNet score on the MEAD and RAVDESS test sets in Tab. 6 (App. D.3)
demonstrating that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance in lip synchronization. These
statistics highlight the structure of the diffusion model, which significantly enhances the diversity
of output compared to discriminator-based models while avoiding the over-smoothing issue, and
the use of AdaLN for coarse-grained condition injection, which effectively injects and maintains
semantic control.

4.2.3   A BLATION STUDY
Coarse-grained condition modeling. To justify our choice of network design in coarse-grained
condition modeling, we replace the AdaLN self-attention layer with a FiLM cross-attention layer
used to incorporate fine-grained and speech audio conditions. As reported in Tab. 2, the base model
with the AdaLN self-attention layer generates more appropriate and diverse expressions, indicating
that our design is more efficient in modeling global conditions.

Fine-grained design. We conduct ablation studies on fine-grained controlling from the perspec-
tives of model structure, training, and inference, as 1) removing the two-stage pipeline as the coarse-
and fine-grained control are trained jointly, 2) removing the swap-label mechanism with only regu-
lar diffusion loss and 3) replacing the mask-based CFG technique with the one proposed by Ho &
Salimans (2021). We collect a test set with in-the-wild speech audios with single or multiple AUs ac-
tivated and keep the random seed fixed. As shown in Tab. 3 and Fig. 4, we conclude that 1) Without
the two-stage pipeline, the jointly trained model exhibits fine-grained control, but its lip movements
are significantly unsynchronized. 2) Without the swap-label mechanism, the adapter trained with
paired conditions fails to generalize on conflict conditions, resulting in invalid fine-grained control
and unsynchronized lip movements. 3) Without the mask-based CFG technique, the generation
encounters issues of temporal leakage, making the fine-grained control difficult to observe within


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the control interval. We observe that the SyncNet scores degrade when fine-grained control is incor-
porated, compared to the counterpart without fine-grained control (in Tab. 1). To further investigate
this, we analyze the contribution of each AU to the evaluation result, as presented in Tab. 4. The
analysis reveals that inappropriate activations of lower-face AUs disproportionately influence facial
movements, resulting in suboptimal lip synchronization. This explains why the SyncNet score de-
grades more without the mask-based CFG technique, as the inappropriate fine-grained condition
leaks and contaminates facial movements.
                                                                                           Table 3: Fine-grained design ablation
                                Table 2: Coarse-grained design ablation
                                                                             Method                       CR ↑    SyncD ↓      SyncC ↑
                                                 LVE ↓         Acc ↑    Div ↑w/o two-stage                0.35     11.94         2.78
                                Ours (FiLM)      7.64          48.19% 114.26 w/o swap-label               0.12     11.02         4.07
                                Ours (AdaLN)     7.21          59.48% 119.36 w/o masked CFG               0.27     10.66         4.74
                                                                             Ours                         0.51     10.14         5.38

Table 4: SyncNet scores on single-AU fine-grained control: with fixed speech audio and coarse-
grained conditions, the results controlled by upper-face AUs do not suffer from lip-sync issues
(+0.156 on average), whereas those with lower-face AUs exhibit unsynced lips (+0.693).

                                        AU             Null            AU01 AU02 AU04                AU05     AU06     AU07        AU45
                           upper
                                       SyncD           9.667           9.967 10.365 9.784            9.735    9.982    9.613       9.615
                                        AU   AU09 AU10 AU12 AU14 AU15 AU17 AU20 AU26 AU28
                           lower
                                       SyncD 10.251 10.465 10.788 10.194 10.354 10.614 10.090 10.423 10.066


                                             Neutral                            Brow Lower                         Neutral
our method


                                                                                    …
w/o two stage


                                                                                       …
w/o masked CFG w/o swap-label


                                                                                    …


                                                                                    …


Figure 4: Ablation on fine-grained design: we illustrate the ablation by generating facial fine-grained
condition Brow Lower within a neutral talking animation.


We visualize the training loss in Fig. 5, and conclude that 1) Incorporating the fine-grained condition
specifies the generation target, and simplifies the training objective (base vs. w/o two-stage and
base vs. w/o swap), and 2) Swap-label mechanism complicates the training objective with conflict
conditions, as the larger loss is observed, enabling the adapter to dominate fine-grained control.

4.2.4                                U SER STUDY
We conduct a user study involving 38 participants who are first required to select from EmoTalk,
UniTalker, and our method the animation they deem most natural, expressive, and exhibiting the
best lip-syncing. Our model achieves the highest performance across metrics as shown in Fig. 6.


                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then, the participants are invited to evaluate the fine-grained control ability by comparing it with the
animation without the fine-grained control. In this evaluation, the fine-grained control capability, as
well as the overall performance is widely accepted performance by participants. We present coarse-
and fine-grained control in Fig. 7.


                                                     Naturalness                  77%                   12%   10%


                                                  Lip synchronization             80%                   8%    12%


                                                   Expressiveness                  82%                   6%   11%


                                                    Controllability                 88%


                                                       Overall                     84%



                                                                         Ours     EmoTalk   UniTalker



             Figure 5: Training losses.                            Figure 6: User study results.
     Angry


                                                                 ...


                                                AU05 + AU12      😆
     Happy


                                                                 ...


                                                AU04 + AU15      ☹️
Figure 7: Cafe-Talk generates natural movements with conflict coarse- and fine-grained conditions.


5   C ONCLUSION
We present Cafe-Talk, the first diffusion-based 3D talking face model featuring both coarse- and
fine-grained multimodal conditional control. The fine-grained condition is represented with AUs,
enabling localized and flexible control. Cafe-Talk is designed to add a fine-grained control adapter
into a diffusion-based talking face model with coarse-grained control. Provided with conflict condi-
tions during training and masked temporally during inference, the fine-grained condition dominates
the generation precisely. We extend the natural language control by a detector aligned with AUs.
Cafe-Talk has achieved superior performance across all evaluations, and fine-grained control has
received wide acceptance in user studies, validating the efficacy of the design. However, our model
still has limitations that need to be overcome. The failure cases show that there could be inaccu-
rate lip movements when the fine-grained conditions of the lower-face AUs explicitly conflict with
speech audio. Our near-term research efforts are geared towards immediate improvement with a
better solution to harmonize the fine-grained control of the lower face with speech audio. Mean-
while, other aspects of 3D talking faces and applications could be researched in the long term. For
example, it would be of interest to researchers to explore more real-life AI agents with LLMs and
flexible control offered by our Cafe-Talk.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2023YFF1203803,
2023YFC3604500), Beijing Science and Technology Plan Project Z231100005923039, and Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (62441201, L2324214).


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. FaceTalk: Audio-driven motion
  diffusion for neural parametric head models. In CVPR, 2024.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 12449–
  12460, 2020.
Haoran Bai, Di Kang, Haoxian Zhang, Jinshan Pan, and Linchao Bao. Ffhq-uv: Normalized facial
  uv-texture dataset for 3d face reconstruction. In CVPR, pp. 362–371, 2023.
Tadas Baltrušaitis, Peter Robinson, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Openface: An open source facial
  behavior analysis toolkit. In WACV, pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2016.
Linchao Bao, Xiangkai Lin, Yajing Chen, Haoxian Zhang, Sheng Wang, Xuefei Zhe, Di Kang,
  Haozhi Huang, Xinwei Jiang, Jue Wang, et al. High-fidelity 3d digital human head creation from
  rgb-d selfies. In ACM TOG, 2021.
Linchao Bao, Haoxian Zhang, Yue Qian, Tangli Xue, Changhai Chen, Xuefei Zhe, and
  Di Kang. Learning audio-driven viseme dynamics for 3d face animation. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.06059, 2023.
Zenghao Chai, Haoxian Zhang, Jing Ren, Di Kang, Zhengzhuo Xu, Xuefei Zhe, Chun Yuan, and
  Linchao Bao. Realy: Rethinking the evaluation of 3d face reconstruction. In ECCV, pp. 74–92.
  Springer, 2022.
Joon Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman. Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild. In ACCV
  2016 Workshops, pp. 251–263. Springer, 2017.
Alexis Conneau, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
  Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning for speech recognition. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.13979, 2020.
Daniel Cudeiro, Timo Bolkart, Cassidy Laidlaw, Anurag Ranjan, and Michael J Black. Capture,
  learning, and synthesis of 3d speaking styles. In CVPR, pp. 10101–10111, 2019.
Radek Daněček, Kiran Chhatre, Shashank Tripathi, Yandong Wen, Michael Black, and Timo
  Bolkart. Emotional speech-driven animation with content-emotion disentanglement. In SIG-
  GRAPH Asia, pp. 1–13, 2023.
Paul Ekman and Wallace V Friesen. Nonverbal leakage and clues to deception. In Psychiatry,
  volume 32, pp. 88–106. Taylor & Francis, 1969.
Yingruo Fan, Zhaojiang Lin, Jun Saito, Wenping Wang, and Taku Komura. Faceformer: Speech-
  driven 3d facial animation with transformers. In CVPR, pp. 18770–18780, 2022.
E Friesen and Paul Ekman. Facial action coding system: a technique for the measurement of facial
  movement. In Palo Alto, volume 3, pp. 5, 1978.
Yuan Gan, Zongxin Yang, Xihang Yue, Lingyun Sun, and Yi Yang. Efficient emotional adaptation
  for audio-driven talking-head generation. In ICCV, pp. 22634–22645, 2023.
Peng Gao, Shijie Geng, Renrui Zhang, Teli Ma, Rongyao Fang, Yongfeng Zhang, Hongsheng Li,
  and Yu Qiao. Clip-adapter: Better vision-language models with feature adapters. In IJCV, volume
  132, pp. 581–595. Springer, 2024.
Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and
   Di Zhang. LivePortrait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retargeting control. In
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03168, 2024.
Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Ad-nerf: Audio
  driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis. In ICCV, pp. 5784–5794, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger,
  Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et al. Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end
  speech recognition. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.
Kazi Injamamul Haque and Zerrin Yumak. Facexhubert: Text-less speech-driven e(x)pressive 3d
  facial animation synthesis using self-supervised speech representation learning. In ICMI, pp.
  282–291, 2023.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In NeurIPS,
  volume 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Antti Herva, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Audio-driven facial
  animation by joint end-to-end learning of pose and emotion. In ACM TOG, volume 36, 2017.
Shuai Li, Sisi Zhuang, Wenfeng Song, Xinyu Zhang, Hejia Chen, and Aimin Hao. Sequential texts
  driven cohesive motions synthesis with natural transitions. In ICCV, pp. 9498–9508, 2023.
Yunfei Liu, Lijian Lin, Fei Yu, Changyin Zhou, and Yu Li. MODA: Mapping-once audio-driven
  portrait animation with dual attentions. In ICCV, pp. 23020–23029, 2023.
Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech
  and song (ravdess): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american
  english. In PloS one, volume 13, pp. e0196391. Public Library of Science San Francisco, CA
  USA, 2018.
Shunlin Lu, Ling-Hao Chen, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Ruimao Zhang, Lei Zhang, and Heung-Yeung
  Shum. HumanTOMATO: Text-aligned whole-body motion generation. In ICML, 2024.
Yifeng Ma, Suzhen Wang, Yu Ding, Bowen Ma, Tangjie Lv, Changjie Fan, Zhipeng Hu, Zhidong
  Deng, and Xin Yu. TalkCLIP: Talking head generation with text-guided expressive speaking
  styles. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00334, 2023.
Ali Mollahosseini, Behzad Hasani, and Mohammad H Mahoor. Affectnet: A database for facial
  expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild. In TAC, volume 10, pp. 18–31. IEEE,
  2017.
Evonne Ng, Javier Romero, Timur Bagautdinov, Shaojie Bai, Trevor Darrell, Angjoo Kanazawa, and
  Alexander Richard. From audio to photoreal embodiment: Synthesizing humans in conversations.
  In CVPR, 2024.
Tae-Hyun Oh, Tali Dekel, Changil Kim, Inbar Mosseri, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein,
  and Wojciech Matusik. Speech2Face: Learning the face behind a voice. In CVPR, pp. 7539–7548,
  2019.
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus
  based on public domain audio books. In ICASSP, pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In ICCV, pp. 4195–
 4205, 2023.
Ziqiao Peng, Yihao Luo, Yue Shi, Hao Xu, Xiangyu Zhu, Hongyan Liu, Jun He, and Zhaoxin Fan.
  Selftalk: A self-supervised commutative training diagram to comprehend 3d talking faces. In
  ACM MM, 2023a.
Ziqiao Peng, Haoyu Wu, Zhenbo Song, Hao Xu, Xiangyu Zhu, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin
  Fan. EmoTalk: Speech-driven emotional disentanglement for 3d face animation. In ICCV, pp.
  20687–20697, 2023b.
Ziqiao Peng, Wentao Hu, Yue Shi, Xiangyu Zhu, Xiaomei Zhang, Hao Zhao, Jun He, Hongyan Liu,
  and Zhaoxin Fan. Synctalk: The devil is in the synchronization for talking head synthesis. In
  CVPR, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In AAAI, volume 32, 2018.
Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and Gül Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis
 with transformer vae. In ICCV, pp. 10985–10995, 2021.
Mathis Petrovich, Or Litany, Umar Iqbal, Michael J Black, Gul Varol, Xue Bin Peng, and Davis
 Rempe. Multi-track timeline control for text-driven 3d human motion generation. In CVPR, pp.
 1911–1921, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Alexander Richard, Michael Zollhöfer, Yandong Wen, Fernando De la Torre, and Yaser Sheikh.
  Meshtalk: 3d face animation from speech using cross-modality disentanglement. In ICCV, pp.
  1173–1182, 2021.
Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Learning dynamic facial
  radiance fields for few-shot talking head synthesis. In ECCV, pp. 666–682. Springer, 2022.
Zhaoxu Sun, Yuze Xuan, Fang Liu, and Yang Xiang. FG-EmoTalk: Talking head video generation
  with fine-grained controllable facial expressions. In AAAI, volume 38, pp. 5043–5051, 2024.
Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, and Ye Pan. Style2talker: High-resolution talking head generation with emotion
  style and art style. In AAAI, volume 38, pp. 5079–5087, 2024.
Guy Tevet, Brian Gordon, Amir Hertz, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Motionclip: Ex-
  posing human motion generation to clip space. In ECCV, pp. 358–374. Springer, 2022.
Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano.
  Human motion diffusion model. In ICLR, 2023.
Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He,
  Yu Qiao, and Chen Change Loy. MEAD: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-
  face generation. In ECCV, pp. 700–717. Springer, 2020.
Yin Wang, Zhiying Leng, Frederick WB Li, Shun-Cheng Wu, and Xiaohui Liang. Fg-t2m: Fine-
  grained text-driven human motion generation via diffusion model. In ICCV, pp. 22035–22044,
  2023.
Yuchi Wang, Junliang Guo, Jianhong Bai, Runyi Yu, Tianyu He, Xu Tan, Xu Sun, and Jiang Bian.
  InstructAvatar: Text-guided emotion and motion control for avatar generation. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15758, 2024.
Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yuechen Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Jue Wang, and Tien-Tsin Wong.
   Codetalker: Speech-driven 3d facial animation with discrete motion prior. In CVPR, pp. 12780–
   12790, 2023.
Chao Xu, Junwei Zhu, Jiangning Zhang, Yue Han, Wenqing Chu, Ying Tai, Chengjie Wang, Zhifeng
  Xie, and Yong Liu. High-fidelity generalized emotional talking face generation with multi-modal
  emotion space learning. In CVPR, pp. 6609–6619, 2023.
Zhenhui Ye, Ziyue Jiang, Yi Ren, et al. Geneface: Generalized and high-fidelity audio-driven 3d
  talking face synthesis. In ICLR, 2023.
Hongwei Yi, Hualin Liang, Yifei Liu, Qiong Cao, Yandong Wen, Timo Bolkart, Dacheng Tao, and
  Michael J Black. Generating holistic 3d human motion from speech. In CVPR, pp. 469–480,
  2023.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In ICCV, pp. 3836–3847, 2023a.
Mingyuan Zhang, Huirong Li, Zhongang Cai, Jiawei Ren, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Finemogen:
 Fine-grained spatio-temporal motion generation and editing. In NeurIPS, volume 36, 2024.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qinsheng Zhang, Jiaming Song, Xun Huang, Yongxin Chen, and Ming-Yu Liu. Diffcollage: Parallel
  generation of large content with diffusion models. In CVPR, pp. 10188–10198. IEEE, 2023b.

Qingcheng Zhao, Pengyu Long, Qixuan Zhang, Dafei Qin, Han Liang, Longwen Zhang, Yingliang
  Zhang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Media2Face: Co-speech facial animation generation with multi-
  modality guidance. In ACM SIGGRAPH, 2024.

Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu
  Li. Makeittalk: Speaker-aware talking-head animation. In ACM TOG, volume 39, 2020.


A       OVERVIEW

We form the appendix as follows: in App. B we present more visualization results with coarse- and
fine-grained control. In App. C, we depict the implementation details of our model, and provide
more details for evaluation in App. D. Finally, the text-based AU detector is described in App. E.


B       M ORE RESULTS

We demonstrate emotion control by the coarse-grained condition in Fig. 8. Since the emotion is
encoded into the CLIP embedding space, our model has the capability of not only the in-domain
emotion labels (i.e., angry, fear, happy, sad and surprised), but also the unseen emotion words (e.g.,
shocked). In addition, even though not adopted during training, the coarse-grained condition also
supports facial portraits as condition input, thanks to the multimodality alignment of the CLIP.


          angry      fear       happy        sad        surprised                        “shocked”


 Ca



 Fe



 Tal



    k


                            Figure 8: Results with coarse-grained control


However, the emotion perceived by CLIP does not fully ensure that the generated facial movements
precisely match the intended expression. This underscores the importance of fine-grained condi-
tional control. In Fig. 9, we present the results of our model generated with multimodal detected
AUs.
We visualize the facial movement coefficients generated with different CFG scale β in Fig. 10, where
the fine-grained condition precisely occurs in its slot due to our mask-based CFG technique. Due to
the intensity modeled by the CFG technique, the generated results exhibit different rhythms, which
cannot be achieved by post-processing e.g., linear multiplication, or summation of the coefficients.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                        smile           yell        eyes open


                             Figure 9: Results with fine-grained control


    Figure 10: Controlling intensity with CFG scale: the eyebrows are raised higher with bigger β


C     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
C.1    D IFFUSION TRANSFORMER

In the diffusion transformer block, the attention layers take 512-dimensional features as input and
are equipped with 8 heads. We utilize an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001, and both
stages are trained with a batch size of 16 on 8 Nvidia V100 GPUs for 400k and 300k iterations (∼ 4
days each). More information are listed in Tab. 5

         Table 5: Parameters and training strategies for modules in the diffusion transformer

              Module                  Parameters (M)            Training strategy
              Wav2Vec2-xslr-300m          315.43                     Fixed
              Base model                   25.09        Opt. in stage 1, fixed in stage 2
              Adapter                       5.39         Opt. in stage 2 w/ swap-label
              Total                       345.91                       —


C.2    RULE - BASED AU DETECTION

Unlike existing methods utilizing an off-the-shelf detector to obtain AUs, we devise a rule-based
algorithm (Alg. 1) to binarize from the coefficient sequence for multi-fold reasons: 1) Semantical
mismatches exist between the AU detector prediction and the ground-truth facial movements, mak-
ing it fail to learn the co-relationship (Fig. 11). Previous methods may not run into such difficulty


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


since only salient AUs within a sequence are selected. 2) Our algorithm provides flexibility: if
only binarizing the facial movements with a threshold, the fine-grained condition will activate cor-
responding muscles for the entire interval, for we encourage the corresponding muscles to fluctuate
between activation and deactivation under fine-grained control.

Algorithm 1 Binarization Algorithm Process
    Input: Expression sequence M 0:T
    Output: AU condition sequence F

    Step 1: Binarize M 0:T by a threshold
    Step 2: Apply max pooling with a random kernel size to the binarized sequence
    Step 3: Merge adjacent active sequences randomly if the gap between them is less than a spacing
    threshold


Figure 11: The AU sequence obtained by off-the-shelf detector (Baltrušaitis et al., 2016) (left) and
our binarize algorithm (right). The rule-based algorithm produces fine-grained conditions with se-
mantic consistency.


C.3      M ISCELLANEOUS

With a base model trained jointly on the MEAD and RAVDESS datasets, we utilize the 157-hour
internet dataset in stage 2. Considering the unreliability of the concurrent video-based emotion
recognition methods, we randomly arrange the emotion label and intensity as input, following the
swap-label mechanism to enhance the fine-grained condition controllability. During training, we
trim the audio up to 10 seconds for training efficiency.


D       E VALUATION

D.1      M ETRICS

Lips vertices error We utilize lips vertices error (LVE) (Richard et al., 2021) to evaluate the lips
motion synchronization to the ground truth, which is defined as the maximal L2 error of all lip
vertices on the frame level and reports the average over all frames in the testing set.

SyncNet score To evaluate the lips synchronization without ground truth, we adopt the SyncNet
(Chung & Zisserman, 2017) minimum distance (SyncD) and confidence score (SyncC), which is
commonly adopted for evaluating lips synchronization on video-based talking-head and the videos
are rendered by Unreal Engine MetaHuman 2 in our case.
    2
        https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/metahuman


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Emotion accuracy and diversity We test the expression of the generated facial movements with
a transformer-based emotion classifier. The classifier first encodes the facial movement M 0:T into
feature Mf0:T and classifies it to the emotion class with a classifier head. We report the accuracy of
the prediction and the feature-level standard deviation as diversity.

D.2   M ETRICS OF ACC

Transformer-based classifier We introduce a Transformer-based classifier to classify the emotion
category. As the model structure is shown in Fig. 12, the classifier takes the facial movements
with an additional <cls> token as the input and maps them into latent space with an MLP. Then,
with positional embedding, it is fed into the Transformer block, which consists of one layer of
the Transformer encoder layer with 8 heads. Finally, a classifier head takes the first token from the
encoder and outputs the prediction. The classifier is trained on the MEAD dataset with cross-entropy
loss. The training process lasts for 200 epochs, where the learning rate is set to 1e-4 and the batch
size is set to 128. Notably, we randomly split the dataset into the training set, validation set, and
testing set, with quantities of 70%, 15%, and 15%, to ensure the in-domain classifying ability. The
classifier achieves accuracies of 88.28% on emotion classification.


                    Figure 12: Model structure: the transformer-based classifier


D.3   P ERFORMANCE

Comparison with existing methods. We report the SyncNet score on the MEAD and RAVDESS
datasets in Tab. 6, further demonstrating the superiority of our model in lip synchronization.

                  Table 6: The SyncNet score on MEAD and RAVDESS test set.

                                         MEAD          RAVDESS
                        Models      SyncD ↓ SyncC ↑ SyncD ↓ SyncC ↑
                        UniTalker    11.52       3.05       9.57       2.35
                        EmoTalk      11.63       2.91       9.61       2.29
                        Ours         11.22       4.33       9.33       3.95


We also report the size of the relevant models and the inference time for 5-second audio on the
Nvidia 2080Ti GPU in Tab 7. The inference latency is primarily caused by the sampling and de-
noising process of the current diffusion architecture, which could be partially alleviated with a more
advanced GPU. Our method’s high controllability, precise manipulation, and diverse outputs are
compatible with flexible offline facial editing and time-tolerant AIGC talking animation generation
in real-world applications.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 7: Size and inference time cost on related methods.

                  Models         Num of parameters (M) Inference time (sec)
                  FaceFormer                94.7                     3.34
                  TalkSHOW                  94.9                     3.69
                  EMOTE                    109.6                     3.73
                  EmoTalk                  640.6                    10.99
                  UniTalker                 96.0                     3.20
                  Cafe-Talk                345.9                    14.71



Ablation study on emotion label. Since the base model is trained with paired emotion label and
speech audio, where speech audio as well conveys emotion implicitly, we conduct a series of ablation
studies to evaluate the controllability of the emotion label by 1) masking the emotion label within
the CFG technique (Eq. 6) and, 2) swapping the emotion label randomly. Reported in Tab. 8, the
emotion accuracy drops sharply without the correct emotion label, indicating the label serves as an
explicit emotion condition, which the model prioritizes and learns as the dominant factor.

                  Table 8: Ablation study on the controllability of emotion label.

                                                         Acc ↑            Div ↑
                    Mask emotion label                   23.68%        110.96
                                                   57.22%, label as GT
                    Swap emotion label                                 106.33
                                                   10.86%, audio as GT
                    Paired (reported in Tab. 1)          59.68%        119.36



Ablation study on emotion intensity. We evaluate how the emotion intensity impacts the gener-
ation and modeling design. As shown in Tab. 9, we first provide the detailed matrics on the MEAD
test set within each intensity level. We observe that higher intensity levels result in higher Acc,
indicating that incorporating expression intensity enhances the emotional expressiveness of the gen-
erated results. Then we re-generate the facial movements on the MEAD test set, and observe a sharp
drop in both Acc and Div, demonstrating that emotion label control fails in this extreme case and
confirming that our design enables the model to learn the ordinal relationship of intensity. Finally,
in an ablation study removing intensity from the model pipeline, we observed a decline in both Acc
and Div, suggesting the model is more likely to generate expressions with medium intensity. This
further highlights the necessity of intensity for flexible control.

                  Table 9: Ablation study on coarse-grained intensity condition.

                                                        Acc ↑     Div ↑
                            intensity = 1 subset        51.68% 111.16
                            intensity = 2 subset        63.86% 119.75
                            intensity = 3 subset        66.26% 119.48
                            intensity = 0             19.07% 67.09
                            remove intensity          53.27% 115.17
                            Ours (reported in Tab. 1) 59.48% 119.36



Ablation study on coarse-grained design. We illustrate the emotion accuracy with the confusion
matrix in Fig. 13, corresponding to Tab. 2. We also notice that the major mispredicted pairs
are “disgusted-angry” and “surprised-fear”, which is acceptable since the definition boundary is
ambiguous.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Ours                                                 w/o AdaLN
    Figure 13: Confusion matrix: coarse-grained design with AdaLN achieves efficient control.


E    T EXT- BASED AU DETECTOR

Model structure We construct a text-based AU detector based on CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) for
its multimodal alignment ability. As shown in Fig. 14, the text input is first encoded by the fixed
CLIP encoder, then fed into an adapter (Gao et al., 2024) with normalization. Finally, a classification
head is utilized to detect the activated AUs. Concretely, the CLIP adapter (Gao et al., 2024) is
a bottleneck 2-layer MLP ([512 → 128 → 512]) with residual connection, activated by ReLU
activation function, and the parameters are counted in Tab. 10.



                 A person is <AU12> <AU 45>
                   A person is <AU12> <AU 45>
                                                   CLIP
                                                   Text    shared weights

                                                   Enc
                 A personAissmiling
                             <AU12>   <AU 45>
                                    person                                                      c AU 12

                   Person acts<AU45> <AU 12>
                                                                                                 AU 45

                                                           Adapter          CLS head Pred AUs GT AUs



                                  Figure 14: Textual AU detector pipeline


                Table 10: Parameters and training strategies for textual AU detector

         Module                                 Paramters (M)                  Training strategy
         CLIP text encoder (ViT-B/32)              37.82                            Fixed
         CLIP adapter + head                        0.13               Opt with InfoNCE and BCE loss
         Total                                     37.95                             —


Dataset We leverage the powerful language analysis capabilities of GPT to enhance our model’s
ability to perform expression analysis on an open vocabulary. The prompt used is as follows:

         Please generate a series of complex and abstract facial expressions, each involv-
         ing specific Action Units (AUs) from the following list: [AU key-value pair, ab-
         breviated, e.g., AU01:InnerBrowRaiser]. Expressions should be a mix of
         both simple (e.g., frown, raised eyebrows, kiss, wink) and complex combinations
         (e.g., skeptical with one eyebrow raised, incredulous with raised brows and open
         mouth). Additionally, include mixed emotions (e.g., happy-surprise, sad-relief)
         with the corresponding AUs. Provide at least 50 different expressions, ensuring a
         wide variety of emotional and physical expressions. Output the results as a Python


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        dictionary with each expression labeled as either an emotion or an expression,
        along with the corresponding AUs.

We obtained 228 text-AU pairs in total, which cover both emotion and expression, examples are
demonstrated in Tab. 11. Then we formulate the generated corpus with the template shown in
Tab. 12, and obtain the natural facial descriptions, e.g., “A shocked person.” Meanwhile, we enrich
the dataset by collecting the emotion-AU pairs from AffectNet (Mollahosseini et al., 2017), where
the emotion is manually annotated and augmented with synonyms, and the AUs are detected by an
off-the-shelf detector (Baltrušaitis et al., 2016).

                      Table 11: Examples of text-AU pair generated by GPT

             Description                     Type         AUs
             Annoyed                         Emotion      AU04, AU07, AU23
             Shocked                         Emotion      AU01, AU02, AU05, AU26
             Anger-Disgust                   Emotion      AU04, AU09, AU10, AU17
             Pain with Squinting             Expression   AU04, AU07, AU10, AU23
             Happiness with Broad Smile      Expression   AU06, AU12, AU25
             Frowning                        Expression   AU04, AU15


         Table 12: The templates designed to formulate the natural language descriptions

                                      Description templates
                    A [desc] person            A woman acts like [desc]
                    A person looks [desc]      A person is [desc]
                    A person seems [desc]      A person behaves [desc]
                    A man acts like [desc]     A person is talking with [desc]


Training The model is trained with 200 epochs, where the batch size is set to 128. We utilize the
Adam optimizer and the learning rate is set to 0.0001.

Evaluation The CLIP adapter and the classification head are evaluated on the textual AU detection
task and achieve an F1-score of 0.92 and 0.98 on the testing set (in-domain template), with and
without the InfoNCE loss, respectively. Moreover, we visualize the CLIP embeddings fclip and the
adapted embeddings fadaptive with and without the InfoNCE loss in Fig. 15 to evaluate the adapter.
In conclusion, with a contrastive learning strategy, the adapter erases the domain gap between AU
and natural language descriptions, while preserving the AU information. Meanwhile, in Tab. 13, we
ablate the importance of the alignment and knowledge of GPT, with which the detector shows better
generalization.


              Figure 15: The T-SNE visualization of the CLIP and adapted features.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Ablation study: we ablate the detector by 1) removing the contrastive learning (as w/o
alignment), and 2) training without the GPT generated pairs. (as w/o GPT pairs). AUs in red denote
incorrect predictions.

           Description                   ours        w/o alignment    w/o GPT pairs
           A person is smiling        AU12             AU12          AU05 AU10 AU12
           A person is crying       AU04 AU15        AU04 AU15         AU04 AU07
           A person is blinking       AU45             AU45               AU45
           A yawning person           AU26             AU26            AU04 AU10
           A person closes his eyes   AU45             AU20          AU05 AU10 AU04
           A not happy person       AU04 AU15          AU04               AU01


                                                21
