Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DRO C: E LEVATING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR
C OMPLEX V EHICLE ROUTING VIA D ECOMPOSED R E -
TRIEVAL OF C ONSTRAINTS

  Xia Jiang1 , Yaoxin Wu1∗, Chenhao Zhang2 , and Yingqian Zhang1
 1
   Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
 2
   Southeast University, China
 x.jiang1@tue.nl, y.wu2@tue.nl, zhangchenhaoseu@foxmail.com, yqzhang@tue.nl



                                                A BSTRACT

             This paper proposes Decomposed Retrieval of Constraints (DRoC), a novel frame-
             work aimed at enhancing large language models (LLMs) in exploiting solvers to
             tackle vehicle routing problems (VRPs) with intricate constraints. While LLMs
             have shown promise in solving simple VRPs, their potential in addressing complex
             VRP variants is still suppressed, due to the limited embedded internal knowledge
             that is required to accurately reflect diverse VRP constraints. Our approach miti-
             gates the issue by integrating external knowledge via a novel retrieval-augmented
             generation (RAG) approach. More specifically, the DRoC decomposes VRP con-
             straints, externally retrieves information relevant to each constraint, and synergisti-
             cally combines internal and external knowledge to benefit the program generation
             for solving VRPs. The DRoC also allows LLMs to dynamically select between
             RAG and self-debugging mechanisms, thereby optimizing program generation with-
             out the need for additional training. Experiments across 48 VRP variants exhibit
             the superiority of DRoC, with significant improvements in the accuracy rate and
             runtime error rate delivered by the generated programs. The DRoC framework has
             the potential to elevate LLM performance in complex optimization tasks, fostering
             the applicability of LLMs in industries such as transportation and logistics.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) are central to computer science and combinatorial optimization,
serving as a foundational benchmark for evaluating computational complexity and developing ap-
proximation algorithms (Pillai & Singh, 2023). Beyond their theoretical significance, VRPs are
also a major focus in operations research (OR), where they model decision-making processes in
various industrial domains. The NP-hard challenge of VRPs in practice escalates substantially with
the complexity of composite constraints, reflecting the interplay between theoretical and practical
aspects. Different solvers such as OR-tools and Gurobi are commonly used due to their accessibility
and generic modeling capabilities. Despite easy applications in simple VRPs, for users who lack
modelling and optimization skills, these solvers are hard to use for solving VRPs with composite
constraints, since 1) there are few example codes/documentation to explain the modeling of vari-
ous constraints, and 2) developing programs for complex VRPs necessitates expert-level domain
knowledge. Hence, it is challenging for non-experts to successfully apply the solvers to real-world
operations (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024). Consequently, researchers have increasingly focused on
automating problem-solving procedures to mitigate dependence on domain and modelling expertise.
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated expert-level performance in several domains
(Almeida et al., 2024) and have recently been applied to optimization problems in OR (Xiao et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024a). Their advanced reasoning and generation capabilities offer the potential
to automate modeling and programming tasks. Despite the success in solving simple optimization
problems, LLMs frequently face limitations when dealing with VRPs characterized by composite
constraints (see Figure 1, which benchmarks GPT-3.5-turbo on 48 VRPs used in this paper). This
     ∗
         Corresponding author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


challenge arises from LLMs’ bounded internal knowledge since the domain-specific corpus is
insufficient during training processes. As a result, LLMs exhibit deficiencies in generating programs
for VRPs, and they lack capabilities of 1) the accurate formulation of some specific constraints, and
2) the integration of heterogeneous constraints within a generated program. They pose significant
obstacles to the widespread application of LLMs in solving complex VRPs in real-world scenarios,
particularly those distinguished by intricate constraints. For instance, state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLM-
based methods often fail to address complex problems due to incorrect constraint modeling with
coding errors (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024). Therefore, we aim for the integration of external
knowledge into LLMs and target at improving constraint modeling in program generation for VRPs.
Inspired by Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al.,
2022) and Divide-and-Conquer (DaC) paradigms
(Zhang et al., 2024b), which showcase that com-
plex tasks can be solved by an LLM through a de-
composed manner, we propose a systematic inte-
gration of external knowledge and decomposition
techniques to enhance LLMs in program generation
for VRP solvers. Specifically, we introduce a novel
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework,
termed Decomposed Retrieval of Constraint (DRoC),
which enables LLMs to more effectively address com-
plex VRPs without additional training. The DRoC
framework facilitates the incorporation of external
knowledge retrieved from documentation and exam- Figure 1: The evaluation of gpt-3.5-turbo on
ple codes. Notably, we perform constraint-based de- 48 VRP variants with different numbers of
composition for the target VRP during the retrieval composite constraints. Performance declines
process, which further enhances the correctness and with increased constraints.
constraint-specificity of generated programs. In addi-
tion, our framework synergistically combines external and internal knowledge by empowering LLMs
to dynamically select between RAG and self-debugging mechanisms, continuously optimizing the
program generation process. We conducted experiments across a set of 48 assorted VRPs and further
extend the method to other OR problems, demonstrating the efficacy of the DRoC framework.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   LLM S FOR VRP S

The advent of LLMs has facilitated advanced approaches to VRPs. LLMs can embed different
problems by natural language and thereby enable a multi-task model for tackling simple OR problems,
including basic travelling salesman problem (TSP) and capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP)
(Jiang et al., 2024). The heuristics for addressing VRPs are automatically searched through LLMs
with the aid of evolutionary computation (EC) (Liu et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). However, these
methods typically aim to evolve pre-defined algorithm types such as guided local search, necessitating
much domain-specific knowledge and prerequisites. Also, they often entail a substantial number of
LLM invocations for evolution, e.g., for creating and maintaining a population of algorithms.
Alternative research focuses on the modeling and programming of OR problems including VRPs
based on the textual descriptions. These approaches aim to transform user queries into mathematical
formulations and executable code recognizable to external solvers (Zhang et al., 2024a; Tang et al.,
2024). Further, the introduction of multi-agent frameworks enables the coordination among a
structured sequence of LLM agents to perform tasks including formulation, programming, and
evaluation for a target problem (Xiao et al., 2023; AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024). Nonetheless, these
methods predominantly rely on the intrinsic knowledge embedded within LLMs, which limits their
efficacy in addressing problems beyond the scope of their training data. This paper delves into
directly generating programs for solving complex VRPs by integrating LLMs’ internal knowledge
and external references, without the process of mathematical model formulation.
NCO methods for VRPs. Beyond LLMs, quite a few approaches automate end-to-end solutions for
VRPs through deep (reinforcement) learning, collectively known as neural combinatorial optimization
(NCO) (Kool et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023). The predominant NCO methods typically


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


employ Transformer-like neural architectures to process features (e.g., customer coordinates) in VRP
instances by encoders and construct VRP solutions (i.e., tours) by the decoder. While these methods
bypass the reliance on manually designed heuristics to some extent, the heavy NCO models are often
trained separately on individual and simple VRP variants (Hottung et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2023a; Goh et al., 2024) with massive time cost. Moreover, the simplified constraint-handling
strategies hamper their applicability to complex VRPs with intricate real-world constraints.

2.2   R ETRIEVAL - AUGMENTED G ENERATION

RAG approaches leverage the input sequence to retrieve relevant documents, which are subsequently
utilized as supplementary context while generating the target sequence. As a potent mechanism to
inject external knowledge into LLMs, the RAG is widely studied for language tasks, such as question
answering (QA) (Lewis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2023), dialog generation (Shen et al., 2023), and fact
verification (Wang et al., 2023). In addition, there are some efforts applying RAG in code generation,
which generally retrieve information from different sources, such as web content (Parvez et al., 2021),
fixed repository (Zhang et al., 2023), code documentation (Zhou et al., 2023b), or the combination of
multiple resources (Su et al., 2024). Interested readers can refer to (Gao et al., 2023) for a thorough
and systematic review. VRP solvers usually have elaborate documentation and example codes
contributed by the community, which can serve as external knowledge sources for RAG. However,
retrieving irrelevant documents is probably unhelpful and even harmful to performance (Yoran et al.,
2024). To address this, we decompose the retrieval for separate constraints and progressively refine
the documents, which enhances the performance of RAG in generating more accurate programs.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   V EHICLE ROUTING P ROBLEMS

The objective of typical VRPs is to determine a set of vehicle routes with the least cost. The basic
constraints are 1) each customer is visited exactly once by a single vehicle, and 2) all vehicles depart
from and return to one or more depots (Braekers et al., 2016). Suppose that there is one depot indexed
by 0, the commonly used objective for a VRP with m vehicles and n customers is formulated as
                                               X XX
                                    J = min                 cij xkij                                 (1)
                                                k∈M i∈N j∈N

where M = {1, . . . , m} and N = {0, 1, . . . , n} represent the set of vehicles and the locations of
depot and customers, respectively. cij is the traversal cost between customer i and j, and xkij is the
binary decision variable, indicating if vehicle k ∈ M traverses from i to j.
A typical set of constraints for VRPs is formulated as follows,
                                  X X
                                            xkij = 1 ∀i ∈ N, i ̸= 0                                 (2)
                                  k∈M j∈N
                                        X
                                               xk0j = 1 ∀k ∈ M                                      (3)
                                        j∈N
                                        X
                                               xki0 = 1 ∀k ∈ M                                      (4)
                                        i∈N
                                X              X
                                      xkij =         xkji   ∀i ∈ N, k ∈ M                           (5)
                                j∈N            j∈N

where Eq. (2) ensures each customer is visited exactly once by only one vehicle; Eq. (3) and Eq. (4)
means vehicles depart from and return to the depot; Eq. (5) ensures the vehicle flow conservation.
Besides the above basic constraints, different VRP variants are characterized by various constraints
that reflect practical restrictions for vehicle routing in real life.
In this paper, we consider the following additional VRP constraints: 1) Vehicle capacity, limiting
the maximum load a vehicle can carry; 2) Distance (or duration) limit, restricting the total distance
or time a vehicle can travel; 3) Time windows, requiring vehicles to visit customers within specified


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time intervals; 4) Multiple depots, allowing vehicles to start and end routes at different depots; 5)
Open route, where the start and end node of vehicles are not specified; 6) Prize collecting, optimizing
routes by balancing the penalty of locations that are not visited; 7) Pickups and deliveries, managing
paired pickup and drop-off demands within a route; 8) Service time, accounting for the time spent in
serving customers at each location; 9) Resource constraints, limiting the number of vehicles that can
be loaded or unloaded at the depot simultaneously, potentially causing delays in departure or return.
VRP variants featured by combinations of the above constraints are elaborated in Appendix B.
Typically, a VRP, including its objective and constraints, is expected to be formulated as a mathemati-
cal program by a human expert. Once the problem is accurately modeled, existing solvers, such as
Gurobi (Gurobi, 2024) and OR-Tools (Furnon & Perron, 2024), can be called to solve the given VRP.

3.2   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We solve a code generation (or code completion) problem, without the mathematical model formula-
tion process as done in (Ramamonjison et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023; AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024).
In our approach, the input to an LLM consists of the name of a VRP variant and the corresponding
function signature, which specifies the function’s name, its parameters, and parameter types. With
each parameter in the function described by the docstring, the LLM is responsible for completing the
"solve" function by invoking a designated solver. We illustrate an example of the function signature
in Appendix B. Compared to using textual descriptions of problems as input (Huang et al., 2024), our
formulation offers better generalization for two reasons: 1) once a function is successfully generated,
it can be applied to all instances of that specific VRP variant, and 2) only describing basic docstrings
reduces the volume of input to an LLM and minimizes the inference effort required for prompting.
Formally, given an input q representing a VRP, an LLM P (y | q) generates a program y recognizable
to a solver, which can be applied to solve the VRP. We assume the availability of a collection of
documents D, where each document corresponds to a part of documentation or example codes for the
solver. During the RAG process, the generation is conditioned on a particular subset of documents
Ds ⊆ D. The marginalized generation probability over all Ds ⊆ D is given by,
                                          X
                          P (y | q, D) =       P (y | q, Ds ) · P (Ds | q, D)                  (6)
                                          Ds ⊆D
As enumerating all possible subsets is computationally infeasible, we use a retriever R to select the
most probable subset of documents D̂s := arg maxDs ⊆D PR (Ds | q, D), and thereby enables the
LLM to produce a program based on the most likely relevant documents:
                             P (y | q, D) ≈ P (y | q, D̂s ) · P (D̂s | q, D)                         (7)

4     M ETHODOLOGY
Our approach aims to enable LLMs to invoke solvers more accurately for solving VRPs by decom-
posing the problems and integrating external knowledge. Solving VRPs using LLMs is characterized
by the following aspects: 1) Once the generated program is successfully verified on a single instance,
it can be applied to all problem instances of the same structure (e.g., the same types of constraints and
input parameters). This allows for convenient self-debugging on a simple instance using the LLM
and the code executor; 2) The structure of code for addressing different VRPs is mostly the same
when calling the same solvers, and the primary variation lies in how constraints are programmed
through the solver API functions. These characteristics of LLMs motivate us to perform decomposed
retrievals for specific constraints and enhance the quality of code generation. Therefore, we propose
the DRoC framework that elegantly amalgamates the two aforementioned points. The framework is
illustrated on the left subfigure of Figure 2, which is carried out in the following steps:
       • Step 1: Direct code generation: An LLM as the first-time generator is prompted directly
         by the input q (i.e., a VRP) to generate a program y, without external information retrieval.
         Here the code generation purely depends on the internal knowledge of LLM, prompting it to
         solve the problem by its inherent programming capability.
       • Step 2: Code check: The program generated in Step 1 is run by a code executor, invoking a
         solver to solve the VRP. The LLM will be provided with execution traceback if the code
         contains errors, meaning an injection of external knowledge into the LLM.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Figure 2: Overview of the proposed DRoC framework.


          • Step 3: Routing: According to the execution traceback, an LLM as a router determines the
            operation in Step 4, either self-debugging (I) or RAG (II).
          • Step 4 (I): Self-debugging: An LLM as the self-debugger analyzes the execution traceback
            (and errors) and attempts to refine the code, which produces a new version of the program.
          • Step 4 (II): Decomposed retrieval: The retrieval is decomposed to refer LLM to external
            documentation or example codes for seeking relevant documents on separate constraints of
            the target VRP, so as to enhance the accuracy of code generation.

In the following subsections, we present the detailed process of the DRoC framework.

4.1      E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE S OURCES

As VRP solvers generally have elaborate documentation and example codes contributed by the
community, we incorporate them into our external knowledge sources for retrieval rather than relying
solely on single-source data as is common in literature (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023b).
For example, Google’s OR-Tools (Furnon & Perron, 2024) provides a detailed tutorial for solving
VRPs in its online documentation1 and has ample example codes in its open-source repository2 . The
multi-source information can be more synergistic and actively utilized by the LLM during RAG.
In addition, we leverage feedback from the code executor (e.g., a Python interpreter) to empower
the LLM to precisely identify errors within the code. Unlike the retrieval of documents from other
knowledge sources (e.g., documentation and example codes), which typically requires conducting a
semantic similarity search in embedding space, obtaining execution feedback involves direct access
to information generated by the interpreter (Su et al., 2024), such as error information and traceback.
Using OR-Tools as an example, the external knowledge is briefly shown on the right subfigure
of Figure 2. We also investigate a dynamic knowledge source update via Bootstrap for potential
performance improvement, which is discussed in Appendix G. Note that external knowledge contains
both relevant and irrelevant data, so it is critical to design an effective and precise retrieval mechanism.

4.2      D ECOMPOSED R ETRIEVAL

Despite the availability of documentation and example codes for a solver, such as those for OR-tools,
generating accurate programs for a VRP (with composite constraints) is still challenging, due to
the difficulty in obtaining an appropriate context to guide LLMs via RAG. On one hand, external
   1
       https://developers.google.com/optimization/routing
   2
       https://github.com/google/or-tools


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


knowledge sources typically contain exemplar problems with simple constraint structures and may
not directly provide documents relevant to the target VRP. On the other hand, the retrieval process
may overlook critical constraints if the problem is not properly decomposed. For example, using
keywords like "open capacitated vehicle routing problem" often results in retrieving documents
related to CVRP, neglecting the key constraint of the open route. This underscores the need for a more
nuanced approach to ensure that all relevant constraints are consistently considered. To overcome the
issue, we propose to progressively cope with the constraint in a decomposed manner. We break down
the retrieval into three sub-processes, including problem decomposition, single-constraint resolution,
and context merging. Specifically, we first decompose a target VRP into individual constraints and
then resolve these constraints by retrieving from external knowledge sources. Finally, the retrieved
documents are merged to form the context for the LLMs, which are used to guide the code generation.
Problem decomposition. To formulate queries for retrieval and handle constraints separately, we
decompose the target VRP based on its constraints. In addition to the general constraints formulated
by Eq. (2)∼(5), the VRP variants have their own specific constraints, e.g., the additional constraints
described in Section 3.1. Since these constraints are known (Elshaer & Awad, 2020), LLMs have
a basic understanding of their meaning. Therefore, we employ a decomposer (i.e., an LLM) to
split the constraints of the target VRP into individual items, with each represented by a keyword of
the corresponding constraint. As shown on the middle subfigure of Figure 2, C1 , C2 , . . ., Cw are
keywords of individual constraints. A VRP with w additional constraints produces w keywords.
Single-constraint resolution. The limited internal knowledge of LLMs hinders their ability to
accurately generate codes for specific constraints. We enhance them by retrieving relevant external
knowledge (i.e., documentation/example codes). We employ OpenAI’s embedding model to transform
external knowledge into embeddings for dense retrieval. The retriever uses the input "Python code of
Ci ", i ∈ {1, . . . , w} as query Qi to conduct a semantic similarity search among all the embedded
documents. With the embedding Ed of each document d ∈ D and the embedding EQi of the i-th query
text, we use squared Euclidean distance to measure the similarity between Qi and each document d:
                                                        E
                                                        X       j
                                  Distance(Qi , d) =          (EQ i
                                                                    − Edj )2                          (8)
                                                        j=1

where E denotes the dimension of the embedding space. The top-k nearest documents are selected
by the retriever as the candidates for the corresponding constraint.
Given that external knowledge may contain irrelevant information, we implement a two-stage filter to
refine the candidate documents for each constraint. The first stage involves invoking an LLM (i.e.,
first-stage filter) to assess the relevance between the documents and the constraint Ci . By doing so, the
LLM is tasked with explicitly articulating the rationale behind the identified documents as relevant,
which refer to pertinent documents as supporting evidence. The output is structured into three fields:
relevant, code snippet, and summary, with an example in Appendix A.2. The second stage is activated
if multiple documents remain after the initial filtering. An LLM (i.e., second-stage filter) is instructed
to aggregate the documents and their corresponding summaries, ultimately selecting the most relevant
one Di for Ci through a comparative analysis fulfilled by the LLM itself.
Context merging. After obtaining all the single-constraint contexts, i.e., the most relevant document
for each constraint, we simply concatenate them as the merged generation context, which is defined by
D̂s = {D1 , . . . , Dw }. The context as part of the input to the LLM is used to generate new programs.

4.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Given the pipeline of DRoC illustrated in Figure 2, we allow the LLM to generate code up to I
iterations, meaning the process will terminate even if a successful program, which outputs feasible
solutions to the given VRP, is not obtained after I attempts. Specifically, if the first-time generator
fails to produce an appropriate program using only its internal knowledge, a router (i.e., an LLM)
is invoked to dynamically choose between two strategies for utilizing external knowledge: self-
debugging or decomposed retrieval. We employ two distinct prompt templates to guide the LLM’s
role in leveraging the retrieved external knowledge: the retrieval-augmented generator and the
retrieval-augmented debugger. More precisely, the retrieval-augmented generator is triggered only
once, in order to generate a completely new program based on the retrieved context, while the
retrieval-augmented debugger is invoked for the remaining I − 2 iterations to progressively refine


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance of different methods with gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4o. The reported values are
averaged over the results of 48 VRP variants.

      Method (gpt-3.5-turbo)    AR ↑       RER ↓      Method (gpt-4o)          AR ↑       RER ↓
      Standard Prompting       14.58%     66.67%      Standard Prompting      20.83%     58.33%
      CoT                       8.33%     79.17%      CoT                     22.92%     50.00%
      PHP                      12.50%     79.17%      PHP                     22.92%     54.17%
      Self-debug               14.58%     66.67%      Self-debug              31.25%     37.50%
      Vanilla RAG              10.42%     60.42%      Vanilla RAG             37.50%     31.25%
      Self-RAG                 16.67%     56.25%      Self-RAG                33.33%     39.58%
      DRoC (Ours)              20.83%     47.92%      DRoC (Ours)             45.83%     20.83%


the previously generated code by incorporating insights from external documents. In addition to the
RAG processes, the self-debugging operation can also be introduced if the LLM thinks the error can
be fixed by itself. This dynamic routing process ensures a more flexible and adaptive framework,
improving the likelihood of generating accurate solutions for complex problems.
The prompts for all components in our framework are provided in Appendix A.1, including the
first-time generator, router, self-debugger, decomposer, filters, retrieval-augmented generator, and
retrieval-augmented debugger. These prompts detail the instructions given to the LLM in the pipeline.

5     E XPERIMENTS
To verify the effectiveness of DRoC, we conduct extensive experiments. We evaluate the DRoC
and other baselines on 48 VRPs variants by combining different constraints. These VRP variants
and the corresponding dataset are elaborated in Appendix B. In principle, the DRoC framework
can work with any LLMs or optimization solvers. In our experiments, we mainly use ChatGPT
(gpt-4o-2024-08-06 and gpt-3.5-turbo-0125) as the chosen LLM and OR-tools as the optimization
solver. In addition, we provide experimental studies on other proprietary and open-source LLMs (i.e.,
claude3.5 and llama3.1), and another widely used solver (i.e., Gurobi), to show the generalizability.
We set the number of retrieved documents k = 3 and the number of attempts I = 4. The same
values for k and I are used across all baselines to ensure a fair comparison. The best result among 3
independent runs is reported for all the methods. We use the following two performance metrics:

        • Accuracy Rate (AR): This metric is defined as AR = VVat × 100%, where Vt is the total
          number of generated programs for different VRP variants, and Va represents the number of
          successful programs that result in the optimal solution for a given VRP variant.
        • Runtime Error Rate (RER): This metric is defined as RER = VVet × 100%, where Ve
          indicates the number of program that encounter runtime errors, representing the proportion
          of generated programs experiencing execution errors stemming from internal logical errors
          because of incorrect calls of solver APIs or syntax errors.

5.1     BASELINES

We benchmark DRoC against 6 baselines in the main results: Standard Prompting, Chain-of-Thought
(Wei et al., 2022), Progressive-Hint Prompting (PHP) (Zheng et al., 2023), Self-debug (Chen et al.,
2024), Vanilla RAG (VRAG), and Self-RAG (Asai et al., 2024). In addition, we compare DRoC with
two recent works, Evolution of Heuristics (EoH) (Liu et al., 2024) and Reflective Evolution (ReEvo)
(Ye et al., 2024), which use LLMs to improve heuristics via evolutionary computation. We name
them LLM+EC methods. More details of the baselines are elaborated in Appendix C. Our code and
data are publicly available at https://github.com/Summer142857/DRoC.

5.2     OVERALL P ERFORMANCE

Table 1 presents the performance of the proposed DRoC and 6 baselines in terms of AR and RER. The
results show that although applying a more powerful LLM (i.e., gpt-4o) does improve the performance
of all tested methods, all 6 baselines were able to produce successful programs only for less than 40%


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a)                                         (b)

Figure 3: Performance of DRoC and Standard Prompting with different LLMs: (a) AR metric (b)
RER metric. The DRoC is applicable to varied LLMs, showing clear performance enhancements.


of tested VRP variants. This demonstrates the difficulty in solving complex NP-hard problems for
SOTA LLMs. We observe that the methods that either rely solely on the internal knowledge of LLMs
(i.e., Standard Prompting, CoT, and PHP) or only combine execution feedback (i.e., Self-debug) do
not result in good performance. Meanwhile, the performance boost from VRAG and Self-RAG is
minimal, and VRAG can actually lead to performance degradation (for gpt-3.5-turbo), suggesting that
inappropriate or ineffective retrieval methods fail to provide significant assistance in solving VRPs.
In comparison, the proposed approach achieves the best results in both generating correct programs
and reducing runtime errors. Compared to the standard prompting approach, DRoC successfully
solves 25% more VRP variants by gpt-4o. Moreover, it produces more generation of error-free
programs. For solutions that do not have running errors but are not optimal, they may miss some of
the constraints, and human coder can further improve them without building from scratch. More
illustrative results of the generated solutions are provided in Appendix D, where we present visual
plots of the solutions for various VRP instances. Additionally, we also compare the incorrect and
correct API-calling code generated before and after applying our method. DRoC also demonstrates
applicability to other OR problems, such as the assignment and facility location problems, which we
discuss in detail in Appendix E. This highlights the need for more refined retrieval techniques and
integration strategies, as in DRoC, for tackling complex problem-solving scenarios.
Meanwhile, we report the running time of the generated programs in Appendix F and find that DRoC
does not lead to any significant increase in running time of the problem-solving process.

5.3   E VALUATION WITH DIFFERENT LLM S

To demonstrate that the DRoC is a general tool for enhancing VRP-solving capabilities with LLMs,
we also evaluate its performance with the other two LLMs: claude-3.5-sonnet-20241022 and llama3.1-
70b. The results are presented in Figure 3. We observe that even advanced LLMs, such as gpt-4o and
claude-3.5-sonnet, still struggle to correctly solve VRPs. However, the proposed DRoC consistently
improves the performance of various LLMs, indicating that DRoC can function as a generic tool to
enhance the VRP-solving abilities of LLMs in spite of their different architectures.

5.4   E VALUATION WITH G UROBI SOLVER

We show DRoC can embed different optimization solvers such as the popular Gurobi solver. Different
from OR-tools, which solves VRPs by simply calling the APIs, the use of Gurobi for solving a
particular VRP variant requires us to first build the corresponding Mixed-Integer Programming
(MIP) model, making it a more difficult task. In the experiments, we use the programs of 10 VRP
variants, which only contain 0 or 1 additional constraint, as the external knowledge source, and
allow the DRoC to retrieve from these simple VRP solutions. We evaluate the performance on
advanced LLMs, i.e., gpt-4o and claude-3.5-sonnet. The results (see Table 2) show that DRoC
remains effective when working with the Gurobi solver. While we only use VRPs with a single
constraint as external knowledge, the LLMs can accurately solve more VRP variants with more than
one constraint, indicating that complex tasks can be fulfilled by our decomposition-based method.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 2: The performance evaluated on Gurobi solver with and without DRoC.

                                   LLM                          AR ↑        RER ↓
                       gpt-4o (Standard Prompting)              2.08%      45.83%
                  claude-3.5-sonnet (Standard Prompting)       12.50%      52.08%
                              gpt-4o (DRoC)                    31.25%      25.00%
                        claude-3.5-sonnet (DRoC)               31.25%      37.50%


5.5   A BLATION S TUDY

                               Table 3: The results of ablation studies.

                                           OR-tools               Gurobi
                     Method
                                       AR ↑     RER ↓         AR ↑    RER ↓
                     DRoC (Full)      45.83% 20.83%          31.25% 25.00%
                     w/o filter       37.50% 31.25%          27.08% 27.08%
                     w/o DR           35.42% 29.17%          27.08% 29.17%
                     w/o router       43.75% 29.17%          29.17% 31.25%

We conduct ablation studies for both OR-tools and Gurobi for a more comprehensive comparison.
The studies are based on gpt-4o, which has showcased good performance under different settings.
Ablation study on two-stage filter. We first evaluate the necessity of the filter process, which refines
the retrieved documents and reduces extraneous information. As shown in Table 3, we observe a
slight drop in model performance when potentially irrelevant documents are not filtered out. This
outcome is similar to the poorer performance observed with VRAG shown in Table 1, suggesting that
the relevance of the context provided during generation significantly impacts the results. The filter
ensures that pertinent information is used, which is crucial for optimizing VRP-solving effectiveness.
Ablation study on decomposed retrieval (DR). In order to evaluate the necessity of DR, we replace
it by direct retrieval of documents, which takes "Python code of {the name of the VRP}" as the
query, aiming at retrieving code that is mostly close to the target VRP variant. This replacement is
applied whenever the retriever is called, and the final context is obtained by randomly choosing from
top-k retrieved documents. Similarly, there is also a performance drop for both OR-tools and Gurobi,
suggesting that LLM can learn to solve complex VRPs from single-constraint resolutions in the DR.
Ablation study on router. We replace the router with a random routing strategy, which randomly
routes the workflow to the self-debugger or retrieval-augmented debugger. There is also a slight drop
in performance without the proposed router, indicating that the selection between execution-based
and documentation-based external knowledge is important.

5.6   C OMPARISON WITH LLM+EC METHODS

LLMs can be used to evolve heuristics for solving
VRPs, as shown in the literature. We conducted ex-
periments to find out how such an approach performs
in comparison to our approach which is based on
VRP solvers. We take the Prize Collecting Travel-
ling Salesman Problem (PCTSP) as a demonstration
problem, which ChatGPT cannot originally solve
due to the incorrect calls of solver API (see Ap-
pendix D), to conduct a comparison study between
SOTA LLM+EC methods and the proposed DRoC.
We utilize EoH and ReEvo to evolve the ant colony al-
gorithm, as detailed in (Ye et al., 2024), and compare
the results of these evolutionary approaches. Specif- Figure 4: Comparison between LLM+EC
ically, we record both the best objective values and methods (EoH and ReEvo) and DRoC.
the number of tokens consumed by the LLM for EoH


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and ReEvo during iteration-based evolution. As shown in Figure 4, compared to DRoC, the LLM+EC
methods require a substantial number of tokens (e.g., over 0.1M) to evolve towards a solution which
significantly increases computational costs and potential carbon emissions. Notably, the best heuris-
tics for EoH and ReEvo achieve objective values of 6.436 and 6.984, respectively, while DRoC with
OR-tools yield a superior result of 6.352. The findings suggest that our DRoC framework is more
efficient and competitive than EC methods, providing greater enhancement of the LLM.

5.7   S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS


                (a)                              (b)                               (c)

           Figure 5: The results for sensitivity analysis on (a) I; (b) k; (c) temperature.

We study how three key parameters influence the performance of DRoC: the maximum number of
generation I, the number of retrieved documents k, and the temperature of the LLM. The analysis is
also based on gpt-4o, and the results are shown in Figure 5.
Sensitivity analysis on I. The performance of DRoC generally improves with the increase of I, but
the improvement turns marginal from 4 to 5. Therefore we set I = 4 across all our main experiments.
Sensitivity analysis on k. The value of k has less influence than I. The performance is slightly
improved when varying k from 1 to 3, mainly because more comprehensive contents are retrieved
with a larger k. After that, the performance tends to be stable because the generation context is
relatively unchanged since redundant documents are filtered out by the two-stage filter process.
Sensitivity analysis on temperature. The performance of DRoC remains relatively stable across
different temperature parameters. This indicates that the combination of iterative refinement and tar-
geted document selection helps maintain consistent results, regardless of variations in the randomness
of generation influenced by the temperature configuration.

5.8   B OOTSTRAP - BASED O PTIMIZATION

As the LLMs can solve more problems utilizing external knowledge, they can also take the correct
generation as part of the external knowledge, making it possible to improve the performance through
Bootstrap. We also analyze the impact of such a Bootstrap mechanism and find that the integration of
LLM generations and original external knowledge (publicly accessible documentation and codes) can
also boost the accuracy to some extent. The details and result are elaborated in Appendix G, and we
find that more than 50% VRP variants can be resolved after introducing the Bootstrap mechanism.


6     C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we propose DRoC, an effective framework designed for solving VRPs with complex
constraints, utilizing LLMs and optimization solvers. By integrating external knowledge through
retrieval-augmented generation and decomposing constraints for more accurate retrieval, the DRoC
significantly improves LLM performance across a wide range of VRP variants. For instance, it
improves the accuracy rate of gpt-4o from 20.83% to 45.83%. In the future, we plan to expand our
focus to integrate the DRoC with solver selection and metaheuristic generation processes, enhancing
the versatility and reliability in addressing more diverse optimization tasks. We will also introduce
more external knowledge sources for better RAG performance and integrate modeling function into
our framework, further boosting its effectiveness.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling
  with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024.

Guilherme F.C.F. Almeida, José Luiz Nunes, Neele Engelmann, Alex Wiegmann, and Marcelo
  de Araújo. Exploring the psychology of llms’ moral and legal reasoning. Artificial Intelligence,
  333:104145, 2024.

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning to
  retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024.

Kris Braekers, Katrien Ramaekers, and Inneke Van Nieuwenhuyse. The vehicle routing problem:
  State of the art classification and review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 99:300–313, 2016.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Raafat Elshaer and Hadeer Awad. A taxonomic review of metaheuristic algorithms for solving the
  vehicle routing problem and its variants. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 140:106242, 2020.

Vincent Furnon and Laurent Perron. Or-tools routing library, 2024.

Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and
  Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.

Yong Liang Goh, Zhiguang Cao, Yining Ma, Yanfei Dong, Mohammed Haroon Dupty, and Wee Sun
  Lee. Hierarchical neural constructive solver for real-world tsp scenarios. In Proceedings of the
  30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 884–895, 2024.

Gurobi. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2024.

André Hottung, Bhanu Bhandari, and Kevin Tierney. Learning a latent search space for routing
  problems using variational autoencoders. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.

Zhehui Huang, Guangyao Shi, and Gaurav S. Sukhatme. Can large language models solve robot
  routing? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10795, 2024.

Xia Jiang, Yaoxin Wu, Yuan Wang, and Yingqian Zhang. Unco: Towards unifying neural combinato-
  rial optimization through large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12214, 2024.

Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie
  Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7969–7992, December
  2023.

Minsu Kim, Junyoung Park, and Jinkyoo Park. Sym-nco: Leveraging symmetricity for neural
 combinatorial optimization. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and
 A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 1936–1949,
 2022.

Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, learn to solve routing problems! In
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fei Liu, Tong Xialiang, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao Lu, and Qingfu
  Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language
  model. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Fu Luo, Xi Lin, Fei Liu, Qingfu Zhang, and Zhenkun Wang. Neural combinatorial optimization with
  heavy decoder: Toward large scale generalization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 36, pp. 8845–8864, 2023.

Md Rizwan Parvez, Wasi Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. Retrieval
 augmented code generation and summarization. In Findings of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2719–2734, November 2021.

Aditya Pillai and Mohit Singh. Linear programming based reductions for multiple visit tsp and
 vehicle routing problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11742, 2023.

Rindra Ramamonjison, Haley Li, Timothy Yu, Shiqi He, Vishnu Rengan, Amin Banitalebi-dehkordi,
  Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. Augmenting operations research with auto-formulation of optimiza-
  tion models from problem descriptions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track, pp. 29–62, December 2022.

Weizhou Shen, Yingqi Gao, Canbin Huang, Fanqi Wan, Xiaojun Quan, and Wei Bi. Retrieval-
 generation alignment for end-to-end task-oriented dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 2023
 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8261–8275, December
 2023.

Hongjin Su, Shuyang Jiang, Yuhang Lai, Haoyuan Wu, Boao Shi, Che Liu, Qian Liu, and Tao Yu.
 Arks: Active retrieval in knowledge soup for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12317,
  2024.

Zhengyang Tang, Chenyu Huang, Xin Zheng, Shixi Hu, Zizhuo Wang, Dongdong Ge, and Benyou
  Wang. Orlm: Training large language models for optimization modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.17743, 2024.

Zhiruo Wang, Jun Araki, Zhengbao Jiang, Md Rizwan Parvez, and Graham Neubig. Learning to filter
  context for retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08377, 2023.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 24824–24837, 2022.

Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, and Andrew Lim. Learning improvement heuristics
  for solving routing problems. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 33(9):
  5057–5069, 2021.

Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin
  Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, et al. Chain-of-experts: When llms meet complex operations
  research problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Haoran Ye, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Haeyeon Kim, Jinkyoo Park,
  and Guojie Song. Large language models as hyper-heuristics for combinatorial optimization. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. Making retrieval-augmented language
  models robust to irrelevant context. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024.

Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou,
  and Weizhu Chen. RepoCoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and
  generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2471–2484, December 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jihai Zhang, Wei Wang, Siyan Guo, Li Wang, Fangquan Lin, Cheng Yang, and Wotao Yin. Solv-
   ing general natural-language-description optimization problems with large language models. In
   Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
   tational Linguisticss, pp. 483–490, June 2024a.
Yizhou Zhang, Lun Du, Defu Cao, Qiang Fu, and Yan Liu. An examination on the effectiveness of
  divide-and-conquer prompting in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05359, 2024b.
Chuanyang Zheng, Zhengying Liu, Enze Xie, Zhenguo Li, and Yu Li. Progressive-hint prompting
  improves reasoning in large language models, 2023.
Jianan Zhou, Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Towards omni-generalizable
   neural methods for vehicle routing problems. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
   on Machine Learning, volume 202, pp. 42769–42789, 23–29 Jul 2023a.
Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F. Xu, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. Docprompting: Gen-
  erating code by retrieving the docs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023b.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROMPT AND OUTPUT TEMPLATES
A.1   P ROMPTS

                    Table 4: The prompts skeleton for each DRoC component

 Component         Prompt Skeleton
 First-time gen-   You are an expert in Python programming for operations research. You are very
 erator            good at calling solver in Python and solving problems.
                   Respond with the syntactically correct code for solving a problem using solver.
                   Make sure you follow these rules:
                   1. Read the template. First understand the meaning of the parameters in ’solve’
                   function, and then complete the code inside the function.
                   2. Ensure all parameters in the template are used in the function.
                   3. Do not give additional examples or define main function for testing.
                   4. Return the objective value of the problem by the ’solve’ function.
                   5. Ensure any code you provide can be executed with all required imports and
                   variables defined.
                   Template: {code_example}
                   Structure your answer with a description of the code solution, and then list the
                   imports, and finally list the functioning code block.
 Router            Your task is to determine how to refine the incorrect Python code, which is
                   produced by another programmer.
                   Here is the code: <prep_code>
                   The code is about solving a problem based on solver, and there is the error
                   information while running the code:
                   Error message: <message>
                   There are several tools that can be called, which can be one of the following:
                   (1) retrieval_augmented_debug[input]: Retrieve code examples from a repos-
                   itory, and then refine the current program drawing upon the retrieved codes.
                   Prioritize it when the error is caused by incorrect use of solver API.
                   (2) self_debug[input]: Call a pretrained LLM like yourself. Prioritize it when
                   you are confident in fixing the error yourself, e.g., when the error of the code is
                   caused by syntax error or wrong import.
                   Return "1" if you think you should use tool (1), otherwise return "2". Do not
                   return other things.
 Self-debugger     You are an expert in Python programming for operations research by calling
                   solver. Now your responsibility is to debug the code snippet with errors.
                   The code snippet with bug is as <prep_code>. Here is the error message of the
                   code: <message>. You can first reason about the error, and finally refine the
                   code and return the whole fixed function. Ensure any code you provide can
                   be executed with all required imports and variables defined. Remember, the
                   final solution should be returned by the ’solve’ function. Do not use other name
                   for the function and do not give example usage of the function. Structure the
                   refined solution by firstly giving the reason of the error and the strategy for
                   fixing it. Then list the imports. Finally list the functioning code block and solve
                   the problem with ’solve’ function.
 Decomposer        You will extract the keywords of a vehicle routing problem (VRP) for me. I
                   give you the name of a VRP and you produce the keywords according to its
                   constraints. Structure your answer with a list of keywords inside "<>" and use
                   commas to separate different keywords. Do not return other things.
                   For example, the output of "Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem with Time
                   Windows and Multiple Depots (CVRPTWMD)" should be <Capacitated, Time
                   Windows, Multiple Depots>, and the output of "Prize Collecting Travelling
                   Salesman Problem (PCTSP)" should be <Prize Collecting>.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 First-stage fil-   You are an expert in Python programming and solver for vehicle routing prob-
 ter                lem.
                    I will give you a retrieved documents potentially related to keyword, and you
                    will firstly assess if the document includes Python code to program keyword. If
                    so, you should explain how the code addresses the constraint of keyword. Here
                    is the retrieved document:
                    {context}
                    If the document contains Python code related to keyword, grade it as relevant.
                    After that, extract the code snippet in the document related to keyword. Finally,
                    produce an explanation on how to program the constraint of keyword, and your
                    goal is to make other programmers know how to do that. Structure your answer
                    with the binary score ’yes’ or ’no’ to indicate whether the document is relevant,
                    and then list the related code snippet, and finally give the summary.
                    If the document is not related, just return ’no’ for the binary score, and nothing
                    for the code snippet and the summary.
 Second-stage       You are an expert in Python programming and solver for vehicle routing problem
 filter             (VRP).
                    I will give you several retrieved documents (codes) and their explanations
                    potentially related to keyword, and you should assess which context is the most
                    relevant one and with minimal redundant information.
                    Here are the documents, which are separated by ’====================’:
                    {contexts}
                    Return the index of the most relevant document and do not return anything else.
                    For example, if you think the second document is the most relevant one, just
                    return 2. Please strictly return integer index following the above instruction.
 Retrieval-         You are an expert in Python programming for operations research and combi-
 augmented          natorial optimization. You are good at calling <solver> in Python and solving
 generator          problems.
                    Respond with the syntactically correct code for solving a problem using solver.
                    Make sure you follow these rules: 1. Read the template. First understand the
                    meaning of the parameters in ’solve’ function, and then complete the code inside
                    the function.
                    2. The context provides example codes of addressing each constraint of {prob-
                    lem} by {solver}. Learn to model each constraint and solve the problem
                    accordingly.
                    3. Do not give additional examples or define main function for testing. 4. Return
                    the objective value of the problem by the ’solve’ function. 5. Ensure any code
                    you provide can be executed with all required imports and variables defined.
                    Template: {code_example}
                    Context: {context}
                    Structure your answer with a description of the code solution, and then list the
                    imports, and finally list the functioning code block.
 Retrieval-         You are responsible for refining the code with errors, which tries to solve
 augmented          problem by calling solver in Python.
 dubugger           The code snippet with the bug is as <prep_code>.
                    Here is the error message of the code: <message>.
                    Make sure you follow these rules: 1. You can first reason about the error, and
                    then refine the code and return the whole fixed function.
                    2. The context provides examples of solving problems with different constraints,
                    referring to the relevant parts and modifying the code accordingly: <context>.
                    3. Do not give additional examples or define the main function for testing.
                    4. Return the objective value of the problem by the ’solve’ function.
                    5. Ensure any code you provide can be executed with all required imports and
                    variables defined.
                    Structure your answer with a description of the code solution, then list the
                    imports, and finally list the functioning code block.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2    O UTPUT EXAMPLE OF THE FILTER

      relevance =" yes " ,
      code_snippet ="# Add Capacity constraint \n
      def demand_callback ( from_index ) :\ n
      # Convert from routing variable Index to demands NodeIndex \n
      from_node = manager . IndexToNode ( from_index )\n
      return demands [ from_node ]\ n\n
      # Register the demand callback with the routing model \n
      demand_callback_index = routing . RegisterUnaryTransitCallback (
      demand_callback )\n     routing . AddDimensionWithVehicleCapacity (
      demand_callback_index , 0, # null capacity slack \n
      vehicle_capacities , # vehicle maximum capacities \n      True , # start
      cumul to zero \n         ' Capacity ')" ,
      summary =" To program the Capacitated constraint in the Capacitated
      Vehicle Routing Problem with Distance Limit ( CVRPL ) using OR - tools in
       Python , you need to define a demand callback function that maps the
      routing variable Index to demands NodeIndex . This function is
      registered as a unary transit callback with the routing model . Then ,
      the capacity constraint is added using the
      AddDimensionWithVehicleCapacity method , specifying the demand
      callback index , null capacity slack , vehicle maximum capacities ,
      start cumul to zero , and the dimension name ' Capacity '. This ensures
      that the vehicle capacities are respected during the routing
      optimization process ."

                    Figure 6: The example of the output of the first-stage filter.


B     VRP VARIANTS

def solve ( time_matrix : list , time_windows : list , demands : list ,
             vehicle_capacities : list , num_vehicles : int ,
             starts : list , ends : list ):
    """
    Args :
         time_matrix : contains the integer travel times between locations
         time_windows : the list of tuples for time windows of the
    customers
         demands : the list of integer customer demands
         vehicle_capacities : the capacity of each vehicle
         num_vehicles : the number of the vehicle
         starts : the index of the starting depots for vehicles
         ends : the index of the ending depots for vehicles

      Returns :
          obj : a number representing the objective value of the solution
      """
      obj = -1
      return obj

                           Figure 7: Function template of CVRPTWMD.

As mentioned in Section 3.1, there are several common additional constraints for the VRP, and we
create VRP variants by combining different constraints, for which is shown in Table 5. Due to the
high complexity of VRPs, designing numerous large instances with feasible solutions is challenging.
Therefore, we use a carefully crafted, simple instance for each VRP variant, developed by human
experts. This approach ensures the feasibility of each instance and provides the dataset for evaluating
the performance of various baselines alongside our proposed method, DRoC. The ground truth for the
optimal solutions of the instances is primarily obtained using Hybrid Genetic Search (HGS) (Wouda


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2024), which is widely recognized as a method for calculating approximate optimal solutions
for VRPs. For VRP variants with constraints of "Pickup and Delivery" or "Resource Constraints," we
utilize OR-Tools with a search time limit of 100 seconds to determine their ground truth, as the used
HGS solver does not support these specific constraints. To make the instances more informative, we
randomly use a distance matrix or a time matrix to represent the graph of the VRP. Therefore, we
impose distance limits on those with distance matrix and duration limit on those with time matrix.
Accordingly, we create 48 unique VRP variants, each paired with specific instances, forming a
benchmark dataset for evaluation. A program is deemed correct when its generated solve function
yields the same value as the optimal solution. Additionally, such correct programs can generalize to
any VRP instance sharing the same constraint structure, regardless of input parameters (e.g., customer
coordinates).
Different from previous studies (Zhang et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024), which try to solve OR
problems with natural language description, we just take the name of the problem and the function
signature as input. We take the function signature of the CVRPTWMD as an example, which is
shown in Figure 7.
In this case, the LLM needs to try to understand the meaning of each parameter and generate programs
accordingly. Once a program for a VRP variant is produced successfully, it can be used in all instances
of the same VRP. Compared to natural language-based description, which specifies the data of the
problem, this method is more generalizable.


C    BASELINES

In this section, we elaborate on the implementations of the baselines involved in the experiments:
Standard Prompting: it refers to using the prompt skeleton of the first-time generator in Section A.1.
The generator is called up to I times independently without the injection of any external knowledge.
Chain-of-Thought: similar to the CoT baseline in (Xiao et al., 2023), we add the sentence "Let’s
think step by step" in the standard prompting to guide the model’s thought process, aiming at using
the internal knowledge of the LLMs for reasoning as much as possible.
Progressive-Hint Prompting: similar to the PHP baseline in (Xiao et al., 2023), we produce an
initial program and then use previous generations as hints to progressively guide the LLM toward the
correct solutions. It is fulfilled by verifying if the current response is the same as the previous one.
Self-debug: it is based on the method proposed by Chen et al. (2024), using the error information
and corresponding traceback produced by the executor to teach the LLM conduct debug without any
human feedback on the code correctness. Specifically, it follows the prompt of the self-debugger in
Section A.1. The number of generations is also up to I.
Vanilla RAG: The VRAG approach retrieves relevant context before each round of program genera-
tion. In the first iteration, the query is set as "Python code of the name of the VRP." For subsequent
iterations, the query consists of the generated code from the previous iteration to retrieve the most
relevant documents. During program generation, the top-k retrieved documents are included as part
of the input to guide the model in generating a more accurate solution.
Self-RAG: Originally proposed by Asai et al. (2024), we adapt Self-RAG to the VRP tasks. Similar
to VRAG, a retriever is used to obtain relevant documents, followed by a relevance grader to assess
whether each retrieved document is pertinent to the target VRP. We implement this process using the
first-stage filtering mechanism from our DRoC framework. The remaining relevant documents are
then used in parallel to generate solutions. Each generated program is executed until one can run
successfully. Additionally, the code generated in previous iterations is used as a query for further
retrieval, continuing until the maximum number of generations I is reached.
EoH: EoH evolves the codes of heuristics by diverse prompt strategies. We basically follow the
configuration in the original paper (Liu et al., 2024). We use 30 populations at the initial stage and 10
populations for each iteration. We allow for at most 300 times of evaluations on the PCTSP instances.
ReEvo: ReEvo uses the reflection mechanism to progressively evolve the heuristics. We follow the
default settings in Ye et al. (2024) with also up to 300 evaluations on the instances.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 5: The studied 48 VRP variants with nine additional constraints.
                 Vehicle    Distance    Time    Multiple    Open      Prize      Pickup and   Service   Resource
                 Capacity    Limit     Window   Depots      Route   Collecting    Delivery     Time     Constraint
 TSP
 TSPTW                                   ✓
 TSPTWS                                  ✓                                                      ✓
 VRP
 VRPL                          ✓
 VRPMD                                             ✓
 VRPS                                                                                           ✓
 VRPSL                         ✓                                                                ✓
 VRPTW                                   ✓
 VRPTWL                        ✓         ✓
 VRPTWMD                                 ✓         ✓
 VRPTWS                                  ✓                                                      ✓
 VRPTWMDL                                ✓         ✓                                            ✓
 VRPTWSL                       ✓         ✓                                                      ✓
 VRPTWMRC                                ✓                                                                 ✓
 VRPTWMRCL                     ✓         ✓                                                                 ✓
 CVRP               ✓
 CVRPL              ✓          ✓
 CVRPTW             ✓                    ✓
 CVRPMD             ✓                              ✓
 CVRPTWL            ✓          ✓         ✓
 CVRPMDL            ✓          ✓                   ✓
 CVRPTWMD           ✓                    ✓         ✓
 CVRPTWMDL          ✓          ✓         ✓         ✓
 CVRPTWRC           ✓                    ✓                                                                 ✓
 CVRPTWRCL          ✓          ✓         ✓                                                                 ✓
 PCTSP                                                                 ✓
 PCTSPTW                                 ✓                             ✓
 PCVRP                                                                 ✓
 PCVRPTW                                 ✓                             ✓
 PCVRPMD                                           ✓                   ✓
 PCVRPTWMD                               ✓         ✓                   ✓
 OVRP                                                        ✓
 OVRPL                         ✓                             ✓
 OVRPTW                                  ✓                   ✓
 OCVRP              ✓                                        ✓
 OCVRPL             ✓          ✓                             ✓
 OCVRPTW            ✓                    ✓                   ✓
 PDP                                                                                 ✓
 PDPL                          ✓                                                     ✓
 PDPTW                                   ✓                                           ✓
 PDPMD                                             ✓                                 ✓
 PDPTWL                        ✓         ✓                                           ✓
 PDPTWMD                                 ✓         ✓                                 ✓
 PDPSL                         ✓                                                     ✓          ✓
 PDPTWS                                  ✓                                           ✓          ✓
 PDPTWSL                       ✓         ✓                                           ✓          ✓
 PDPTWMDL                      ✓         ✓         ✓                                 ✓



For the comparison study of EoH and ReEvo, The evolution is conducted on 10 PCTSP instances
with 50 nodes, which are randomly sampled from a unit square. Let the distance between node i and
                                                                                    1+⌊99·r⌋
the depot be di , and dmax = maxi (di ), the prize of node i is set to prizei = 4 max i (1+⌊99·r⌋)
                                                                                                   where
     di
r = dmax . The penalty values for unvisited nodes are set the same as the prizes.


D    G ENERATED SOLUTIONS

We present several examples of solutions that our DRoC method can achieve, which the standard
approach fails to generate, as illustrated in Figure 8. These VRPs often involve multiple constraints
that pose significant challenges for LLMs to address effectively.
We use gpt-4o to invoke OR-tools for solving VRPs with the Prize Collecting constraint. The primary
distinction between the Standard Prompting and DRoC methods lies in how they handle the constraint,
with the former failing to produce a correct solution, while the latter succeeds. As shown in Figure 9,
the programming approaches for the Prize Collecting constraint differ significantly. DRoC enables


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a)                        (b)                        (c)                      (d)

Figure 8: Example solutions generated by DRoC. (a) CVRPTWRC solved by OR-tools; (b) PCVRP
solved by OR-tools; (c) CVRPMD solved by Gurobi; (4) VRPTWL solved by Gurobi.


vehicles to drop nodes, effectively accommodating the constraint. In contrast, the standard method
produces meaningless content, leading to hallucinations during the generation.

# Define the prize collection callback
def prize_callback ( from_index ):
    from_node = manager . IndexToNode ( from_index )
    return prizes [ from_node ]
prize_callback_index = routing . RegisterUnaryTransitCallback (
    prize_callback )

routing . AddDimensionWithVehicleCapacity (
    prize_callback_index ,
    0, # no slack
    [ sum ( prizes )] * num_vehicle , # vehicle maximum prize capacity
    True , # start cumul to zero
    ' Prize ')
# Setting the objective to maximize the prize collection
prize_dimension = routing . GetDimensionOrDie ( ' Prize ')
for vehicle_id in range ( num_vehicle ):
    routing . SetFixedCostOfVehicle (- sum ( prizes ) , vehicle_id )

                        (a) Generated code snippet by Standard Prompting. (Incorrect)
# Allow to drop nodes .
for node in range (1 , len ( distance_matrix )):
    routing . AddDisjunction ([ manager . NodeToIndex ( node )], prizes [ node ])

                               (b) Generated code snippet by DRoC. (Correct)

                  Figure 9: Comparison of code snippets for Prize Collecting constraint.


E     A PPLICATION TO OTHER OR PROBLEM

Many real-world OR problems possess composite constraints, and thus these in which our methods
can be applied. In order to show the applicability of the proposed DRoC to other OR problems,
we take the assignment problem and facility location problems as the examples, which are both
fundamental combinatorial optimization problems.

E.1   A SSIGNMENT P ROBLEM

We focus on the scenario of worker assignment problem: Given assignment costs for each worker-task
pair, we need to allocate workers to distinct tasks so that each worker is assigned to one and at most
one task and the total cost is minimized. The following additional constraints are considered: 1)
Teams of Workers: the workers are divided into several teams, and each team can perform at most x


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tasks, where x is a parameter; 2) Task sizes: Each task is assigned a size indicating the necessary time
or effort, and the total size of tasks allocated to each worker is restricted by a fixed limit.

# Define constraints
for j in range ( num_tasks ):
    solver . Add ( sum (x[i , j] for i in range ( num_workers )) == task_sizes [j ])

for i in range ( num_workers ):
    solver . Add ( sum (x[i , j] for j in range ( num_tasks )) <= team_max )
    solver . Add ( sum (x[i , j] * task_sizes [j] for j in range ( num_tasks )) <=
    size_max )

                      (a) Generated code snippet by Standard Prompting. (Incorrect)
# Each worker is assigned to at most one task .
for worker in range ( num_workers ):
    model . Add (
        sum ( task_sizes [ task ] * x[ worker , task ] for task in range (
    num_tasks ))
        <= size_max
    )

# Each task is assigned to exactly one worker .
for task in range ( num_tasks ):
    model . AddExactlyOne (x[ worker , task ] for worker in range ( num_workers ))

# Each team takes at most team_max tasks .
for team in worker_teams :
    team_tasks = []
    for worker in team :
        for task in range ( num_tasks ):
              team_tasks . append (x[ worker , task ])
    model . Add ( sum ( team_tasks ) <= team_max )

                             (b) Generated code snippet by DRoC. (Correct)

           Figure 10: Comparison of code snippets for the worker assignment problem.

We consider the worker assignment problem with both constraints of Teams of Workers and Task
sizes. We also use the OR-Tools to solve it. The way that gpt-3.5-turbo handles the constraints is
shown as Figure 10 (a), while the code snippet of DRoC is shown in Figure 10 (b). We find that the
LLM without DRoC neither groups workers effectively nor assigns the correct number of worker for
the tasks. In comparison, our method generates the program by modeling the constraints correctly.

E.2   FACILITY L OCATION P ROBLEM

The Facility Location Problem (FLP) encompasses optimization tasks aimed at selecting optimal
sites for p facilities to minimize the conveying cost from facilities to customers. FLPs may include
constraints such as facility capacity. Various real-world scenarios present different optimization
objectives for FLPs, leading to distinct problem variants, such as: 1) p-median: minimizing the total
distance from each customer to their nearest facility; 2) p-center: minimizing the maximum cost any
customer must spend to reach the nearest facility; 3) p-maxian: maximizing the total weighted travel
cost incurred by all customers; 4) p-dispersion: maximizing the smallest distance between any pair of
facilities. These objectives necessitate additional constraints during the modeling. Hence, we explore
the integration of capacity constraints with these objectives and assess the performance of DRoC
on these FLP variants. We take part of the codes implemented by Gaboardi (2015) as the external
knowledge and use Gurobi to model and solve the FLP variants.
Table 6 illustrates that DRoC facilitates the resolution of more FLP variants, including some not
encompassed by external knowledge. In particular, DRoC augmentation empowers gpt-3.5-turbo to
successfully tackle five additional problem variants, while the standard gpt-3.5-turbo exhibits very
limited proficiency in solving FLPs.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Table 6: The evaluation results on the FLPs.
                                                                                      Solved by
                                     Contained in the     Solved by      Solved by                     Solved by
                                                                                     gpt-3.5-turbo
                                    external knowledge   gpt-3.5-turbo    gpt-4o                     gpt-4o (DRoC)
                                                                                       (DRoC)
    p-median FLP                            ✓                  ✗            ✓              ✗              ✓
    p-center FLP                            ✓                  ✗            ✓              ✓              ✓
    p-maxian FLP                            ✓                  ✗            ✓              ✓              ✓
    p-dispersion FLP                        ✓                  ✗            ✗             ✓               ✓
    Capacitated FLP                                            ✗            ✓              ✗              ✓
    Capacitated p-median FLP                                   ✗            ✗             ✓               ✓
    Capacitated p-center FLP                                   ✗            ✓              ✗              ✓
    Capacitated p-maxian FLP                ✓                  ✗            ✗              ✗              ✓
    Capacitated p-dispersion FLP                               ✗            ✗             ✓               ✓



F      RUNNING TIME OF THE GENERATED CODE

                                      Table 7: Comparison of running time

        Method                     Mean Time (s)     Std Time (s)        Mean Log Ratio       Std Log Ratio
        HGS                            1.005             0.003                 -                    -
        DRoC (HGS)                     0.329             0.713              -3.257                0.317
        OR-Tools                      12.503            32.379                 -                    -
        DRoC (OR-Tools)                1.411             4.059              -1.145                0.882

We also explore the running time of the generated programs and check if the LLM produce code with
extended compuation time duration. In our implementations, we used the HGS solver for obtaining
optimal solutions and OR-Tools in our RAG framework, respectively. Specifically, the running time
for the HGS solver is supposed to be configured, which serves as the stopping condition for the search
process. We set a maximum run time of 1 second for HGS, as we found it is sufficient to obtain
optimal solutions for the simple instances used in our evaluation. For the OR-Tools solver, we set the
search time limit as 100s, as it has an early stop mechanism once there is no solution improvement.
The statistics for running time are shown in Table 7. Note that we calculate the running time of DRoC
for instances solvable by HGS [denoted as DRoC (HGS)] and those solvable by OR-Tools [denoted
as DRoC (OR-Tools)], respectively.
The results empirically show that the mean and standard deviation of the running time for DRoC
(OR-Tools) are smaller than those of directly calling OR-Tools. This is mainly because the search
limit parameter is not configured for most of the instances in the programs generated by DRoC, while
we predetermine the search limit for OR-Tools when calculating the approximated optimal solutions.
When we set the same time limit for both OR-Tools and DRoC (OR-Tools), the time metrics can be
nearly identical (with a mean log ratio of 0.004). This is intuitive, as the generated code produced
by DRoC maintains a similar structure to manually written code for solving specific VRPs. Thus,
DRoC does not introduce any significant increase in running time, while it provides an automatic and
user-friendly approach to solve the problems.

G       B OOTSTRAP - BASED O PTIMIZATION

We have introduced DRoC using static external knowledge sources. However, as LLMs, powered by
DRoC, begin generating more accurate solutions, we can dynamically update the external knowledge
by incorporating these generated solutions. Specifically, we first solve all solvable VRP variants using
the static DRoC approach, and subsequently embed all the generated programs, which have been
executed successfully, to the knowledge base. We create a new retriever for these LLM-generated
solutions and ensemble it with the retriever of other knowledge. Following this, we initiate a new
round of generation aimed at solving the previously unsolved problems. By leveraging the solutions
generated by the LLMs, we enhance the model’s performance in a Bootstrap-based manner, a process
we term DRoC with Bootstrap-based optimization (DRoC-BBO). This iterative approach allows the
LLM to improve progressively by utilizing its own outputs as external knowledge, thereby improving
its problem-solving capabilities over successive iterations.


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Figure 11: Performance of the DRoC-BBO.


Experimentally, the DRoC-BBO can slightly improve the performance with more rounds of generation
with updated knowledge sources, which is shown in Figure 11. This indicates that the LLMs can also
be enhanced through Bootstrap for solving optimization problems like VRP.

R EFERENCES
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning to
  retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024.
Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models to
  self-debug. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
James        Gaboardi.                 Facility     location          /     location       allocation.
  https://github.com/jGaboardi/Facility_Location, 2015.
Zhehui Huang, Guangyao Shi, and Gaurav S Sukhatme. From words to routes: Applying large
  language models to vehicle routing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10795, 2024.
Fei Liu, Tong Xialiang, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao Lu, and Qingfu
  Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language
  model. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Niels A. Wouda, Leon Lan, and Wouter Kool. Pyvrp: A high-performance vrp solver package.
  INFORMS Journal on Computing, 36(4):943–955, 2024.
Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin
  Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, et al. Chain-of-experts: When llms meet complex operations
  research problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Haoran Ye, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Haeyeon Kim, Jinkyoo Park,
  and Guojie Song. Large language models as hyper-heuristics for combinatorial optimization. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Jihai Zhang, Wei Wang, Siyan Guo, Li Wang, Fangquan Lin, Cheng Yang, and Wotao Yin. Solv-
   ing general natural-language-description optimization problems with large language models. In
   Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
   tational Linguisticss, pp. 483–490, June 2024.


                                                 22
