Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TAB M: A DVANCING TABULAR D EEP L EARNING
WITH PARAMETER -E FFICIENT E NSEMBLING

 Yury Gorishniy ‚àó                  Akim Kotelnikov                        Artem Babenko
 Yandex                            HSE University, Yandex                 Yandex



                                              A BSTRACT
            Deep learning architectures for supervised learning on tabular data range from
            simple multilayer perceptrons (MLP) to sophisticated Transformers and retrieval-
            augmented methods. This study highlights a major, yet so far overlooked opportu-
            nity for designing substantially better MLP-based tabular architectures. Namely,
            our new model TabM relies on efficient ensembling, where one TabM efficiently imi-
            tates an ensemble of MLPs and produces multiple predictions per object. Compared
            to a traditional deep ensemble, in TabM, the underlying implicit MLPs are trained
            simultaneously, and (by default) share most of their parameters, which results in
            significantly better performance and efficiency. Using TabM as a new baseline, we
            perform a large-scale evaluation of tabular DL architectures on public benchmarks
            in terms of both task performance and efficiency, which renders the landscape of
            tabular DL in a new light. Generally, we show that MLPs, including TabM, form
            a line of stronger and more practical models compared to attention- and retrieval-
            based architectures. In particular, we find that TabM demonstrates the best perfor-
            mance among tabular DL models. Then, we conduct an empirical analysis on the
            ensemble-like nature of TabM. We observe that the multiple predictions of TabM
            are weak individually, but powerful collectively. Overall, our work brings an im-
            pactful technique to tabular DL and advances the performance-efficiency trade-off
            with TabM ‚Äî a simple and powerful baseline for researchers and practitioners. The
            code is available at: https://github.com/yandex-research/tabm.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Supervised learning on tabular data is a ubiquitous machine learning (ML) scenario in a wide range
of industrial applications. Among classic non-deep-learning methods, the state-of-the-art solution
for such tasks is gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDT) (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018; Chen &
Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017). Deep learning (DL) models for tabular data, in turn, are reportedly
improving, and the most recent works claim to perform on par or even outperform GBDT on academic
benchmarks (Hollmann et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b;a; Gorishniy et al., 2024).
However, from the practical perspective, it is unclear if tabular DL offers any obvious go-to baselines
beyond simple architectures in the spirit of a multilayer perceptron (MLP). First, the scale and
consistency of performance improvements of new methods w.r.t. simple MLP-like baselines are not
always explicitly analyzed in the literature. Thus, one has to infer those statistics from numerous
per-dataset performance scores, which makes it hard to reason about the progress. At the same
time, due to the extreme diversity of tabular datasets, consistency is an especially valuable and
hard-to-achieve property for a hypothetical go-to baseline. Second, efficiency-related properties,
such as training time, and especially inference throughput, sometimes receive less attention. While
methods are usually equally affordable on small-to-medium datasets (e.g. <100K objects), their
applicability to larger datasets remains uncertain. Third, some recent work generally suggests that the
progress on academic benchmarks may not transfer that well to real-world tasks (Rubachev et al.,
2024). With all the above in mind, in this work, we thoroughly evaluate existing tabular DL methods
and find that non-MLP models do not yet offer a convincing replacement for MLPs.
At the same time, we identify a previously overlooked path towards more powerful, reliable, and
reasonably efficient tabular DL models. In a nutshell, we find that the parameter-efficient approach to
    ‚àó
        The corresponding author: yurygorishniy@gmail.com


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


deep ensembling, where most weights are shared between ensemble members, allow one to make
simple and strong tabular models out of plain MLPs. For example, MLP coupled with BatchEnsemble
(Wen et al., 2020) ‚Äî a long-existing method ‚Äî right away outperforms popular attention-based
models, such as FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021), while being simpler and more efficient.
This result alone suggests that efficient ensembling is a low-hanging fruit for tabular DL.
Our work builds on the above observations and offers TabM ‚Äî a new powerful and practical model
for researchers and practitioners. Drawing an informal parallel with GBDT (an ensemble of decision
trees), TabM can also be viewed as a simple base model (MLP) combined with an ensembling-like
technique, providing high performance and simple implementation at the same time.
Main contributions. We summarize our main contributions as follows:
    1. We present TabM ‚Äî a simple DL architecture for supervised learning on tabular data. TabM is
       based on MLP and parameter-efficient ensembling techniques closely related to BatchEnsemble
       (Wen et al., 2020). In particular, TabM produces Multiple predictions per object. TabM easily
       competes with GBDT and outperforms prior tabular DL models, while being more efficient than
       attention- and retrieval-based DL architectures.
    2. We provide a fresh perspective on tabular DL models in a large-scale evaluation along four
       dimensions: performance ranks, performance score distributions, training time, and inference
       throughput. One of our findings is that MLPs, including TabM, hit an appealing performance-
       efficiency tradeoff, which is not the case for attention- and retrieval-based models.
    3. We show that the two key reasons for TabM‚Äôs high performance are the collective training of the
       underlying implicit MLPs and the weight sharing. We also show that the multiple predictions of
       TabM are weak and overfitted individually, while their average is strong and generalizable.


2     R ELATED WORK

Decision-tree-based models. Gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDT) (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke
et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) is a strong and efficient baseline for tabular tasks. GBDT is
a classic machine learning model, specifically, an ensemble of decision trees. Our model TabM is a
deep learning model, specifically, a parameter-efficient ensemble of MLPs.
Tabular deep learning architectures. A large number of deep learning architectures for tabular
data have been proposed over the recent years. That includes attention-based architectures (Song
et al., 2019; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Somepalli et al., 2021; Kossen et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2023),
retrieval-augmented architectures (Somepalli et al., 2021; Kossen et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2024;
Ye et al., 2024), MLP-like models (Gorishniy et al., 2021; Klambauer et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020)
and others (Arik & Pfister, 2020; Popov et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023b; Marton et al., 2024; Hollmann
et al., 2023). Compared to prior work, the key difference of our model TabM is its computation
flow, where one TabM imitates an ensemble of MLPs by producing multiple independently trained
predictions. Prior attempts to bring ensemble-like elements to tabular DL (Badirli et al., 2020; Popov
et al., 2020) were not found promising (Gorishniy et al., 2021). Also, being a simple feed-forward
MLP-based model, TabM is significantly more efficient than some of the prior work. Compared to
attention-based models, TabM does not suffer from quadratic computational complexity w.r.t. the
dataset dimensions. Compared to retrieval-based models, TabM is easily applicable to large datasets.
Improving tabular MLP-like models. Multiple recent studies achieved competitive performance
with MLP-like architectures on tabular tasks by applying architectural modifications (Gorishniy et al.,
2022), regularizations (Kadra et al., 2021; Jeffares et al., 2023a; HolzmuÃàller et al., 2024), custom
training techniques (Bahri et al., 2021; Rubachev et al., 2022). Thus, it seems that tabular MLPs have
good potential, but one has to deal with overfitting and optimization issues to reveal that potential.
Our model TabM achieves high performance with MLP in a different way, namely, by using it as the
base backbone in a parameter-efficient ensemble in the spirit of BatchEsnsemble (Wen et al., 2020).
Our approach is orthogonal to the aforementioned training techniques and architectural advances.
Deep ensembles. In this paper, by a deep ensemble, we imply multiple DL models of the same
architecture trained independently (Jeffares et al., 2023b) for the same task under different random
seeds (i.e. with different initializations, training batch sequences, etc.). The prediction of a deep
ensemble is the mean prediction of its members. Deep ensembles often significantly outperform single
DL models of the same architecture (Fort et al., 2020) and can excel in other tasks like uncertainty


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


estimation or out-of-distribution detection (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). It was observed that
individual members of deep ensembles can learn to extract diverse information from the input, and
the power of deep ensembles depends on this diversity (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023). The main drawback
of deep ensembles is the cost and inconvenience of training and using multiple models.
Parameter-efficient deep ‚Äúensembles‚Äù. To achieve the performance of deep ensembles at a lower
cost, multiple studies proposed architectures that imitate ensembles by producing multiple predictions
with one model (Lee et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2020; Havasi et al., 2021; AntoraÃÅn
et al., 2020; Turkoglu et al., 2022). Such models can be viewed as ‚Äúensembles‚Äù where the implicit
ensemble members share a large amount of their weights. There are also non-architectural approaches
to efficient ensembling, e.g. FGE (Garipov et al., 2018), but we do not explore them, because we
are interested specifically in architectural techniques. In this paper, we highlight parameter-efficient
ensembling as an impactful paradigm for tabular DL. In particular, we describe two simple variations
of BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020) that are highly effective for tabular MLPs. One variation uses a
more efficient parametrization, and another one uses an improved initialization.

3     TAB M
In this section, we present TabM ‚Äî a Tabular DL model that makes Multiple predictions.

3.1     P RELIMINARIES

Notation. We consider classification and regression tasks on tabular data. x and y denote the features
and a label, respectively, of one object from a given dataset. A machine learning model takes x as
input and produces yÃÇ as a prediction of y. N ‚àà N and d ‚àà N respectively denote the ‚Äúdepth‚Äù (e.g. the
number of blocks) and ‚Äúwidth‚Äù (e.g. the size of the latent representation) of a given neural network.
dy ‚àà N is the output representation size (e.g. dy = 1 for regression tasks, and dy equals the number
of classes for classification tasks).
Datasets. Our benchmark consists of 46 publicly available datasets used in prior work, including
Grinsztajn et al. (2022); Gorishniy et al. (2024); Rubachev et al. (2024). The main properties of our
benchmark are summarized in Table 1, and more details are provided in Appendix C.

      Table 1: The overview of our benchmark. The ‚ÄúSplit type‚Äù property is explained in the text.

      #Datasets          Train size                 #Features              Task type                Split type
                  Min.   Q50   Mean   Max.   Min.   Q50   Mean   Max.   #Regr.   #Classif.   Random    Domain-aware
         46       1.8K   12K   76K    723K    3     20    108    986     28         18         37            9


Domain-aware splits. We pay extra attention to datasets with what we call ‚Äúdomain-aware‚Äù splits,
including the eight datasets from the TabReD benchmark (Rubachev et al., 2024) and the Microsoft
dataset (Qin & Liu, 2013). For these datasets, their original real-world splits are available, e.g.
time-aware splits as in TabReD. Such datasets were shown to be challenging for some methods
because they naturally exhibit a certain degree of distribution shift between training and test parts
(Rubachev et al., 2024). The random splits of the remaining 37 datasets are inherited from prior work.
Experiment setup. We use the setup from Gorishniy et al. (2024), and describe it in detail in
subsection D.2. Most importantly, on each dataset, a given model undergoes hyperparameter tuning
on the validation set, then the tuned model is trained from scratch under multiple random seeds, and
the test metric averaged over the random seeds becomes the final score of the model on the dataset.
Metrics. We use RMSE (the root mean square error) for regression tasks, and accuracy or ROC-AUC
for classification tasks depending on the dataset source. See subsection D.3 for details.
Also, throughout the paper, we often use the relative performance of models w.r.t. MLP as the key
metric. This metric gives a unified perspective on all tasks and allows reasoning about the scale of
improvements  w.r.t. to a simple baseline (MLP). Formally, on a given dataset, the metric is defined
     score
as baseline ‚àí 1 ¬∑ 100%, where ‚Äúscore‚Äù is the metric of a given model, and ‚Äúbaseline‚Äù is the metric
of MLP. In this computation, for regression tasks, we convert the raw metrics from RMSE to R2 to
better align the scales of classification and regression metrics.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   A QUICK INTRODUCTION TO BATCH E NSEMBLE .

For a given architecture, let‚Äôs consider any linear layer l in it: l(x) = W x + b, where x ‚àà Rd1 ,
W ‚àà Rd2 √ód1 , b ‚àà Rd2 . To simplify the notation, let d1 = d2 = d. In a traditional deep ensemble, the
i-th member has its own set of weights Wi , bi for this linear layer: li (xi ) = Wi xi + bi , where xi is the
object representation within the i-th member. By contrast, in BatchEnsemble, this linear layer is either
(1) fully shared between all members, or (2) mostly shared: li (xi ) = si ‚äô (W (ri ‚äô xi )) + bi , where
‚äô is the elementwise multiplication, W ‚àà Rd√ód is shared between all members, and ri , si , bi ‚àà Rd
are not shared between the members. This is equivalent to defining the i-th weight matrix as
Wi = W ‚äô (si riT ). To ensure diversity of the ensemble members, ri and si of all members are ini-
tialized randomly with ¬±1. All other layers are fully shared between the members of BatchEnsemble.
The described parametrization allows packing all ensemble members in one model that simultaneously
takes k objects as input, and applies all k implicit members in parallel, without explicitly materializing
each member. This is achieved by replacing one or more linear layers of the original neural network
with their BatchEnsemble versions: lBE (X) = ((X ‚äô R)W ) ‚äô S + B, where X ‚àà Rk√ód stores k
object representations (one per member), and R, S, B ‚àà Rd store the non-shared weights (ri , si , bi )
of the members, as shown at the lower left part of Figure 1.
Terminology. In this paper, we call ri , si , bi , R, S and B adapters, and the implicit members of
parameter-efficient emsembles (e.g. BatchEnsemble) ‚Äî implicit submodels or simply submodels.
Overhead to the model size. With BatchEnsemble, adding a new ensemble member means adding
only one row to each of the matrices R, S, and B, which results in 3d new parameters per layer. For
typical values of d, this is a negligible overhead to the original layer size d2 + d.
Overhead to the runtime. Thanks to the modern hardware, the large number of shared weights
and the parallel execution of the k forward passes, the runtime overhead of BatchEnsemble can be
(significantly) lower than √ók (Wen et al., 2020). Intuitively, if the original workload underutilizes the
hardware, there are more chances to pay less than √ók overhead.

3.3   A RCHITECTURE

TabM is one model representing an ensemble of k MLPs. Contrary to conventional deep ensembles,
in TabM, the k MLPs are trained in parallel and share most of their weights by default, which
leads to better performance and efficiency. We present multiple variants of TabM that differ in their
weight-sharing strategies, where TabM and TabMmini are the most effective variants, and TabMpacked
is a conceptually important variant potentially useful in some cases. We obtain our models in several
steps, starting from essential baselines. We always use the ensemble size k = 32 and analyze this
hyperparameter in subsection 5.3. In subsection A.1, we explain that using MLP as the base model is
crucial because of its excellent efficiency.
MLP. We define MLP as a sequence of N simple blocks followed by a linear prediction head:
MLP(x) = Linear(BlockN (. . . (Block1 (x))), where Blocki (x) = Dropout(ReLU(Linear((x))).
MLP√ók = MLP + Deep Ensemble. We denote the traditional deep ensemble of k independently
trained MLPs as MLP√ók . To clarify, this means tuning hyperparameters of one MLP, then indepen-
dently training k tuned MLPs under different random seeds, and then averaging their predictions.
The performance of MLP√ók is reported in Figure 2. Notably, the results are already better and more
stable than those of FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021) ‚Äî the popular attention-based baseline.
Although the described approach is a somewhat default way to implement an ensemble, it is not
optimized for the task performance of the ensemble. First, for each of the k MLPs, the training is
stopped based on the individual validation score, which is optimal for each individual MLP, but can
be suboptimal for their ensemble. Second, the hyperparameters are also tuned for one MLP without
knowing about the subsequent ensembling. All TabM variants are free from these issues.
TabMpacked = MLP + Packed-Ensemble. As the first step towards better and more efficient en-
sembles of MLPs, we implement k MLPs as one large model using Packed-Ensemble (Laurent
et al., 2023). This results in TabMpacked illustrated in Figure 1. As an architecture, TabMpacked is
equivalent to MLP√ók and stores k independent MLPs without any weight sharing. However, the
critical difference is that TabM processes k inputs in parallel, which means that one training step
of TabM consists of k parallel training steps of the individual MLPs. This allows monitoring the


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance of the ensemble during the training and stopping the training when it is optimal for the
whole ensemble, not for individual MLPs. As a consequence, this also allows tuning hyperparameters
for TabMpacked as for one model. As shown in Figure 2, TabMpacked delivers significantly better
performance compared to MLP√ók . Efficiency-wise, for typical depth and width of MLPs, the runtime
overhead of TabMpacked is noticeably less than √ók due to the parallel execution of the k forward
passes on the modern hardware. Nevertheless, the √ók overhead of TabMpacked to the model size
motivates further exploration.
TabMnaive = MLP + BatchEnsemble. To reduce the size of TabMpacked , we now turn to weight
sharing between the MLPs, and naively apply BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020) instead of Packed-
Ensemble, as described in subsection 3.2. This gives us TabMnaive ‚Äî a preliminary version of TabM.
In fact, the architecture (but not the initialization) of TabMnaive is already equivalent to that of TabM,
so Figure 1 is applicable. Interestingly, Figure 2 reports higher performance of TabMnaive compared
to TabMpacked . Thus, constraining the ensemble with weight sharing turns out to be a highly effective
regularization on tabular tasks. The alternatives to BatchEnsemble are discussed in subsection A.1.

                                                                                                                   Test

                                 Shared
                                 Not shared
                                                                        ?                                          Train

                                                                    Backbones         Heads


                                                                                                                                                        Packed-Ensemble


                                                                 BatchEnsemble*                                                                          MiniEnsemble


Figure 1: (Upper left) A high-level illustration of TabM. One TabM represents an ensemble of k MLPs
processing k inputs in parallel. The remaining parts of the figure are three different parametrizations of
the k MLP backbones. (Upper right) TabMpacked consists of k fully independent MLPs. (Lower left)
TabM is obtained by injecting three non-shared adapters R, S, B in each of the N linear layers of
one MLP (‚àó the initialization differs from Wen et al. (2020)). (Lower right) TabMmini is obtained
by keeping only the very first adapter R of TabM and removing the remaining 3N ‚àí 1 adapters.
(Details) Input transformations such as one-hot-encoding or feature embeddings (Gorishniy et al.,
2022) are omitted for simplicity. Drop denotes dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014).
 Relative improvement over MLP


                                   8%
                                                     MLP
                                                     Attention
                                   6%
                                                     MLP (Ours)
                                                     Mean
                                   4%

                                   2%

                                   0%

                                 ‚àí2%
                                            MLP        FT-T MLP√ó32              TabMpacked TabMnaive TabMbad TabMmini                      TabM          TabM‚ôÝ        TabM‚ÄÝmini TabM‚ÄÝ√ó5
                                                                                                                                                                                    mini
                                          0.00 ¬± 0.0% 0.39 ¬± 1.6% 0.96 ¬± 1.6%     1.42 ¬± 2.3%   1.86 ¬± 2.4%   1.00 ¬± 2.3%   1.96 ¬± 2.8%   2.15 ¬± 2.8%   2.07 ¬± 3.6%   2.92 ¬± 4.1%   3.20 ¬± 4.4%



Figure 2: The performance of models described in subsection 3.3 on 46 datasets from Table 1; plus
several baselines on the left. For a given model, one dot on a jitter plot describes the performance
score on one of the 46 datasets. The box plots describe the percentiles of the jitter plots: the boxes
describe the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers describe the 10th and 90th percentiles.
Outliers are clipped. The numbers at the bottom are the mean and standard deviations over the jitter
plots. For each model, hyperparameters are tuned. ‚ÄúModel√ók ‚Äù denotes an ensemble of k models.


                                                                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


TabMmini = MLP + MiniEnsemble. By construction, the just discussed TabMnaive (illustrated as
‚ÄúTabM‚Äù in Figure 1) has 3N adapters: R, S and B in each of the N blocks. Let‚Äôs consider the very
first adapter, i.e. the first adapter R in the first linear layer. Informally, its role can be described as
mapping the k inputs living in the same representation space to k different representation spaces
before the tabular features are mixed with @W for the first time. A simple experiment reveals that
this adapter is critical. First, we remove it from TabMnaive and keep the remaining 3N ‚àí 1 adapters
untouched, which gives us TabMbad with worse performance, as shown in Figure 2. Then, we do the
opposite: we keep only the very first adapter of TabMnaive and remove the remaining 3N ‚àí 1 adapters,
which gives us TabMmini ‚Äî the minimal version of TabM. TabMmini is illustrated in Figure 1, where
we call the described approach ‚ÄúMiniEnsemble‚Äù. Figure 2 shows that TabMmini performs even slightly
better than TabMnaive , despite having only one adapter instead of 3N adapters.
TabM = MLP + BatchEnsemble + Better initialization. The just obtained results motivate the next
step. We go back to the architecture of TabMnaive with all 3N adapters, but initialize all multiplicative
adapters R and S, except for the very first one, deterministically with 1. As such, at initialization, the
deterministically initialized adapters have no effect, and the model behaves like TabMmini , but these
adapters are free to add more expressivity during training. This gives us TabM, illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 2 shows that TabM is the best variation so far.
Hyperparameters. Compared to MLP, the only new hyperparameter of TabM is k ‚Äî the number of
implicit submodels. We heuristically set k = 32 and do not tune this value. We analyze the influence
of k in subsection 5.3. We also share additional observations on the learning rate in subsection A.3.
Limitations and practical considerations are commented in subsection A.4.

3.4   I MPORTANT PRACTICAL MODIFICATIONS OF TAB M

‚ôÝ ‚àº Shared training batches. Recall that the order of training objects usually varies between
ensemble members, because of the random shuffling with different seeds. For TabM, in terms of
Figure 1, that corresponds to X storing k different training objects {xi }ki=1 . We observed that reusing
the training batches between the TabM‚Äôs submodels results in only minor performance loss on average
(depending on a dataset), as illustrated with TabM‚ôÝ in Figure 2. In practice, due to the simpler
implementation and better efficiency, sharing training batches can be a reasonable starting point.
‚ÄÝ ‚àº Non-linear feature embeddings. In Figure 2, TabM‚ÄÝmini denotes TabMmini with non-linear
feature embeddings from (Gorishniy et al., 2022), which demonstrates the high utility of feature
embeddings for TabM. Specifically, we use a slightly modified version of the piecewise-linear
embeddings (see subsection D.8 for details).
√óN ‚àº Deep ensemble. In Figure 2, TabM‚ÄÝ√ó5                                                   ‚ÄÝ
                                          mini denotes an ensemble of five independent TabMmini
models, showing that TabM itself can benefit from the conventional deep ensembling.

3.5   S UMMARY

The story behind TabM shows that technical details of how to construct and train an ensemble have
a major impact on task performance. Most importantly, we highlight simultaneous training of the
(implicit) ensemble members and weight sharing between them. The former is responsible for the
ensemble-aware stopping of the training, and the latter apparently serves as a form of regularization.

4     E VALUATING TABULAR DEEP LEARNING ARCHITECTURES
Now, we perform an empirical comparison of many tabular models, including TabM.

4.1   BASELINES

In the main text, we use the following baselines: MLP (defined in subsection 3.3), FT-Transformer
denoted as ‚ÄúFT-T‚Äù (the attention-based model from Gorishniy et al. (2021)), SAINT (the attention-
and retrieval-based model from Somepalli et al. (2021)), T2G-Former denoted as ‚ÄúT2G‚Äù (the attention-
based model from Yan et al. (2023)), ExcelFormer denoted as ‚ÄúExcel‚Äù (the attention-based model
from Chen et al. (2023a)), TabR (the retrieval-based model from Gorishniy et al. (2024)), ModernNCA


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


denoted as ‚ÄúMNCA‚Äù (the retrieval-based model from Ye et al. (2024)) and GBDT, including XGBoost
(Chen & Guestrin, 2016), LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017) and CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018).
The models with non-linear feature embeddings from Gorishniy et al. (2022) are marked with ‚ÄÝ or ‚Ä°
depending on the embedding type (see subsection D.8 for details on feature embeddings):
   ‚Ä¢ MLP‚ÄÝ and TabM‚ÄÝmini use a modified version of the piecewise-linear embeddings.
   ‚Ä¢ TabR‚Ä° , MNCA‚Ä° , and MLP‚Ä° (also known as MLP-PLR) use various periodic embeddings.
More baselines are evaluated in Appendix B. Implementation details are provided in Appendix D.

4.2     TASK PERFORMANCE

We evaluate all models following the protocol announced in subsection 3.1 and report the results in
Figure 3 (see also the critical difference diagram in Figure 9). We make the following observations:
  1. The performance ranks render TabM as the top-tier DL model.
  2. The middle and right parts of Figure 3 provide a fresh perspective on the per-dataset metrics.
     TabM holds its leadership among the DL models. Meanwhile, many DL methods turn out to be
     no better or even worse than MLP on a non-negligible number of datasets, which shows them as
     less reliable solutions, and changes the ranking, especially on the domain-aware splits (right).
  3. One important characteristic of a model is the weakest part of its performance profile (e.g.
     the 10th or 25th percentiles in the middle plot) since it shows how reliable the model is on
     ‚Äúinconvenient‚Äù datasets. From that perspective, MLP‚ÄÝ seems to be a decent practical option
     between the plain MLP and TabM, especially given its simplicity and efficiency compared to
     retrieval-based alternatives, such as TabR and ModernNCA.
Summary. TabM confidently demonstrates the best performance among tabular DL models, and can
serve as a reliable go-to DL baseline. This is not the case for attention- and retrieval-based models.
Overall, MLP-like models, including TabM, form a representative set of tabular DL baselines.

                      Performance ranks                                         Performance scores                                      Performance scores
                           On 46 datasets                                   On 37 datasets with random split                      On 9 datasets with domain-aware split
                      Sorted by the mean rank                                  Sorted by the mean score                                 Sorted by the mean score

                                                                                                         Mean
       MLP                                       5.5 ¬± 3.2      Excel‚àó                                                   TabR
      Excel‚àó                                 5.2 ¬± 2.9            MLP                                                   SAINT
      SAINT                              4.9 ¬± 2.9              SAINT                                                   Excel‚àó
      FT-T                              4.6 ¬± 2.9                FT-T                                                   TabR‚Ä°
       T2G                        4.1 ¬± 2.4                      TabR                                                   MNCA
      MNCA                       3.9 ¬± 2.6                        T2G                                                     MLP
       TabR                     3.9 ¬± 3.1                        MLP‚ÄÝ                                                    FT-T
      MLP‚ÄÝ                      3.8 ¬± 2.4                       MNCA                                                   MNCA‚Ä°
 LightGBM                    3.4 ¬± 2.0                       LightGBM                                                     T2G
  XGBoost                   3.3 ¬± 2.1                           TabR‚Ä°                                                 CatBoost
  CatBoost                 3.2 ¬± 2.0                          XGBoost                                                    MLP‚ÄÝ
   MNCA‚Ä°                   3.0 ¬± 2.2                             TabM                                                LightGBM
      TabR‚Ä°            2.9 ¬± 2.2                              CatBoost                                                   TabM
                                             MLP, GBDT
      TabM            2.8 ¬± 2.1
                                             Attention,
                                                               MNCA‚Ä°                                                  XGBoost
                                             Retrieval
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    1.7 ¬± 1.2
                                             MLP (Ours)
                                                              TabM‚ÄÝmini                                               TabM‚ÄÝmini

                  1         2      3         4        5              ‚àí2%      0%      2%      4%      6%        8%           ‚àí5%           0%            5%               10%
                                Rank (‚Üì)                                   Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)                       Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)



Figure 3: The task performance of tabular models on the 46 datasets from Table 1. (Left) The mean
and standard deviations of the performance ranks over all datasets summarize the head-to-head
comparison between the models on all datasets. (Middle & Right) The relative performance w.r.t. the
plain multilayer perceptron (MLP) allows reasoning about the scale and consistency of improvements
over this simple baseline. One dot of a jitter plot corresponds to the performance of a model on one
of the 46 datasets. The box plots visualize the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the jitter
plots. Outliers are clipped. The separation in random and domain-aware dataset splits is explained in
subsection 3.1. (‚àó Evaluated under the common protocol without data augmentations)



                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.3    E FFICIENCY

Now, we evaluate tabular models in terms of training and inference efficiency, which becomes
a serious reality check for some of the methods. We benchmark exactly those hyperparameter
configurations of models that are presented in Figure 3 (see subsection B.3 for the motivation).
TabM‚ÄÝ‚àó                ‚ÄÝ‚ôÝ‚àó                                                           ‚àó
        mini & TabMmini . Additionally, in this section, we mark with the asterisk ( ) the versions of
TabM enhanced with two efficiency-related plugins available out-of-the-box in PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019): the automatic mixed precision (AMP) and torch.compile (Ansel et al., 2024). The
purpose of those TabM variants is to showcase the potential of the modern hardware and software
for a powerful tabular DL model, and they should not be directly compared to other DL models.
However, the implementation simplicity of TabM plays an important role, because it facilitates the
seamless integration of the aforementioned PyTorch plugins.
Training time. We focus on training times on larger datasets, because on small datasets, all methods
become almost equally affordable, regardless of the formal relative difference. Nevertheless, in
Figure 10, we provide measurements on small datasets as well. The left side of Figure 4 reveals
that TabM offers practical training times. By contrast, the long training times of attention- and
retrieval-based models become one more limitation of these methods.
Inference throughput. The right side of Figure 4 tells essentially the same story as the left side. In
subsection B.3, we also report the inference throughput on GPU with large batch sizes.
Applicability to large datasets. In Table 2, we report metrics on two large datasets. As expected,
attention- and retrieval-based models struggle, yielding extremely long training times, or being simply
inapplicable without additional effort. See subsection D.4 for implementation details.
Parameter count. Most tabular networks are overall compact. This, in particular, applies to TabM,
because its size is by design comparable to MLP. We report model sizes in subsection B.3.
Summary. Simple MLPs are the fastest DL models, with TabM being the runner-up. The attention-
and retrieval-based models are significantly slower. Overall, MLP-like models, including TabM, form
a representative set of practical and accessible tabular DL baselines.

              Training time on datasets with > 100K objects                                Inference throughput with batch size 1
                            Device: GPU NVIDIA A100                                           Device: CPU Intel i7-7800X, single thread
    MLP                                               MLP, GBDT               MLP
                                                      Attention,
    MLP‚ÄÝ                                              Retrieval            XGBoost
  XGBoost                                             MLP (Ours)             MLP‚ÄÝ
                                                      Mean
  TabM‚ÄÝ‚àó
       mini                                                                  TabM
  TabM‚ÄÝmini                                                                TabM‚ÄÝmini
    TabM                                                                      TabR
     TabR                                                                     FT-T
   MNCA                                                                        T2G
   MNCA‚Ä°                                                                     TabR‚Ä°
    TabR‚Ä°                                                                   MNCA
      T2G                                                                   MNCA‚Ä°
     FT-T                                                                   SAINT
   SAINT
                      10s          ‚âà 2m       ‚âà 15m ‚âà 1h ‚âà 3h                          0    1000      2000      3000       4000      5000   6000
                                   Time (‚Üì)                                                          Objects per second (‚Üë)



Figure 4: Training times (left) and inference throughput (right) of the models from Figure 3. One dot
represents a measurement on one dataset. TabM‚ÄÝ‚àó                             ‚ÄÝ
                                                  mini is the optimized TabMmini (see subsection 4.3).


Table 2: RMSE (upper rows) and training times (lower rows) on two large datasets. The best values
are in bold. The meaning of model colors follows Figure 3.

                        #Objects          #Features      XGBoost        MLP        TabM‚ÄÝ‚ôÝ‚àó
                                                                                       mini          TabM‚ÄÝmini            FT-T            TabR
                                                           0.1601       0.1592         0.1583         0.1582             0.1594
  Maps Routing              6.5M              986                                                                                         OOM
                                                            28m          15m             2h            13.5h              45.5h
                                                           1.4234       1.4842         1.4090         1.4112             1.4409
  Weather                   13M               103                                                                                         OOM
                                                            10m          15m            1.3h            3.3h              13.5h



                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5                      A NALYSIS
5.1                        P ERFORMANCE AND TRAINING DYNAMICS OF THE INDIVIDUAL SUBMODELS

Recall that the prediction of TabM is defined as the mean prediction of its k implicit submodels that
share most of their weights. In this section, we take a closer look at these submodels.
For the next experiment, we intentionally simplify the setup as described in detail in subsection D.5.
Most importantly, all models have the same depth 3 and width 512, and are trained without early
stopping, i.e. the training goes beyond the optimal epochs. We use TabMmini from Figure 1 with
k = 32 denoted as TabMk=32                  k=1
                          mini . We use TabMmini (i.e. essentially one plain MLP) as a natural baseline
for the submodels of TabMmini , because each of the 32 submodels has the architecture of TabMk=1
                             k=32
                                                                                                   mini .

We visualize the training profiles on four diverse datasets (two classification and two regression
problems of different sizes) in Figure 5. As a reminder, the mean of the k individual losses is what
is explicitly optimized during the training of TabMmini , the loss of the collective mean prediction
corresponds to how TabMmini makes predictions on inference, and TabMk=1   mini is just a baseline.

                                         Churn                                             House                                     Otto                                    Microsoft
                            k=1            Train                                                                2
                 2.0        k = 32         Test                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                     0.4
 Loss (‚Üì)


                            k = 32[i]
                                                                                                                1
                 1.0                                                 0.2                                                                                  0.5


                 0.0                                                 0.0                                        0                                         0.0
                       0           100             200         300         0         100           200   300         0         100           200    300          0          100           200         300
                                          Epoch                                            Epoch                                     Epoch                                        Epoch

                            k=1                                                                                2.0                                        1.2
 Test Loss (‚Üì)


                 1.5        k = 32                                   0.5
                            k = 32[i]                                                                          1.5
                 1.0                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                     0.4                                       1.0
                       Training
                 0.5
                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                           0.4     0.3       0.2         0.1   0.0             0.4             0.2       0.0             0.6     0.4          0.2   0.0         0.8   0.6          0.4          0.2   0.0
                                        Train Loss                                     Train Loss                               Train Loss                                   Train Loss



Figure 5: The training profiles of TabMk=32                k=1
                                           mini and TabMmini as described in subsection 5.1. (Upper)
The training curves. k = 32[i] represents the mean individual loss over the 32 submodels. (Lower)
Same as the first row, but in the train-test coordinates: each dot represents some epoch from the first
row, and the training generally goes from left to right. This allows reasoning about overfitting by
comparing test loss values for a given train loss value.

In the upper row of Figure 5, the collective mean prediction of the submodels is superior to their
individual predictions in terms of both training and test losses. After the initial epochs, the training
loss of the baseline MLP is lower than that of the collective and individual predictions.
In the lower row of Figure 5, we see a stark contrast between the individual and collective performance
of the submodels. Compared to the baseline MLP, the submodels look overfitted individually, while
their collective prediction exhibits substantially better generalization. This result is strict evidence
of a non-trivial diversity of the submodels: without that, their collective test performance would be
similar to their individual test performance. Additionally, we report the performance of the Best
submodel of TabM across many datasets under the name TabM[B] in Figure 6. As such, individually,
even the best submodel of TabM is no better than a simple MLP.
Summary. TabM draws its power from the collective prediction of weak, but diverse submodels.

5.2                        S ELECTING SUBMODELS AFTER TRAINING

The design of TabM allows selecting only a subset of submodels after training based on any criteria,
simply by pruning extra prediction heads and the corresponding rows of the adapter matrices. To
showcase this mechanics, after the training, we Greedily construct a subset of TabM‚Äôs submodels with
the best collective performance on the validation set, and denote this ‚Äúpruned‚Äù TabM as TabM[G].
The performance reported in Figure 6 shows that TabM[G] is slightly behind the vanilla TabM. On
average over 46 datasets, the greedy submodel selection results in 8.8 ¬± 6.6 submodels out of the
initial k = 32, which can result in faster inference. See subsection D.6 for implementation details.


                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Relative improvement over MLP


                                                                                                          Relative improvement over MLP
                                     8%                                                                                                               d         n
                                                  MLP
                                                                                                                                           1.0%           64        1
                                                  MLP (Ours)                                                                                              128       2
                                     6%                                                                                                                   256       3
                                                  Mean                                                                                                    512

                                     4%                                                                                                    0.0%

                                     2%                                                                                                   ‚àí1.0%

                                     0%
                                                                                                                                          ‚àí2.0%
                                    ‚àí2%
                                            MLP           TabM         TabM[B]        TabM[G]                                                     1             2       4   8       16   32   64   128
                                          0.00 ¬± 0.0%    2.15 ¬± 2.8%   ‚àí0.06 ¬± 1.8%   2.02 ¬± 2.6%                                                                               k


Figure 6: The performance on the 46 datasets                                                             Figure 7: The average performance of TabM
from Table 1. TabM[B] and TabM[G] are de-                                                                with n layers of the width d across 17 datasets
scribed in subsection 5.1 and subsection 5.2.                                                            as a function of k.

5.3                                  H OW DOES THE PERFORMANCE OF TAB M DEPEND ON k?

To answer the question in the title, we consider TabM with n layers of the size d and different values
of k, and report the average performance over multiple datasets in Figure 7 (the implementation
details are provided in subsection D.7). The solid curves correspond to n = 3, and the dark green
curves correspond to d = 512. Our main observations are as follows. First, it seems that the ‚Äúlarger‚Äù
TabM is (i.e. when n and d increase), the more submodels it can accommodate effectively. For
example, note how the solid curves corresponding to different d diverge at k = 2 and k = 4. Second,
too high values of k can be detrimental. Perhaps, weight sharing limits the number of submodels that
can productively ‚Äúcoexist‚Äù in one network, despite the presence of non-shared adapters. Third, too
narrow (d = 64) or too shallow (n = 1) configurations of TabM can lead to suboptimal performance,
at least in the scope of middle-to-large datasets considered in this work.

5.4                                  PARAMETER - EFFICIENT ENSEMBLING REDUCES THE NUMBER OF DEAD NEURONS

Here, we show empirically that the design of TabM naturally leads to higher utilization of the
backbone‚Äôs weights. Even without technical definitions, this sounds intuitive, since TabM has to
implement k (diverse) computations using the amount of weights close to that of one MLP.
Let‚Äôs consider TabMmini as illustrated in Figure 1. By design, each of the shared neurons of TabMmini
is used k times per forward pass, where ‚Äúneuron‚Äù refers to the combination of the linear transformation
and the subsequent nonlinearity (e.g. ReLU). By contrast, in plain MLP (or in TabMmini with k = 1),
each neuron is used only once per forward pass. Thus, technically, a neuron in TabMmini has more
chances to be activated, which overall may lead to lower portion of dead neurons in TabMmini
compared to MLP (a dead neuron is a neuron that never activates, and thus has no impact on the
prediction). Using the experiment setup from subsection 5.1, we compute the portion of dead neurons
in TabMmini using its best validation checkpoint. On average across 46 datasets, for k = 1 and
k = 32, we get 0.29 ¬± 0.17 and 0.14 ¬± 0.09 portion of dead neurons, respectively, which is in line
with the described intuition. Technically, on a given dataset, this metric is computed as the percentage
of neurons that never activate on a fixed set of 2048 training objects.

6                                   C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
In this work, we have demonstrated that tabular multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) greatly benefit from
parameter-efficient ensembling. Using this insight, we have developed TabM ‚Äî a simple MLP-
based model with state-of-the-art performance. In a large-scale comparison with many tabular DL
models, we have demonstrated that TabM is ready to serve as a new powerful and efficient tabular DL
baseline. Along the way, we highlighted the important technical details behind TabM and discussed
the individual performance of the implicit submodels underlying TabM.
One idea for future work is to bring the power of (parameter-)efficient ensembles to other, non-tabular,
domains with optimization-related challenges and, ideally, lightweight base models. Another idea is
to evaluate TabM for uncertainty estimation and out-of-distribution (OOD) detection on tabular data,
which is inspired by works like Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017).


                                                                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Reproducibility statement. The code is provided in the following repository: link. It contains the
implementation of TabM, hyperparameter tuning scripts, evaluation scripts, configuration files with
hyperparameters (the TOML files in the exp/ directory), and the report files with the main metrics
(the JSON files in the exp/ directory). In the paper, the model is described in section 3, and the
implementation details are provided in Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna: A
  next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In KDD, 2019. 18

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. In ICLR, 2023. 3

Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky,
  Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berard, Evgeni Burovski, Geeta Chauhan, Anjali Chourdia, Will
  Constable, Alban Desmaison, Zachary DeVito, Elias Ellison, Will Feng, Jiong Gong, Michael
  Gschwind, Brian Hirsh, Sherlock Huang, Kshiteej Kalambarkar, Laurent Kirsch, Michael Lazos,
  Mario Lezcano, Yanbo Liang, Jason Liang, Yinghai Lu, C. K. Luk, Bert Maher, Yunjie Pan,
  Christian Puhrsch, Matthias Reso, Mark Saroufim, Marcos Yukio Siraichi, Helen Suk, Shunting
  Zhang, Michael Suo, Phil Tillet, Xu Zhao, Eikan Wang, Keren Zhou, Richard Zou, Xiaodong
  Wang, Ajit Mathews, William Wen, Gregory Chanan, Peng Wu, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch 2:
  Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compilation.
  In ASPLOS, 2024. 8

Javier AntoraÃÅn, James Urquhart Allingham, and JoseÃÅ Miguel HernaÃÅndez-Lobato. Depth uncertainty
  in neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2020. 3

Sercan O. Arik and Tomas Pfister. TabNet: Attentive interpretable tabular learning. arXiv,
  1908.07442v5, 2020. 2

Sarkhan Badirli, Xuanqing Liu, Zhengming Xing, Avradeep Bhowmik, Khoa Doan, and Sathiya S.
  Keerthi. Gradient boosting neural networks: GrowNet. arXiv, 2002.07971v2, 2020. 2

Dara Bahri, Heinrich Jiang, Yi Tay, and Donald Metzler. SCARF: Self-supervised contrastive learning
  using random feature corruption. In ICLR, 2021. 2

Jintai Chen, Jiahuan Yan, Danny Ziyi Chen, and Jian Wu. ExcelFormer: A neural network surpassing
   gbdts on tabular data. arXiv, 2301.02819v1, 2023a. 1, 6, 20, 24, 25

Kuan-Yu Chen, Ping-Han Chiang, Hsin-Rung Chou, Ting-Wei Chen, and Tien-Hao Chang. Trompt:
  Towards a better deep neural network for tabular data. In ICML, 2023b. 1, 2, 15

Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In SIGKDD, 2016. 1,
  2, 7

Stanislav Fort, Huiyi Hu, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Deep ensembles: A loss landscape perspec-
  tive. arXiv, 1912.02757v2, 2020. 2

Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P. Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. In NeurIPS, 2018. 3

Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning
  models for tabular data. In NeurIPS, 2021. 2, 4, 6, 15, 23, 25

Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, and Artem Babenko. On embeddings for numerical features in
  tabular deep learning. In NeurIPS, 2022. 2, 5, 6, 7, 14, 15, 20, 21, 23

Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Nikolay Kartashev, Daniil Shlenskii, Akim Kotelnikov, and Artem
  Babenko. TabR: Tabular deep learning meets nearest neighbors. In ICLR, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 6, 17, 18,
  19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Leo Grinsztajn, Edouard Oyallon, and Gael Varoquaux. Why do tree-based models still outperform
  deep learning on typical tabular data? In NeurIPS, the ‚ÄùDatasets and Benchmarks‚Äù track, 2022. 3,
  17, 18, 23, 24, 29
Marton Havasi, Rodolphe Jenatton, Stanislav Fort, Jeremiah Zhe Liu, Jasper Snoek, Balaji Lakshmi-
 narayanan, Andrew Mingbo Dai, and Dustin Tran. Training independent subnetworks for robust
 prediction. In ICLR, 2021. 3, 14
Noah Hollmann, Samuel MuÃàller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. TabPFN: A transformer
  that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. In ICLR, 2023. 1, 2, 15
David HolzmuÃàller, LeÃÅo Grinsztajn, and Ingo Steinwart. Better by default: Strong pre-tuned mlps and
  boosted trees on tabular data. arXiv, 2407.04491v1, 2024. 2
Alan Jeffares, Tennison Liu, Jonathan CrabbeÃÅ, Fergus Imrie, and Mihaela van der Schaar. TANGOS:
  Regularizing tabular neural networks through gradient orthogonalization and specialization. In
  ICLR, 2023a. 2
Alan Jeffares, Tennison Liu, Jonathan CrabbeÃÅ, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Joint training of deep
  ensembles fails due to learner collusion. In NeurIPS, 2023b. 2
Arlind Kadra, Marius Lindauer, Frank Hutter, and Josif Grabocka. Well-tuned simple nets excel on
  tabular datasets. In NeurIPS, 2021. 2
Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan
  Liu. LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30:3146‚Äì3154, 2017. 1, 2, 7
Myung Jun Kim, LeÃÅo Grinsztajn, and GaeÃàl Varoquaux. CARTE: pretraining and transfer for tabular
 learning. arXiv, abs/2402.16785v1, 2024. 16
GuÃànter Klambauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Andreas Mayr, and Sepp Hochreiter. Self-normalizing
  neural networks. In NIPS, 2017. 2, 15
Jannik Kossen, Neil Band, Clare Lyle, Aidan N. Gomez, Tom Rainforth, and Yarin Gal. Self-attention
  between datapoints: Going beyond individual input-output pairs in deep learning. In NeurIPS,
  2021. 2
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In NeurIPS, 2017. 3, 10, 14
Olivier Laurent, Adrien Lafage, Enzo Tartaglione, Geoffrey Daniel, Jean-Marc Martinez, Andrei
  Bursuc, and Gianni Franchi. Packed ensembles for efficient uncertainty estimation. In ICLR, 2023.
  4
Stefan Lee, Senthil Purushwalkam, Michael Cogswell, David J. Crandall, and Dhruv Batra. Why M
  heads are better than one: Training a diverse ensemble of deep networks. arXiv, abs/1511.06314,
  2015. 3, 14
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2019. 18
Sascha Marton, Stefan LuÃàdtke, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. GRANDE: Gradient-
  based decision tree ensembles for tabular data. In ICLR, 2024. 2
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas KoÃàpf, Ed-
 ward Z. Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit
  Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS, 2019. 8
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825‚Äì2830, 2011. 18


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural oblivious decision ensembles for deep
  learning on tabular data. In ICLR, 2020. 2
Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey
  Gulin. CatBoost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. In NeurIPS, 2018. 1, 2, 7
Tao Qin and Tie-Yan Liu. Introducing LETOR 4.0 datasets. arXiv, 1306.2597v1, 2013. 3
Ivan Rubachev, Artem Alekberov, Yury Gorishniy, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting pretraining
  objectives for tabular deep learning. arXiv, 2207.03208v1, 2022. 2
Ivan Rubachev, Nikolay Kartashev, Yury Gorishniy, and Artem Babenko. TabReD: Analyzing Pitfalls
  and Filling the Gaps in Tabular Deep Learning Benchmarks. arXiv, 2406.19380v4, 2024. 1, 3, 17,
  18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 25, 36
Gowthami Somepalli, Micah Goldblum, Avi Schwarzschild, C. Bayan Bruss, and Tom Goldstein.
  SAINT: improved neural networks for tabular data via row attention and contrastive pre-training.
  arXiv, 2106.01342v1, 2021. 2, 6, 25
Weiping Song, Chence Shi, Zhiping Xiao, Zhijian Duan, Yewen Xu, Ming Zhang, and Jian Tang.
 Autoint: Automatic feature interaction learning via self-attentive neural networks. In CIKM, 2019.
 2, 15, 26
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E. Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 15(1):1929‚Äì1958, 2014. 5
Ilya O. Tolstikhin, Neil Houlsby, Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
   Unterthiner, Jessica Yung, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Jakob Uszkoreit, Mario Lucic, and
   Alexey Dosovitskiy. Mlp-mixer: An all-mlp architecture for vision. In NeurIPS, 2021. 15
Mehmet Ozgur Turkoglu, Alexander Becker, HuÃàseyin Anil GuÃànduÃàz, Mina Rezaei, Bernd Bischl,
 Rodrigo Caye Daudt, Stefano D‚ÄôAronco, Jan D. Wegner, and Konrad Schindler. Film-ensemble:
 Probabilistic deep learning via feature-wise linear modulation. In NeurIPS 2022, 2022. 3, 14, 15
Ruoxi Wang, Rakesh Shivanna, Derek Z. Cheng, Sagar Jain, Dong Lin, Lichan Hong, and Ed H.
  Chi. Dcn v2: Improved deep & cross network and practical lessons for web-scale learning to rank
  systems. arXiv, 2008.13535v2, 2020. 2, 15
Yeming Wen, Dustin Tran, and Jimmy Ba. Batchensemble: an alternative approach to efficient
  ensemble and lifelong learning. In ICLR, 2020. 2, 3, 4, 5, 14, 15
Jiahuan Yan, Jintai Chen, Yixuan Wu, Danny Z. Chen, and Jian Wu. T2G-FORMER: organizing
   tabular features into relation graphs promotes heterogeneous feature interaction. In AAAI, 2023. 2,
   6, 23, 24
Han-Jia Ye, Huai-Hong Yin, and De-Chuan Zhan. Modern neighborhood components analysis: A
  deep tabular baseline two decades later. arXiv, 2407.03257v1, 2024. 2, 7, 20, 23
Shaofeng Zhang, Meng Liu, and Junchi Yan. The diversified ensemble neural network. In NeurIPS,
  2020. 3


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION ON TAB M
A.1   M OTIVATION

Why BatchEnsemble? Among relatively ease-to-use ‚Äúefficient ensembling‚Äù methods, beyond
BatchEnsemble, there are examples such as dropout ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017),
naive multi-head architectures, TreeNet (Lee et al., 2015). However, in the literature, they were
consistently outperformed by more advanced methods, including BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020),
MIMO (Havasi et al., 2021), FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022).
Among advanced methods, BatchEnsemble seems to be one of the simplest and most flexible options.
For example, FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022) requires normalization layers to be presented in
the original architecture, which is not always the case for tabular MLPs. MIMO (Havasi et al., 2021),
in turn, imposes additional limitations compared to BatchEnsemble. First, it requires concatenating
(not stacking, as with BatchEnsemble) all k input representations, which increases the input size of
the first linear layer. With the relatively high number of submodels k = 32 used in our paper, this
can be an issue on datasets with a large number of features, especially when feature embeddings
(Gorishniy et al., 2022) are used. For example, for k = 32, the number of features m = 1000, and the
feature embedding size l = 32, the input size approaches one million resulting in an extremely large
first linear layer of MLP. Second, with BatchEnsemble, it is easy to explicitly materialize, analyze,
and prune individual submodels. By contrast, in MIMO, all submodels are implicitly entangled
within one MLP, and there is no easy way to access individual submodels.
Why MLPs? Despite the applicability of BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020) to almost any architecture,
we focus specifically on MLPs. The key reason is efficiency. First, to achieve high performance,
throughout the paper, we use the relatively large number of submodels k = 32. However, the desired
less-than-√ók runtime overhead of BatchEnsemble typically happens only when the original model
underutilizes the power of parallel computations of a given hardware. This will not be the case for
attention-based models on datasets with a large number of features, as well as for retrieval-based
models on datasets with a large number of objects. Second, as we show in subsection 4.3, attention-
and retrieval-based models are already slow as-is. By contrast, MLPs are exceptionally efficient, to
the extent that slowing them down even by an order of magnitude will still result in practical models.
Also, generally speaking, the definition of MLP suggested in subsection 3.3 and used in TabM is not
special, and more advanced MLP-like backbones can be used. However, in preliminary experiments,
we did not observe the benefits of more advanced backbones. Perhaps, small technical differences
between backbones become less impactful in the context of parameter-efficient ensembling, at least
in the scope of middle-to-large-sized datasets.

A.2   TAB M WITH FEATURE EMBEDDINGS

Notation. In this paper, we use ‚ÄÝ to mark TabM variants with the piecewise-linear embeddings (e.g.
TabM‚ÄÝmini , TabM‚ÄÝ , etc.).
Implementation details. In fact, there are no changes in the usage of feature embeddings compared
to plain MLPs: feature embeddings are applied, and the result is flattened, before being passed to
the backbones in terms of Figure 1. For example, if a dataset has m continuous features and all of
them are embedded, the very first adapter R will have the shape k √ó mde , where de is the feature
embedding size. For TabM‚ÄÝmini and TabM‚ÄÝ , we initialize the first multiplicative adapter R of the first
linear layer from the standard normal distribution N (0, 1). The remaining details are best understood
from the source code.
Efficiency. When feature embeddings are used, the simplified batching strategy from subsec-
tion 3.4 allows for more efficient implementation, when the feature embeddings are applied to the
original batch size objects, and the result is simply cloned k times (compared to embedding
k √ó batch size objects with the original batching strategy).

A.3   H YPERPARAMETERS

We noticed that the typical optimal learning rate for TabM is higher than for MLP (note that, on
each dataset, the batch size is the same for all DL models). We hypothesize that the reason is the


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


effectively larger batch size for TabM because of how the training batches are constructed (even if
the simplified batching strategy from subsection 3.4 is used).

A.4    L IMITATIONS AND PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS

TabM does not introduce any new limitations compared to BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, we note the following:
    ‚Ä¢ The MLP backbone used in TabM is one of the simplest possible, and generally, more advanced
      backbones can be used. That said, some backbones may require additional care when used in
      TabM. For example, we did not explore backbones with normalization layers. For such layers, it
      is possible to allocate non-shared trainable affine transformations for each implicit submodel
      by adding one multiplicative and one additive adapter after the normalization layer (i.e. like in
      FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022)). Additional experiments are required to find the best
      strategy.
    ‚Ä¢ For ensemble-like models, such as TabM, the notion of ‚Äúthe final object embedding‚Äú changes:
      now, it is not a single vector, but a set of k vectors. If exactly one object embedding is required,
      then additional experiments may be needed to find the best way to combine k embeddings into
      one. The presence of multiple object embeddings can also be important for scenarios when
      TabM is used for solving more than one task, in particular when it is pretrained as a generic
      feature extractor and then reused for other tasks. The main practical guideline is that the k
      prediction branches should not interact with each other (e.g. through attention, pooling, etc.)
      and should always be trained separately.

B     E XTENDED RESULTS
This section complements section 4.

B.1    A DDITIONAL BASELINES

In addition to the models from subsection 4.1, we consider the following baselines:
    ‚Ä¢ MLP-PLR Gorishniy et al. (2022), that is, an MLP with periodic embeddings.
    ‚Ä¢ ResNet (Gorishniy et al., 2021)
    ‚Ä¢ SNN (Klambauer et al., 2017)
    ‚Ä¢ DCNv2 (Wang et al., 2020)
    ‚Ä¢ AutoInt (Song et al., 2019)
    ‚Ä¢ MLP-Mixer is our adaptation of Tolstikhin et al. (2021) for tabular data.
    ‚Ä¢ Trompt (Chen et al., 2023b) (our reimplementation, since there is no official implementation)
We also evaluated TabPFN (Hollmann et al., 2023), where possible. The results for this model are
available only in Appendix E because this model is by design not applicable to regression tasks,
which is a considerable number of our datasets. Overall, TabPFN specializes in small datasets. In
line with that, the performance of TabPFN on our benchmark was not competitive.

B.2    TASK PERFORMANCE

Figure 8 is a different version of Figure 3 with additional baselines. Overall, none of the additional
baselines affect our main story.
Figure 9 is the critical difference diagram (CDD) computed over exactly the same results that were
used for building Figure 3.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Performance ranks                                             Performance scores                                         Performance scores
                  On 37 datasets with random split                                 On 37 datasets with random split                        On 9 datasets with domain-aware split
                     Sorted by the mean rank                                          Sorted by the mean score                                   Sorted by the mean score

                                                                                                                 Mean
       DCN2                                       6.8 ¬± 4.1            DCN2                                                        TabR
         SNN                                    6.5 ¬± 4.3                SNN                                                     SAINT
         MLP                               5.9 ¬± 3.8                  AutoInt                                                     DCN2
      AutoInt                             5.6 ¬± 4.1                    Excel‚àó                                                       SNN
      ResNet                           5.5 ¬± 3.5                         MLP                                                     AutoInt
       Excel‚àó                         5.3 ¬± 3.4                       ResNet                                                 MLP-Mixer
  MLP-Mixer                      4.9 ¬± 3.3                            SAINT                                                       Excel‚àó
      SAINT                      4.9 ¬± 3.6                             FT-T                                                       TabR‚Ä°
       FT-T                      4.8 ¬± 3.7                              TabR                                                     MNCA
      Trompt                  4.4 ¬± 3.6                           MLP-Mixer                                                      Trompt
         T2G                 4.3 ¬± 2.9                                Trompt                                                        MLP
        TabR              3.8 ¬± 3.5                                      T2G                                                     ResNet
        MLP‚ÄÝ             3.6 ¬± 2.3                                      MLP‚ÄÝ                                                      FT-T
      MNCA            3.6 ¬± 2.7                                         MLP‚Ä°                                                     MNCA‚Ä°
        MLP‚Ä°         3.5 ¬± 2.4                                        MNCA                                                          T2G
   LightGBM         3.4 ¬± 2.2                                      LightGBM                                                    CatBoost
    XGBoost         3.4 ¬± 2.3                                          TabR‚Ä°                                                       MLP‚Ä°
    CatBoost      3.0 ¬± 2.0                                         XGBoost                                                        MLP‚ÄÝ
        TabM     2.8 ¬± 2.3                                              TabM                                                  LightGBM
      MNCA‚Ä°      2.8 ¬± 2.5                     MLP, GBDT
                                                                    CatBoost                                                       TabM
                                               Attention,
       TabR‚Ä°    2.6 ¬± 2.4                      Retrieval              MNCA‚Ä°                                                    XGBoost
                                               MLP (Ours)
    TabM‚ÄÝmini      1.6 ¬± 1.2                                        TabM‚ÄÝmini                                                  TabM‚ÄÝmini

                     2                4                6                    ‚àí2%      0%      2%      4%      6%         8%             ‚àí5%           0%           5%               10%
                                Rank (‚Üì)                                          Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)                          Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)



Figure 8: An extended comparison of tabular models as in Figure 3. Note that the ranks (left) are
computed only over the 37 datasets with random splits because ResNet, AutoInt, and MLP-Mixer
were evaluated only on one 1 out of 9 datasets with domain-aware splits.

                                                              4            6                8               10                12



                                      TabM‚ÄÝmini                                                                                        MLP
                                         TabM                                                                                          Excel‚àó
                                        TabM‚ôÝ                                                                                          SAINT
                                         TabR‚Ä°                                                                                         FT-T
                                      CatBoost                                                                                         T2G
                                        MNCA‚Ä°                                                                                          TabR
                                      XGBoost                                                                                          MNCA
                                     LightGBM                                                                                          MLP‚ÄÝ


Figure 9: Critical difference diagram. The computation method is taken from the Kim et al. (2024).


B.3    E FFICIENCY

This section complements subsection 4.3.
Additional results.
Figure 10 complements Figure 4 by providing the training times on smaller datasets and the inference
throughput on GPU with large batch sizes.
Table 3 provide the number of trainable parameters for some of the models from Figure 3.
Motivation for the benchmark setup. Comparing models under all possible kinds of budgets (task
performance, the number of parameters, training time, etc.) on all possible hardware (GPU, CPU,
etc.) with all possible batch sizes is rather infeasible. As such, we set a narrow goal of providing a
high-level intuition on the efficiency in a transparent setting. Thus, benchmarking the transparently
obtained tuned hyperparameter configurations works well for our goal. Yet, this choice also has
a limitation: the hyperparameter tuning process is not aware of the efficiency budget, so it can
prefer much heavier configurations even if they lead to tiny performance improvements, which will
negatively affect efficiency without a good reason. Overall, we hope that the large number of datasets
compensates for potentially imperfect per-dataset measurements.


                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Motivation for the two setups for measuring inference throughput.
    ‚Ä¢ The setup on the right side of Figure 4 simulates the online per-object predictions.
    ‚Ä¢ The setup on the right side of Figure 10 simulates the offline batched computations.


              Training time on datasets with < 100K objects                           Inference throughput with maximum batch size
                            Device: GPU NVIDIA A100                                                Device: GPU NVIDIA 2080Ti
  XGBoost                                             MLP, GBDT               MLP
                                                      Attention,
      MLP                                             Retrieval             MLP‚ÄÝ
     MLP‚ÄÝ                                             MLP (Ours)
                                                                          XGBoost
                                                      Mean
    MNCA                                                                     TabM
    MNCA‚Ä°                                                                  MNCA
     TabM                                                                  MNCA‚Ä°
  TabM‚ÄÝmini                                                                 FT-T
     TabR                                                                 TabM‚ÄÝmini
     TabR‚Ä°                                                                   TabR
     FT-T                                                                   TabR‚Ä°
      T2G                                                                    T2G
    SAINT                                                                  SAINT

                      10s          ‚âà 2m       ‚âà 15m ‚âà 1h ‚âà 3h                     103        104       105         106         107   108
                                   Time (‚Üì)                                                         Objects per second (‚Üë)



Figure 10: (Left) Training time on datasets with less than 100K objects. (Right) Inference throughput
on GPU with maximum possible batch size (i.e. the batch size depends on a model).



Table 3: Mean number of parameters with std. dev. for 7 different tuned models across all 46 datasets.

      TabM                  MLP                FT-T                T2G         TabR            ModernNCA                     SAINT
 1.4M ¬± 1.3M        1.0M ¬± 1.0M           1.2M ¬± 1.2M       2.1M ¬± 1.6M   858K ¬± 1.4M         1.0M ¬± 1.1M           175.4M ¬± 565.4M


C     DATASETS

In total, we use 46 datasets:
  1. 38 datasets are taken from Gorishniy et al. (2024), which includes:
      (a) 28 datasets from Grinsztajn et al. (2022). See the original paper for the precise dataset
          information.
      (b) 10 datasets from other sources. Their properties are provided in Table 4.
  2. 8 datasets from the TabReD benchmark (Rubachev et al., 2024). Their properties are provided
     in Table 5.
In fact, the aforementioned 38 datasets from Gorishniy et al. (2024) is only a subset of the datasets
used in Gorishniy et al. (2024). Namely, we did not include the following of the remaining datasets:
    ‚Ä¢ The datasets that, according to Rubachev et al. (2024), have incorrect splits
      and/or label leakage, including:            Bike Sharing Demand, compass, electricity,
      SGEMM GPU kernel performance, sulfur, visualizing soil, and the weather forecast-
      ing dataset (it is replaced by the correct weather forecasting dataset from TabReD (Rubachev
      et al., 2024)).
    ‚Ä¢ rl from (Grinsztajn et al., 2022). We observed abnormal results on these datasets. This is an
      anonymous dataset, which made the investigation impossible, so we removed this dataset to
      avoid confusion.
    ‚Ä¢ yprop 4 1 from (Grinsztajn et al., 2022). Strictly speaking, this dataset was omitted due to a
      mistake on our side. For future work, we note that the typical performance gaps on this dataset
      have low absolute values in terms of RMSE. Perhaps, R2 may be a more appropriate metric for
      this dataset.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Properties of those datasets from Gorishniy et al. (2024) that are not part of Grinsztajn et al.
(2022) or TabReD Rubachev et al. (2024). ‚Äú# Num‚Äù, ‚Äú# Bin‚Äù, and ‚Äú# Cat‚Äù denote the number of
numerical, binary, and categorical features, respectively. The table is taken from (Gorishniy et al.,
2024).

      Name                 # Train # Validation # Test # Num # Bin # Cat Task type Batch size
      Churn Modelling     6 400        1 600      2 000     7     3     1    Binclass 128
      California Housing 13 209        3 303      4 128     8     0     0   Regression 256
      House 16H           14 581       3 646      4 557    16     0     0   Regression 256
      Adult               26 048       6 513     16 281     6     1     8    Binclass 256
      Diamond             34 521       8 631     10 788     6     0     3   Regression 512
      Otto Group Products 39 601       9 901     12 376    93     0     0   Multiclass 512
      Higgs Small         62 751     15 688      19 610    28     0     0    Binclass 512
      Black Friday        106 764     26 692     33 365     4     1     4   Regression 512
      Covertype           371 847     92 962    116 203    10     4     1   Multiclass 1024
      Microsoft           723 412    235 259    241 521   131     5     0   Regression 1024

Table 5: Properties of the datasets from the TabReD benchmark (Rubachev et al., 2024). ‚Äú# Num‚Äù,
‚Äú# Bin‚Äù, and ‚Äú# Cat‚Äù denote the number of numerical, binary, and categorical features, respectively.

       Name                # Train # Validation # Test # Num # Bin # Cat Task type Batch size
       Sberbank Housing 18 847         4 827     4 647    365   17    10    Regression 256
       Ecom Offers        109 341     24 261    26 455    113    6     0     Binclass 1024
       Maps Routing       160 019     59 975    59 951    984    0     2    Regression 1024
       Homesite Insurance 224 320     20 138    16 295    253   23    23     Binclass 1024
       Cooking Time       227 087     51 251    41 648    186    3     3    Regression 1024
       Homecredit Default 267 645     58 018    56 001    612    2    82     Binclass 1024
       Delivery ETA       279 415     34 174    36 927    221    1     1    Regression 1024
       Weather            340 596     42 359    40 840    100    3     0    Regression 1024



D     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

D.1    H ARDWARE

Most of the experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. In rare exceptions, we used
a machine with a single NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPU and Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7800X CPU @ 3.50GHz.

D.2    E XPERIMENT SETUP

We mostly follow the experiment setup from Gorishniy et al. (2024). As such, some of the text below
is copied from (Gorishniy et al., 2024).
Data preprocessing. For each dataset, for all DL-based solutions, the same preprocessing was used
for fair comparison. For numerical features, by default, we used a slightly modified version of the
quantile normalization from the Scikit-learn package (Pedregosa et al., 2011) (see the source code),
with rare exceptions when it turned out to be detrimental (for such datasets, we used the standard
normalization or no normalization). For categorical features, we used one-hot encoding. Binary
features (i.e. the ones that take only two distinct values) are mapped to {0, 1} without any further
preprocessing. We completely follow Rubachev et al. (2024) on Table 5 datasets.
Training neural networks. For DL-based algorithms, we minimize cross-entropy for classification
problems and mean squared error for regression problems. We use the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov
& Hutter, 2019). We do not apply learning rate schedules. We do not use data augmentations. We
apply global gradient clipping to 1.0. For each dataset, we used a predefined dataset-specific batch
size. We continue training until there are patience consecutive epochs without improvements on
the validation set; we set patience = 16 for the DL models.
Hyperparameter tuning. In most cases, hyperparameter tuning is performed with the TPE sampler
(typically, 50-100 iterations) from the Optuna package (Akiba et al., 2019). Hyperparameter tuning


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


spaces for most models are provided in individual sections below (example for TabM: subsection D.9).
We follow Rubachev et al. (2024) and use 25 iterations on some datasets from Table 5.
Evaluation. On a given dataset, for a given model, the tuned hyperparameters are evaluated under
multiple (in most cases, 15) random seeds. The mean test metric and its standard deviation over these
random seeds are then used to compare algorithms as described in subsection D.3.

D.3   M ETRICS

We use Root Mean Squared Error for regression tasks, ROC-AUC for classification datasets from
Table 5 (following Rubachev et al. (2024)), and accuracy for the rest of datasets (following Gorishniy
et al. (2024)). We also tried computing ROC-AUC for all classification datasets, but did not observe
any significant changes (see Figure 11), so we stuck to prior work. By default, the mean test score
and its standard deviation are obtained by training a given model with tuned hyperparameters from
scratch on a given dataset under 15 different random seeds.
How we compute ranks. Our method of computing ranks used in Figure 3 does not count small
improvements as wins, hence the reduced range of ranks compared to other studies. Intuitively, our
ranks can be considered as ‚Äútiers‚Äù.
Recall that, on a given dataset, the performance of a given model A is expressed with the mean Amean
and the standard deviation Astd of the performance score computed after the evaluation under multiple
random seeds. Assuming the higher score the better, we define that the model A is better than the
model B if: Amean ‚àí Astd > Bmean . In other words, a model is considered better if it has a better mean
score and the margin is larger than the standard deviation.
On a given dataset, when there are many models, we sort them in descending score order. Starting
from the best model (with a rank equal to 1) we iterate over models and assign the rank 1 to all models
that are no worse than the best model according to the above rule. The first model in descending
order that is worse than the best model is assigned rank 2 and becomes the new reference model. We
continue the process until all models are ranked. Ranks are computed independently for each dataset.

D.4   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 4.3

Applicability to large datasets. The two datasets used in Table 2 are the full versions of the ‚ÄúWeather‚Äù
and ‚ÄúMaps Routing‚Äù datasets from the TabReD benchmark Rubachev et al. (2024). Their smaller
versions with subsampled training set were already included in Table 1 and were used when building
Figure 3. The validation and test sets are the same for the small and large versions of these datasets,
so the task metrics are comparable between the two versions. When running models on the large
versions of the datasets, we reused the hyperparameters tuned for their small versions. Thus, this
experiment can be seen as a quick assessment of the applicability of several tabular DL to large
datasets without a strong focus on the task performance. All models, except for FT-Transformer,
were evaluated under 3 random seeds. FT-Transformer was evaluated under 1 random seed.

D.5   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 5.1

Experiment setup. This paragraph complements the description of the experiment setup in subsec-
tion 5.1. Namely, in addition to what is mentioned in the main text:
   ‚Ä¢ Dropout and weight decay are turned off.
   ‚Ä¢ To get representative training profiles for all models, the learning rates are tuned
     separately for TabMk=1
                          mini and TabMmini
                                           k=32
                                                on validation sets using the usual metrics
     (i.e. RMSE or accuracy) as the guidance. The grid for learning rate tuning was:
     numpy.logspace(numpy.log10(1e-5), numpy.log10(5e-3), num=25).

D.6   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 5.2

TabM[G]. Here, we clarify the implementation details for TabM[G] described in subsection 5.2.
TabM[G] is obtained from a trained TabM by greedily selecting submodels from TabM starting from
the best one and stopping when two conditions are simultaneously true for the first time: (1) adding


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Performance ranks                                         Performance scores                                        Performance scores
                            On 44 datasets                                   On 35 datasets with random split                       On 9 datasets with domain-aware split
                       Sorted by the mean rank                                  Sorted by the mean score                                  Sorted by the mean score

                                                                                                          Mean
        DCN2                                    7.2 ¬± 4.2        DCN2                                                       TabR
          SNN                                 6.9 ¬± 4.6            SNN                                                    SAINT
       AutoInt                           6.1 ¬± 4.5              AutoInt                                                    DCN2
          MLP                            6.1 ¬± 3.7                 MLP                                                       SNN
       ResNet                          5.9 ¬± 3.9                 Excel‚àó                                                   AutoInt
        Excel‚àó                     5.5 ¬± 3.3                    ResNet                                                MLP-Mixer
   MLP-Mixer                       5.5 ¬± 4.3                    SAINT                                                      Excel‚àó
       SAINT                    5.2 ¬± 3.4                        FT-T                                                      TabR‚Ä°
        FT-T                   5.0 ¬± 3.6                          TabR                                                    MNCA
       Trompt                 4.8 ¬± 4.2                     MLP-Mixer                                                     Trompt
          T2G                4.5 ¬± 2.9                             T2G                                                       MLP
         TabR            4.2 ¬± 3.6                              Trompt                                                    ResNet
         MLP‚Ä°            4.1 ¬± 3.7                                MLP‚ÄÝ                                                     FT-T
       MNCA              4.1 ¬± 3.0                                MLP‚Ä°                                                    MNCA‚Ä°
         MLP‚ÄÝ          3.8 ¬± 2.5                                MNCA                                                         T2G
     XGBoost       3.5 ¬± 2.4                                     TabR‚Ä°                                                  CatBoost
    LightGBM       3.4 ¬± 2.3                                 LightGBM                                                       MLP‚Ä°
       MNCA‚Ä°      3.2 ¬± 2.9                                   XGBoost                                                       MLP‚ÄÝ
     CatBoost    3.1 ¬± 2.1                                        TabM                                                 LightGBM
                                             MLP, GBDT
         TabM    3.0 ¬± 2.9                                    CatBoost                                                      TabM
                                             Attention,
        TabR‚Ä°    3.0 ¬± 2.7                   Retrieval          MNCA‚Ä°                                                   XGBoost
                                             MLP (Ours)
     TabM‚ÄÝmini      2.0 ¬± 2.4                                 TabM‚ÄÝmini                                                 TabM‚ÄÝmini

                   2               4            6                     ‚àí2%      0%      2%      4%      6%        8%             ‚àí5%           0%           5%               10%
                                Rank (‚Üì)                                    Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)                         Relative improvement over MLP (‚Üë)



Figure 11: Same as Figure 3, but ROC-AUC is used as the metric for all classification datasets. The
two multiclass datasets presented in our benchmark are not taken into account.



any new submodel does not improve the validation metric of the collective prediction; (2) the current
validation metric is already better than that of the initial model with all k submodels. To clarify,
during the greedy selection, the i-th submodel is considered to be better than the j-th submodel if
adding the i-th submodel to the aggregated prediction leads to better validation metrics (i.e. it is not
the same as adding the submodel in the order of their individual validation metrics).


D.7    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 5.3

Figure 7 shows the mean percentage improvements (see subsection D.3) over MLP across 17 datasets:
all datasets except for Covertype from Table 4, and all datasets from TabReD (Rubachev et al., 2024).
We have used the dropout rate 0.1 and tuned the learning rate separately for each value of k. The
score on each dataset is averaged over 5 seeds.


D.8    N ON - LINEAR EMBEDDINGS FOR CONTINUOUS FEATURES

Notation. We use the notation based on ‚ÄÝ and ‚Ä° only for brevity. Any other unambiguous notation
can be used in future work.
Updated piecewise-linear embeddings. We use a slightly different implementation of the piecewise-
linear embeddings compared to Gorishniy et al. (2022). Architecture-wise, our implementation
corresponds to the ‚ÄúQ-L‚Äù and ‚ÄúT-L‚Äù variations from Table 2 in Gorishniy et al. (2022) (we use the
quantile-based bins for simplicity). In practice, our implementation is significantly faster and uses a
different parametrization and initialization. See the source code for details.
Other models. Since it is not feasible to test all combinations of backbones and embeddings, for
baselines, we stick to the embeddings used in the original papers (applies to TabR (Gorishniy et al.,
2024), ExcelFormer (Chen et al., 2023a) and ModernNCA (Ye et al., 2024)). For all models with
feature embeddings (including TabM, MLP, TabR, ModernNCA, ExcelFormer), the embeddings-
related details are commented in the corresponding sections below.


                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.9    TAB M

Feature embeddings. TabM‚ÄÝmini and TabM‚ÄÝ are the versions of TabM with non-linear feature
embeddings. TabM‚ÄÝmini and TabM‚ÄÝ use the updated piecewise-linear feature embeddings mentioned
in subsection D.8.
Table 6 provides the hyperparameter tuning spaces for TabM and TabMmini . Table 7 provides the
hyperparameter tuning spaces for TabM‚ÄÝ and TabM‚ÄÝmini .

Table 6: The hyperparameter tuning space for TabM and TabMmini . Here, (B) = {Covertype, Mi-
crosoft, Table 5} and (A) contains all other datasets.

                      Parameter             Distribution or Value
                      k                     32
                      # layers              UniformInt[1, 5]
                      Width (hidden size)   UniformInt[64, 1024]
                      Dropout rate          {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                      Learning rate         LogUniform[1e-4, 5e-3]
                      Weight decay          {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                      # Tuning iterations   (A) 100 (B) 50


Table 7: The hyperparameter tuning space for TabM‚ÄÝmini and TabM‚ÄÝ . Here, (B) = {Covertype,
Microsoft, Table 5} and (A) contains all other datasets.

                      Parameter             Distribution or Value
                      k                     32
                      # layers              UniformInt[1, 4]
                      Width (hidden size)   UniformInt[64, 1024]
                      Dropout rate          {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                      # PLE bins            UniformInt[8, 32]
                      Learning rate         LogUniform[5e-5, 3e-3]
                      Weight decay          {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                      # Tuning iterations   (A) 100 (B) 50


D.10    MLP

Feature embeddings. MLP‚ÄÝ and MLP‚Ä° are the versions of MLP with non-linear feature embeddings.
MLP‚ÄÝ uses the updated piecewise-linear embeddings mentioned in subsection D.8. MLP‚Ä° (also
known as MLP-PLR) uses the periodic embeddings (Gorishniy et al., 2022). Technically, it is the
PeriodicEmbeddings class from the rtdl num embeddings Python package. We tested
two variations: with lite=False and lite=True. In the paper, only the former one is reported,
but in the source code, the results for both are available.
Table 8, Table 9, Table 10 provide the hyperparameter tuning spaces for MLP, MLP‚ÄÝ and MLP‚Ä° ,
respectively.

D.11    TAB R

Feature embeddings.    TabR‚Ä° is the version of TabR with non-linear feature em-
beddings.    TabR‚Ä° uses the periodic embeddings (Gorishniy et al., 2022), specifi-
cally,   PeriodicEmbeddings(lite=True) from the rtdl num embeddings
Python package on most datasets.    On the datasets from Table 5, TabR‚Ä° uses the


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Table 8: The hyperparameter tuning space for MLP.

                       Parameter              Distribution
                       # layers               UniformInt[1, 6]
                       Width (hidden size)    UniformInt[64, 1024]
                       Dropout rate           {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                       Learning rate          LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
                       Weight decay           {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                       # Tuning iterations    100



                      Table 9: The hyperparameter tuning space for MLP‚ÄÝ .

                       Parameter              Distribution
                       # layers               UniformInt[1, 5]
                       Width (hidden size)    UniformInt[64, 1024]
                       Dropout rate           {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                       Learning rate          LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
                       Weight decay           {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                       d embedding            UniformInt[8, 32]
                       n bins                 UniformInt[2, 128]
                       # Tuning iterations    100



                      Table 10: The hyperparameter tuning space for MLP‚Ä° .

                       Parameter              Distribution
                       # layers               UniformInt[1, 5]
                       Width (hidden size)    UniformInt[64, 1024]
                       Dropout rate           {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                       Learning rate          LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
                       Weight decay           {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                       n frequencies          UniformInt[16, 96]
                       d embedding            UniformInt[16, 32]
                       frequency init scale   LogUniform[1e-2, 1e1]
                       # Tuning iterations    100


PeriodicEmbeddings(lite=True) embeddings on the Sberbank Housing and Ecom
Offers datasets, and LinearReLUEmbeddings on the rest (to fit the computations into the GPU
memory, following the original TabR paper).
Since we follow the training and evaluation protocols from Gorishniy et al. (2024), and TabR was
proposed in Gorishniy et al. (2024), we simply reuse the results for TabR. More details can be found
in Appendix.D from Gorishniy et al. (2024). When tuning TabR‚Ä° on the datasets from Table 5, we
have used 25 tuning iterations and the same tuning space as for TabR from Rubachev et al. (2024).


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.12       FT-T RANSFORMER

We used the implementation from the ‚Äùrtdl revisiting models‚Äù Python package. The results
on datasets from Table 5 were copied from Rubachev et al. (2024), because the experiment setups are
compatible.

Table 11: The hyperparameter tuning space for FT-Transformer Gorishniy et al. (2021). Here, (B) =
{Covertype, Microsoft} and (A) contains all other datasets (except Table 5).

                  Parameter                                Distribution or Value
                  # blocks                                 UniformInt[1, 4]
                  dtoken                                   UniformInt[16, 384]
                  Attention dropout rate                   Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
                  FFN hidden dimension expansion rate      Uniform[2/3, 8/3]
                  FFN dropout rate                         Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
                  Residual dropout rate                    {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.2]}
                  Learning rate                            LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
                  Weight decay                             {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                  # Tuning iterations                      (A) 100 (B) 50


D.13       M ODERN NCA

Feature embeddings. We adapted the official implementation of Ye et al. (2024). We used periodic
embeddings Gorishniy et al. (2022) (specifically, PeriodicEmbeddings(lite=True) from
the rtdl num embeddings Python package) for ModernNCA‚Ä° and no embeddings for Modern-
NCA. Table 12 and Table 13 provides hyperparameter tuning spaces for each ModernNCA and
ModernNCA‚Ä° .
Table 12: The hyperparameter tuning space for ModernNCA. Here, (C) = {Table 5}, (B) = {Covertype,
Microsoft} and (A) contains all other datasets.

                            Parameter             Distribution
                            # blocks              UniformInt[0, 2]
                            dblock                UniformInt[64, 1024]
                            dim                   UniformInt[64, 1024]
                            Dropout rate          Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
                            Sample rate           Uniform[0.05, 0.6]
                            Learning rate         LogUniform[1e-5, 1e-1]
                            Weight decay          {0, LogUniform[1e-6, 1e-3]}
                            # Tuning iterations   (A) 100 (B, C) 50


D.14       T2G-F ORMER

We adapted the implementation and hyperparameters of Yan et al. (2023) from the official repository1 .
Table 14 provides hyperparameter tuning space.

D.15       SAINT

We completely adapted hyperparameters and protocol from Gorishniy et al. (2024) to evaluate SAINT
on Grinsztajn et al. (2022) benchmark. Results on datasets from Table 4 were directly taken from
   1
       https://github.com/jyansir/t2g-former


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: The hyperparameter tuning space for ModernNCA‚Ä° . Here, (C) = {Table 5}, (B) =
{Covertype, Microsoft} and (A) contains all other datasets.

                            Parameter                Distribution
                            # blocks                 UniformInt[0, 2]
                            dblock                   UniformInt[64, 1024]
                            dim                      UniformInt[64, 1024]
                            Dropout rate             Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
                            Sample rate              Uniform[0.05, 0.6]
                            Learning rate            LogUniform[1e-5, 1e-1]
                            Weight decay             {0, LogUniform[1e-6, 1e-3]}
                            n frequencies            UniformInt[16, 96]
                            d embedding              UniformInt[16, 32]
                            frequency init scale     LogUniform[0.01, 10]
                            # Tuning iterations      (A) 100 (B, C) 50

Table 14: The hyperparameter tuning space for T2G-Former Yan et al. (2023). Here, (C) = {Table 5},
(B) = {Covertype, Microsoft} and (A) contains all other datasets. Also, we used 50 tuning iterations
on some datasets from Grinsztajn et al. (2022).

        Parameter                                     Distribution or Value
        # blocks                                      (A) UniformInt[3, 4] (B, C) UniformInt[1, 3]
        dtoken                                        UniformInt[64, 512]
        Attention dropout rate                        Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
        FFN hidden dimension expansion rate           (A, B) Uniform[2/3, 8/3] (C) 4/3
        FFN dropout rate                              Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
        Residual dropout rate                         {0.0, Uniform[0.0, 0.2]}
        Learning rate                                 LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
        Col. Learning rate                            LogUniform[5e-3, 5e-2]
        Weight decay                                  {0, LogUniform[1e-6, 1e-1]}
        # Tuning iterations                           (A) 100 (B) 50 (C) 25


Gorishniy et al. (2024). Additional details can be found in Appendix.D from Gorishniy et al. (2024).
We have used a default configuration on big datasets due to the very high cost of tuning (see Table 15).

D.16       E XCELFORMER

Feature embeddings. ExcelFormer (Chen et al., 2023a) uses custom non-linear feature embeddings
based on a GLU-style activation, see the original paper for details.
We adapted the implementation and hyperparameters of Chen et al. (2023a) from the official reposi-
tory2 . For a fair comparison with other models, we did not use the augmentation techniques from the
paper in our experiments. See Table 16.

D.17       C AT B OOST, XGB OOST AND L IGHT GBM

Since our setup is directly taken from Gorishniy et al. (2024), we simply reused their results for
GBDTs from the official repository3 . Importantly, in a series of preliminary experiments, we
   2
       https://github.com/WhatAShot/ExcelFormer
   3
       https://github.com/yandex-research/tabular-dl-tabr


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 15: The default hyperparameters for SAINT (Somepalli et al., 2021) on datasets from Rubachev
et al. (2024).

                              Parameter                              Value
                              depth                                  2
                              dtoken                                 32
                              nheads                                 4
                              dhead                                  8
                              Attention dropout rate                 0.1
                              FFN hidden dimension expansion rate    1
                              FFN dropout rate                       0.8
                              Learning rate                          1e-4
                              Weight decay                           1e-2

Table 16: The hyperparameter tuning space for Excelformer Chen et al. (2023a). Here, (D) =
{Homecredit, Maps Routing}, (C) = {Table 5 w/o (D)}, (B) = {Covertype, Microsoft} and (A)
contains all other datasets.

  Parameter                     Distribution or Value
  # blocks                      (A, B) UniformInt[2, 5] (C) UniformInt[2, 4] (D) UniformInt[1, 3]
  dtoken                        (A, B) {32, 64, 128, 256} (C) {16, 32, 64} (D) {4, 8, 16, 32}
  nheads                        (A,B) {4, 8, 16, 32} (C) {4, 8, 16} (D) 4
  Attention dropout rate        0.3
  FFN dropout rate              0.0
  Residual dropout rate         Uniform[0.0, 0.5]
  Learning rate                 LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
  Weight decay                  {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
  # Tuning iterations           (A) 100 (B) 50 (C, D) 25


confirmed that those results are reproducible in our instance of their setup. The details can be found
in Appendix.D from Gorishniy et al. (2024). Results on datasets from Table 5 were copied from the
paper (Rubachev et al., 2024).

D.18       AUTO I NT

We used an implementation from Gorishniy et al. (2021) which is an adapted official implementation4 .

D.18.1       TAB PFN
Since TabPFN accepts only less than 10K training samples we use different subsamples of size 10K
for different random seeds. Also, TabPFN is not applicable to regressions and datasets with more
than 100 features.


   4
       https://github.com/shichence/AutoInt


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 17: The hyperparameter tuning space for AutoInt (Song et al., 2019). Here, (B) = {Covertype,
Microsoft} and (A) contains all other datasets.

                     Parameter                 Distribution
                     # blocks                  UniformInt[1, 6]
                     dtoken                    UniformInt[8, 64]
                     nheads                    2
                     Attention dropout rate    {0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                     Embedding dropout rate    {0, Uniform[0.0, 0.5]}
                     Learning rate             LogUniform[3e-5, 1e-3]
                     Weight decay              {0, LogUniform[1e-4, 1e-1]}
                     # Tuning iterations       (A) 100 (B) 50



E     P ER - DATASET RESULTS WITH STANDARD DEVIATIONS

    Table 18: Extended results for the main benchmark. Results are grouped by datasets. One ensemble
    consists of five models trained independently under different random seeds.

                      churn ‚Üë                                          california ‚Üì
    Method      Single model    Ensemble              Method       Single model     Ensemble
    MLP         0.8553 ¬± 0.0029 0.8582 ¬± 0.0008       MLP          0.4948 ¬± 0.0058 0.4880 ¬± 0.0022
    TabPFN      ‚Äì               0.8624 ¬± 0.0008       TabPFN       ‚Äì                ‚Äì
    ResNet      0.8545 ¬± 0.0044 0.8565 ¬± 0.0035       ResNet       0.4915 ¬± 0.0031 0.4862 ¬± 0.0017
    DCN2        0.8567 ¬± 0.0020 0.8570 ¬± 0.0017       DCN2         0.4971 ¬± 0.0122 0.4779 ¬± 0.0022
    SNN         0.8506 ¬± 0.0051 0.8533 ¬± 0.0033       SNN          0.5033 ¬± 0.0075 0.4933 ¬± 0.0035
    Trompt      0.8600 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                     Trompt       0.4579 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
    AutoInt     0.8607 ¬± 0.0047 0.8622 ¬± 0.0003       AutoInt      0.4682 ¬± 0.0063 0.4490 ¬± 0.0028
    MLP-Mixer   0.8592 ¬± 0.0036 0.8630 ¬± 0.0005       MLP-Mixer    0.4746 ¬± 0.0056 0.4509 ¬± 0.0029
    Excel‚àó      0.8618 ¬± 0.0023 0.8625 ¬± nan          Excel‚àó       0.4544 ¬± 0.0048 0.4350 ¬± nan
    SAINT       0.8603 ¬± 0.0029 ‚Äì                     SAINT        0.4680 ¬± 0.0048 ‚Äì
    FT-T        0.8593 ¬± 0.0028 0.8598 ¬± 0.0025       FT-T         0.4635 ¬± 0.0048 0.4515 ¬± 0.0016
    T2G         0.8613 ¬± 0.0015 ‚Äì                     T2G          0.4640 ¬± 0.0100 0.4462 ¬± nan
    MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8624 ¬± 0.0010 0.8638 ¬± 0.0012       MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.4652 ¬± 0.0045 0.4549 ¬± 0.0006
    MLP‚Ä°        0.8624 ¬± 0.0026 0.8640 ¬± 0.0010       MLP‚Ä°         0.4597 ¬± 0.0058 0.4482 ¬± 0.0026
    MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8580 ¬± 0.0028 0.8605 ¬± 0.0018       MLP‚ÄÝ         0.4530 ¬± 0.0029 0.4491 ¬± 0.0010
    XGBoost     0.8605 ¬± 0.0022 0.8608 ¬± 0.0013       XGBoost      0.4327 ¬± 0.0016 0.4316 ¬± 0.0007
    LightGBM    0.8600 ¬± 0.0008 0.8600 ¬± 0.0000       LightGBM     0.4352 ¬± 0.0019 0.4339 ¬± 0.0008
    CatBoost    0.8582 ¬± 0.0017 0.8588 ¬± 0.0008       CatBoost     0.4294 ¬± 0.0012 0.4265 ¬± 0.0003
    TabR        0.8599 ¬± 0.0025 0.8620 ¬± 0.0023       TabR         0.4030 ¬± 0.0023 0.3964 ¬± 0.0013
    TabR‚Ä°       0.8625 ¬± 0.0021 ‚Äì                     TabR‚Ä°        0.3998 ¬± 0.0033 ‚Äì
    MNCA        0.8595 ¬± 0.0028 0.8615 ¬± 0.0013       MNCA         0.4239 ¬± 0.0012 0.4231 ¬± 0.0005
    MNCA‚Ä°       0.8606 ¬± 0.0032 0.8607 ¬± 0.0008       MNCA‚Ä°        0.4142 ¬± 0.0031 0.4071 ¬± 0.0029
    TabM‚ôÝ       0.8613 ¬± 0.0025 0.8615 ¬± 0.0005       TabM‚ôÝ        0.4509 ¬± 0.0032 0.4490 ¬± 0.0018
    TabM        0.8605 ¬± 0.0016 0.8612 ¬± 0.0008       TabM         0.4414 ¬± 0.0012 0.4402 ¬± 0.0001
    TabM[G]     0.8609 ¬± 0.0024 ‚Äì                     TabM[G]      0.4413 ¬± 0.0020 ‚Äì
    TabMmini    0.8633 ¬± 0.0018 0.8638 ¬± 0.0012       TabMmini     0.4479 ¬± 0.0022 0.4461 ¬± 0.0011
    TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8606 ¬± 0.0023 0.8630 ¬± 0.0030       TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.4275 ¬± 0.0024 0.4244 ¬± 0.0006


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     house ‚Üì                                           adult ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          3.1117 ¬± 0.0294 3.0706 ¬± 0.0140      MLP         0.8540 ¬± 0.0018 0.8559 ¬± 0.0011
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       3.1143 ¬± 0.0258 3.0706 ¬± 0.0098      ResNet      0.8554 ¬± 0.0011 0.8562 ¬± 0.0006
  DCN2         3.3327 ¬± 0.0878 3.1303 ¬± 0.0410      DCN2        0.8582 ¬± 0.0011 0.8593 ¬± 0.0002
  SNN          3.2176 ¬± 0.0376 3.1320 ¬± 0.0155      SNN         0.8582 ¬± 0.0009 0.8603 ¬± 0.0012
  Trompt       3.0638 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.8590 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      3.2157 ¬± 0.0436 3.1261 ¬± 0.0095      AutoInt     0.8592 ¬± 0.0016 0.8612 ¬± 0.0004
  MLP-Mixer    3.1871 ¬± 0.0519 3.0184 ¬± 0.0086      MLP-Mixer   0.8598 ¬± 0.0013 0.8617 ¬± 0.0002
  Excel‚àó       3.2460 ¬± 0.0685 3.1097 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.8613 ¬± 0.0024 0.8641 ¬± nan
  SAINT        3.2424 ¬± 0.0595 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.8601 ¬± 0.0019 ‚Äì
  FT-T         3.1823 ¬± 0.0460 3.0974 ¬± 0.0334      FT-T        0.8588 ¬± 0.0015 0.8608 ¬± 0.0011
  T2G          3.1613 ¬± 0.0320 3.0982 ¬± nan         T2G         0.8601 ¬± 0.0011 0.8622 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    3.0633 ¬± 0.0248 3.0170 ¬± 0.0070      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8693 ¬± 0.0007 0.8702 ¬± 0.0006
  MLP‚Ä°         3.0775 ¬± 0.0336 3.0268 ¬± 0.0170      MLP‚Ä°        0.8694 ¬± 0.0011 0.8704 ¬± 0.0008
  MLP‚ÄÝ         3.0999 ¬± 0.0351 3.0401 ¬± 0.0071      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8603 ¬± 0.0009 0.8616 ¬± 0.0006
  XGBoost      3.1773 ¬± 0.0102 3.1644 ¬± 0.0068      XGBoost     0.8720 ¬± 0.0006 0.8723 ¬± 0.0002
  LightGBM     3.1774 ¬± 0.0087 3.1672 ¬± 0.0050      LightGBM    0.8713 ¬± 0.0007 0.8721 ¬± 0.0004
  CatBoost     3.1172 ¬± 0.0125 3.1058 ¬± 0.0022      CatBoost    0.8714 ¬± 0.0012 0.8723 ¬± 0.0007
  TabR         3.0667 ¬± 0.0403 2.9958 ¬± 0.0270      TabR        0.8646 ¬± 0.0022 0.8680 ¬± 0.0019
  TabR‚Ä°        3.1048 ¬± 0.0410 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8699 ¬± 0.0011 ‚Äì
  MNCA         3.0884 ¬± 0.0286 3.0538 ¬± 0.0072      MNCA        0.8677 ¬± 0.0018 0.8696 ¬± 0.0003
  MNCA‚Ä°        3.0704 ¬± 0.0388 3.0149 ¬± 0.0308      MNCA‚Ä°       0.8717 ¬± 0.0008 0.8742 ¬± 0.0006
  TabM‚ôÝ        3.0002 ¬± 0.0182 2.9796 ¬± 0.0024      TabM‚ôÝ       0.8582 ¬± 0.0011 0.8588 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM         3.0038 ¬± 0.0097 2.9906 ¬± 0.0026      TabM        0.8575 ¬± 0.0008 0.8583 ¬± 0.0004
  TabM[G]      3.0082 ¬± 0.0184 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.8572 ¬± 0.0010 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     3.0394 ¬± 0.0139 3.0206 ¬± 0.0128      TabMmini    0.8598 ¬± 0.0011 0.8604 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    2.9976 ¬± 0.0196 2.9854 ¬± 0.0076      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8700 ¬± 0.0007 0.8701 ¬± 0.0003


                   diamond ‚Üì                                           otto ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.1404 ¬± 0.0012 0.1362 ¬± 0.0003      MLP         0.8175 ¬± 0.0022 0.8222 ¬± 0.0007
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               0.7408 ¬± 0.0028
  ResNet       0.1396 ¬± 0.0029 0.1361 ¬± 0.0011      ResNet      0.8174 ¬± 0.0021 0.8198 ¬± 0.0006
  DCN2         0.1420 ¬± 0.0032 0.1374 ¬± 0.0020      DCN2        0.8064 ¬± 0.0021 0.8208 ¬± 0.0023
  SNN          0.1473 ¬± 0.0057 0.1424 ¬± 0.0008      SNN         0.8087 ¬± 0.0020 0.8156 ¬± 0.0013
  Trompt       0.1391 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.8093 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.1392 ¬± 0.0014 0.1361 ¬± 0.0004      AutoInt     0.8050 ¬± 0.0034 0.8111 ¬± 0.0020
  MLP-Mixer    0.1400 ¬± 0.0025 0.1378 ¬± 0.0008      MLP-Mixer   0.8092 ¬± 0.0040 0.8136 ¬± 0.0010
  Excel‚àó       0.1766 ¬± 0.0023 0.1712 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.8102 ¬± 0.0022 0.8220 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.1369 ¬± 0.0019 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.8119 ¬± 0.0018 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.1376 ¬± 0.0013 0.1360 ¬± 0.0002      FT-T        0.8133 ¬± 0.0033 0.8221 ¬± 0.0013
  T2G          0.1372 ¬± 0.0011 0.1346 ¬± nan         T2G         0.8161 ¬± 0.0019 0.8272 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.1342 ¬± 0.0008 0.1325 ¬± 0.0004      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8190 ¬± 0.0021 0.8271 ¬± 0.0015
  MLP‚Ä°         0.1337 ¬± 0.0010 0.1317 ¬± 0.0003      MLP‚Ä°        0.8189 ¬± 0.0015 0.8253 ¬± 0.0000
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.1323 ¬± 0.0010 0.1301 ¬± 0.0005      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8205 ¬± 0.0021 0.8290 ¬± 0.0006
  XGBoost      0.1368 ¬± 0.0004 0.1363 ¬± 0.0001      XGBoost     0.8297 ¬± 0.0011 0.8316 ¬± 0.0008
  LightGBM     0.1359 ¬± 0.0002 0.1358 ¬± 0.0001      LightGBM    0.8302 ¬± 0.0009 0.8316 ¬± 0.0013
  CatBoost     0.1335 ¬± 0.0006 0.1327 ¬± 0.0004      CatBoost    0.8250 ¬± 0.0013 0.8268 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR         0.1327 ¬± 0.0010 0.1311 ¬± 0.0005      TabR        0.8179 ¬± 0.0022 0.8236 ¬± 0.0009
  TabR‚Ä°        0.1333 ¬± 0.0013 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8246 ¬± 0.0018 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.1370 ¬± 0.0018 0.1348 ¬± 0.0005      MNCA        0.8275 ¬± 0.0012 0.8313 ¬± 0.0006
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.1327 ¬± 0.0012 0.1315 ¬± 0.0006      MNCA‚Ä°       0.8265 ¬± 0.0015 0.8304 ¬± 0.0006
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.1342 ¬± 0.0017 0.1327 ¬± 0.0004      TabM‚ôÝ       0.8268 ¬± 0.0014 0.8300 ¬± 0.0007
  TabM         0.1310 ¬± 0.0007 0.1307 ¬± 0.0002      TabM        0.8275 ¬± 0.0014 0.8284 ¬± 0.0005
  TabM[G]      0.1309 ¬± 0.0008 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.8254 ¬± 0.0022 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.1323 ¬± 0.0007 0.1317 ¬± 0.0002      TabMmini    0.8282 ¬± 0.0014 0.8299 ¬± 0.0005
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.1315 ¬± 0.0006 0.1312 ¬± 0.0001      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8342 ¬± 0.0012 0.8356 ¬± 0.0004


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  higgs-small ‚Üë                                    black-friday ‚Üì
  Method       Single model     Ensemble            Method      Single model      Ensemble
  MLP          0.7180 ¬± 0.0027 0.7192 ¬± 0.0005      MLP         0.6955 ¬± 0.0004 0.6942 ¬± 0.0002
  TabPFN       ‚Äì                0.6727 ¬± 0.0034     TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.7256 ¬± 0.0020 0.7307 ¬± 0.0001      ResNet      0.6929 ¬± 0.0008 0.6907 ¬± 0.0002
  DCN2         0.7164 ¬± 0.0030 0.7237 ¬± 0.0011      DCN2        0.6968 ¬± 0.0013 0.6936 ¬± 0.0007
  SNN          0.7142 ¬± 0.0024 0.7171 ¬± 0.0020      SNN         0.6996 ¬± 0.0013 0.6978 ¬± 0.0004
  Trompt       0.7262 ¬± nan     ‚Äì                   Trompt      0.6983 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.7240 ¬± 0.0028 0.7287 ¬± 0.0008      AutoInt     0.6994 ¬± 0.0082 0.6927 ¬± 0.0021
  MLP-Mixer    0.7248 ¬± 0.0023 0.7334 ¬± 0.0007      MLP-Mixer   0.6905 ¬± 0.0021 0.6851 ¬± 0.0011
  Excel‚àó       0.7262 ¬± 0.0017 0.7329 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.6947 ¬± 0.0016 0.6908 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.7236 ¬± 0.0019 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.6934 ¬± 0.0009 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.7281 ¬± 0.0016 0.7334 ¬± 0.0013      FT-T        0.6987 ¬± 0.0192 0.6879 ¬± 0.0023
  T2G          0.7352 ¬± 0.0037 0.7400 ¬± nan         T2G         0.6887 ¬± 0.0046 0.6832 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.7260 ¬± 0.0017 0.7304 ¬± 0.0008      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.6849 ¬± 0.0006 0.6824 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP‚Ä°         0.7261 ¬± 0.0010 0.7270 ¬± 0.0003      MLP‚Ä°        0.6857 ¬± 0.0004 0.6838 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.7210 ¬± 0.0016 0.7252 ¬± 0.0005      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.6836 ¬± 0.0006 0.6812 ¬± 0.0002
  XGBoost      0.7246 ¬± 0.0015 0.7264 ¬± 0.0013      XGBoost     0.6806 ¬± 0.0001 0.6805 ¬± 0.0000
  LightGBM     0.7256 ¬± 0.0009 0.7263 ¬± 0.0007      LightGBM    0.6799 ¬± 0.0003 0.6795 ¬± 0.0001
  CatBoost     0.7260 ¬± 0.0011 0.7273 ¬± 0.0010      CatBoost    0.6822 ¬± 0.0003 0.6813 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR         0.7223 ¬± 0.0010 0.7257 ¬± 0.0008      TabR        0.6899 ¬± 0.0004 0.6883 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR‚Ä°        0.7294 ¬± 0.0014 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.6761 ¬± 0.0009 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.7263 ¬± 0.0023 0.7292 ¬± 0.0006      MNCA        0.6893 ¬± 0.0004 0.6883 ¬± 0.0000
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.7300 ¬± 0.0020 0.7348 ¬± 0.0008      MNCA‚Ä°       0.6885 ¬± 0.0007 0.6863 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.7383 ¬± 0.0028 0.7409 ¬± 0.0010      TabM‚ôÝ       0.6875 ¬± 0.0015 0.6866 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM         0.7394 ¬± 0.0018 0.7409 ¬± 0.0008      TabM        0.6869 ¬± 0.0004 0.6865 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM[G]      0.7392 ¬± 0.0016 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.6865 ¬± 0.0005 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.7338 ¬± 0.0011 0.7345 ¬± 0.0008      TabMmini    0.6863 ¬± 0.0006 0.6856 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.7361 ¬± 0.0011 0.7383 ¬± 0.0008      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.6781 ¬± 0.0004 0.6773 ¬± 0.0001


                   covtype2 ‚Üë                                       microsoft ‚Üì
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.9630 ¬± 0.0012 0.9664 ¬± 0.0004      MLP         0.7475 ¬± 0.0003 0.7460 ¬± 0.0003
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               0.7606 ¬± 0.0022      TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.9638 ¬± 0.0005 0.9685 ¬± 0.0003      ResNet      0.7472 ¬± 0.0004 0.7452 ¬± 0.0004
  DCN2         0.9622 ¬± 0.0019 0.9673 ¬± 0.0011      DCN2        0.7499 ¬± 0.0003 0.7477 ¬± 0.0001
  SNN          0.9636 ¬± 0.0010 0.9677 ¬± 0.0002      SNN         0.7488 ¬± 0.0004 0.7470 ¬± 0.0001
  Trompt       0.9286 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.7476 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.9614 ¬± 0.0016 0.9696 ¬± 0.0005      AutoInt     0.7482 ¬± 0.0005 0.7455 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP-Mixer    0.9663 ¬± 0.0019 0.9699 ¬± 0.0014      MLP-Mixer   0.7482 ¬± 0.0008 0.7436 ¬± 0.0001
  Excel‚àó       0.9606 ¬± 0.0018 0.9670 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.7479 ¬± 0.0007 0.7442 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.9669 ¬± 0.0010 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.7625 ¬± 0.0066 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.9698 ¬± 0.0008 0.9731 ¬± 0.0006      FT-T        0.7460 ¬± 0.0007 0.7422 ¬± 0.0004
  T2G          0.9668 ¬± 0.0008 0.9708 ¬± nan         T2G         0.7460 ¬± 0.0006 0.7427 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.9690 ¬± 0.0008 0.9721 ¬± 0.0006      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.7446 ¬± 0.0002 0.7434 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP‚Ä°         0.9713 ¬± 0.0006 0.9758 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚Ä°        0.7444 ¬± 0.0003 0.7429 ¬± 0.0001
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.9697 ¬± 0.0008 0.9721 ¬± 0.0005      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.7465 ¬± 0.0005 0.7448 ¬± 0.0001
  XGBoost      0.9710 ¬± 0.0002 0.9713 ¬± 0.0000      XGBoost     0.7413 ¬± 0.0001 0.7410 ¬± 0.0000
  LightGBM     0.9709 ¬± 0.0003 ‚Äì                    LightGBM    0.7417 ¬± 0.0001 0.7413 ¬± 0.0000
  CatBoost     0.9670 ¬± 0.0003 0.9680 ¬± 0.0002      CatBoost    0.7412 ¬± 0.0001 0.7406 ¬± 0.0000
  TabR         0.9737 ¬± 0.0005 0.9745 ¬± 0.0006      TabR        0.7503 ¬± 0.0006 0.7485 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR‚Ä°        0.9752 ¬± 0.0003 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.7501 ¬± 0.0005 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.9724 ¬± 0.0003 0.9729 ¬± 0.0001      MNCA        0.7458 ¬± 0.0003 0.7448 ¬± 0.0002
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.9747 ¬± 0.0002 0.9747 ¬± 0.0002      MNCA‚Ä°       0.7460 ¬± 0.0008 0.7435 ¬± 0.0004
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.9712 ¬± 0.0008 0.9729 ¬± 0.0003      TabM‚ôÝ       0.7434 ¬± 0.0003 0.7424 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM         0.9735 ¬± 0.0004 0.9743 ¬± 0.0001      TabM        0.7432 ¬± 0.0004 0.7426 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM[G]      0.9730 ¬± 0.0005 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.7432 ¬± 0.0004 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.9710 ¬± 0.0007 0.9727 ¬± 0.0002      TabMmini    0.7436 ¬± 0.0002 0.7430 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.9755 ¬± 0.0003 0.9762 ¬± 0.0001      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.7423 ¬± 0.0002 0.7416 ¬± 0.0001


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 19: Extended results for Grinsztajn et al. (2022) benchmark. Results are grouped by datasets.
  One ensemble consists of five models trained independently with different random seeds.

                      wine ‚Üë                                           phoneme ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble              Method        Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.7778 ¬± 0.0153 0.7907 ¬± 0.0117       MLP           0.8525 ¬± 0.0126 0.8635 ¬± 0.0099
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               0.7908 ¬± 0.0063       TabPFN        ‚Äì               0.8684 ¬± 0.0050
  ResNet       0.7710 ¬± 0.0137 0.7839 ¬± 0.0083       ResNet        0.8456 ¬± 0.0121 0.8504 ¬± 0.0066
  DCN2         0.7492 ¬± 0.0147 0.7764 ¬± 0.0095       DCN2          0.8342 ¬± 0.0151 0.8543 ¬± 0.0118
  SNN          0.7818 ¬± 0.0143 0.7994 ¬± 0.0097       SNN           0.8596 ¬± 0.0124 0.8687 ¬± 0.0080
  Trompt       0.7818 ¬± 0.0081 ‚Äì                     Trompt        0.8465 ¬± 0.0205 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.7745 ¬± 0.0144 0.7909 ¬± 0.0160       AutoInt       0.8623 ¬± 0.0138 0.8754 ¬± 0.0095
  MLP-Mixer    0.7769 ¬± 0.0149 0.7950 ¬± 0.0087       MLP-Mixer     0.8629 ¬± 0.0123 0.8757 ¬± 0.0095
  Excel‚àó       0.7631 ¬± 0.0171 0.7765 ¬± 0.0121       Excel‚àó        0.8551 ¬± 0.0092 0.8711 ¬± 0.0081
  SAINT        0.7684 ¬± 0.0144 ‚Äì                     SAINT         0.8657 ¬± 0.0130 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.7755 ¬± 0.0133 0.7894 ¬± 0.0083       FT-T          0.8667 ¬± 0.0127 0.8795 ¬± 0.0093
  T2G          0.7733 ¬± 0.0118 0.7933 ¬± 0.0137       T2G           0.8672 ¬± 0.0166 0.8765 ¬± 0.0141
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.7803 ¬± 0.0157 0.7964 ¬± 0.0146       MLP‚Ä°‚àílite     0.8742 ¬± 0.0120 0.8861 ¬± 0.0071
  MLP‚Ä°         0.7733 ¬± 0.0185 0.7856 ¬± 0.0160       MLP‚Ä°          0.8757 ¬± 0.0118 0.8856 ¬± 0.0065
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.7814 ¬± 0.0132 0.7919 ¬± 0.0098       MLP‚ÄÝ          0.8647 ¬± 0.0098 0.8761 ¬± 0.0076
  XGBoost      0.7949 ¬± 0.0178 0.8010 ¬± 0.0186       XGBoost       0.8682 ¬± 0.0174 0.8771 ¬± 0.0156
  LightGBM     0.7890 ¬± 0.0160 0.7929 ¬± 0.0106       LightGBM      0.8702 ¬± 0.0129 0.8733 ¬± 0.0126
  CatBoost     0.7994 ¬± 0.0131 0.8057 ¬± 0.0098       CatBoost      0.8827 ¬± 0.0117 0.8897 ¬± 0.0055
  TabR         0.7936 ¬± 0.0114 0.8055 ¬± 0.0057       TabR          0.8781 ¬± 0.0096 0.8840 ¬± 0.0054
  TabR‚Ä°        0.7804 ¬± 0.0148 ‚Äì                     TabR‚Ä°         0.8772 ¬± 0.0087 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.7911 ¬± 0.0135 0.8005 ¬± 0.0121       MNCA          0.8835 ¬± 0.0079 0.8861 ¬± 0.0057
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.7867 ¬± 0.0113 0.7953 ¬± 0.0114       MNCA‚Ä°         0.8828 ¬± 0.0082 0.8925 ¬± 0.0056
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.7961 ¬± 0.0136 0.8011 ¬± 0.0084       TabM‚ôÝ         0.8701 ¬± 0.0167 0.8766 ¬± 0.0128
  TabM         0.7943 ¬± 0.0124 0.7985 ¬± 0.0139       TabM          0.8831 ¬± 0.0121 0.8880 ¬± 0.0108
  TabM[G]      0.7879 ¬± 0.0161 ‚Äì                     TabM[G]       0.8762 ¬± 0.0144 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.7890 ¬± 0.0130 0.7937 ¬± 0.0103       TabMmini      0.8803 ¬± 0.0098 0.8842 ¬± 0.0067
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.7839 ¬± 0.0169 0.7917 ¬± 0.0143       TabM‚ÄÝmini     0.8780 ¬± 0.0119 0.8817 ¬± 0.0101


              analcatdata supreme ‚Üì                      Mercedes Benz Greener Manufacturing ‚Üì
  Method       Single model     Ensemble             Method       Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.0782 ¬± 0.0081 0.0766 ¬± 0.0090       MLP          8.3045 ¬± 0.8708 8.2682 ¬± 0.8992
  TabPFN       ‚Äì                ‚Äì                    TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.0852 ¬± 0.0076 0.0823 ¬± 0.0078       ResNet       8.4434 ¬± 0.7982 8.3178 ¬± 0.8482
  DCN2         0.0811 ¬± 0.0137 0.0759 ¬± 0.0086       DCN2         8.3540 ¬± 0.8314 8.3021 ¬± 0.8579
  SNN          0.0826 ¬± 0.0096 0.0779 ¬± 0.0098       SNN          8.2718 ¬± 0.8152 8.2236 ¬± 0.8479
  Trompt       0.0782 ¬± 0.0095 ‚Äì                     Trompt       8.3409 ¬± 0.9840 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.0783 ¬± 0.0078 0.0768 ¬± 0.0083       AutoInt      8.4001 ¬± 0.9256 8.3237 ¬± 0.9658
  MLP-Mixer    0.0770 ¬± 0.0082 0.0759 ¬± 0.0081       MLP-Mixer 8.2860 ¬± 0.8656 8.2398 ¬± 0.9023
  Excel‚àó       0.0796 ¬± 0.0101 0.0776 ¬± 0.0101       Excel‚àó       8.2244 ¬± 0.8514 8.1918 ¬± 0.9387
  SAINT        0.0773 ¬± 0.0078 ‚Äì                     SAINT        8.3556 ¬± 0.9566 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.0787 ¬± 0.0086 0.0775 ¬± 0.0091       FT-T         8.2252 ¬± 0.8617 8.1616 ¬± 0.8834
  T2G          0.0775 ¬± 0.0081 0.0763 ¬± 0.0084       T2G          8.2120 ¬± 0.8485 8.1654 ¬± 0.9339
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.0798 ¬± 0.0088 0.0769 ¬± 0.0092       MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    8.3045 ¬± 0.8708 8.2682 ¬± 0.8992
  MLP‚Ä°         0.0786 ¬± 0.0073 0.0720 ¬± 0.0053       MLP‚Ä°         8.3045 ¬± 0.8708 8.2682 ¬± 0.8992
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.0774 ¬± 0.0064 0.0759 ¬± 0.0063       MLP‚ÄÝ         8.3045 ¬± 0.8708 8.2682 ¬± 0.8992
  XGBoost      0.0801 ¬± 0.0126 0.0774 ¬± 0.0107       XGBoost      8.2177 ¬± 0.8175 8.2092 ¬± 0.8458
  LightGBM     0.0778 ¬± 0.0115 0.0767 ¬± 0.0110       LightGBM 8.2078 ¬± 0.8231 8.1618 ¬± 0.8566
  CatBoost     0.0780 ¬± 0.0067 0.0734 ¬± 0.0022       CatBoost     8.1629 ¬± 0.8193 8.1554 ¬± 0.8439
  TabR         0.0803 ¬± 0.0066 0.0759 ¬± 0.0046       TabR         8.3506 ¬± 0.8149 8.2694 ¬± 0.8399
  TabR‚Ä°        0.0807 ¬± 0.0088 ‚Äì                     TabR‚Ä°        8.3187 ¬± 0.8186 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.0809 ¬± 0.0072 0.0784 ¬± 0.0062       MNCA         8.2557 ¬± 0.8602 8.1771 ¬± 0.8710
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.0825 ¬± 0.0090 0.0793 ¬± 0.0072       MNCA‚Ä°        8.2557 ¬± 0.8602 8.1771 ¬± 0.8710
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.0777 ¬± 0.0099 0.0769 ¬± 0.0105       TabM‚ôÝ        8.2215 ¬± 0.8940 8.1995 ¬± 0.9130
  TabM         0.0786 ¬± 0.0055 0.0781 ¬± 0.0054       TabM         8.2052 ¬± 0.9043 8.1965 ¬± 0.9306
  TabM[G]      0.0808 ¬± 0.0063 ‚Äì                     TabM[G]      8.2235 ¬± 0.8867 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.0773 ¬± 0.0077 0.0763 ¬± 0.0077       TabMmini     8.2075 ¬± 0.9185 8.1986 ¬± 0.9442
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.0764 ¬± 0.0071 0.0749 ¬± 0.0076       TabM‚ÄÝmini    8.2075 ¬± 0.9185 8.1986 ¬± 0.9442


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              KDDCup09 upselling ‚Üë                            kdd ipums la 97-small ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.7759 ¬± 0.0137 0.7806 ¬± 0.0125      MLP         0.8828 ¬± 0.0061 0.8845 ¬± 0.0055
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               0.8578 ¬± 0.0046
  ResNet       0.7811 ¬± 0.0124 0.7861 ¬± 0.0109      ResNet      0.8823 ¬± 0.0070 0.8824 ¬± 0.0060
  DCN2         0.7850 ¬± 0.0161 0.7884 ¬± 0.0135      DCN2        0.8770 ¬± 0.0072 0.8824 ¬± 0.0068
  SNN          0.7884 ¬± 0.0122 0.7940 ¬± 0.0116      SNN         0.8722 ¬± 0.0093 0.8733 ¬± 0.0083
  Trompt       0.7994 ¬± 0.0055 ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.8847 ¬± 0.0070 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.8004 ¬± 0.0075 0.8037 ¬± 0.0063      AutoInt     0.8808 ¬± 0.0083 0.8830 ¬± 0.0081
  MLP-Mixer    0.7979 ¬± 0.0105 0.8010 ¬± 0.0094      MLP-Mixer 0.8762 ¬± 0.0100 0.8770 ¬± 0.0088
  Excel‚àó       0.7903 ¬± 0.0074 0.7939 ¬± 0.0099      Excel‚àó      0.8803 ¬± 0.0054 0.8823 ¬± 0.0071
  SAINT        0.7942 ¬± 0.0112 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.8837 ¬± 0.0055 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.7957 ¬± 0.0127 0.7960 ¬± 0.0139      FT-T        0.8795 ¬± 0.0077 0.8792 ¬± 0.0062
  T2G          0.8037 ¬± 0.0100 0.7988 ¬± 0.0084      T2G         0.8833 ¬± 0.0054 0.8841 ¬± 0.0062
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.7962 ¬± 0.0093 0.7995 ¬± 0.0105      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8765 ¬± 0.0108 0.8765 ¬± 0.0108
  MLP‚Ä°         0.8005 ¬± 0.0097 0.8032 ¬± 0.0117      MLP‚Ä°        0.8816 ¬± 0.0057 0.8818 ¬± 0.0048
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.7925 ¬± 0.0123 0.7963 ¬± 0.0089      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8757 ¬± 0.0101 0.8756 ¬± 0.0104
  XGBoost      0.7930 ¬± 0.0108 0.7950 ¬± 0.0102      XGBoost     0.8825 ¬± 0.0089 0.8835 ¬± 0.0085
  LightGBM     0.7932 ¬± 0.0119 0.7969 ¬± 0.0115      LightGBM 0.8792 ¬± 0.0075 0.8802 ¬± 0.0067
  CatBoost     0.7992 ¬± 0.0117 0.8010 ¬± 0.0121      CatBoost    0.8793 ¬± 0.0088 0.8803 ¬± 0.0100
  TabR         0.7838 ¬± 0.0136 0.7859 ¬± 0.0167      TabR        0.8798 ¬± 0.0081 0.8819 ¬± 0.0078
  TabR‚Ä°        0.7908 ¬± 0.0123 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8831 ¬± 0.0050 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.7939 ¬± 0.0097 0.7989 ¬± 0.0115      MNCA        0.8819 ¬± 0.0054 0.8832 ¬± 0.0048
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.7960 ¬± 0.0131 0.8008 ¬± 0.0110      MNCA‚Ä°       0.8837 ¬± 0.0062 0.8860 ¬± 0.0059
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.8002 ¬± 0.0103 0.8021 ¬± 0.0074      TabM‚ôÝ       0.8845 ¬± 0.0063 0.8848 ¬± 0.0070
  TabM         0.8024 ¬± 0.0111 0.8054 ¬± 0.0123      TabM        0.8823 ¬± 0.0079 0.8825 ¬± 0.0071
  TabM[G]      0.7988 ¬± 0.0118 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.8818 ¬± 0.0082 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.7971 ¬± 0.0117 0.7982 ¬± 0.0107      TabMmini    0.8784 ¬± 0.0123 0.8786 ¬± 0.0133
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.8024 ¬± 0.0075 0.8035 ¬± 0.0088      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8779 ¬± 0.0094 0.8784 ¬± 0.0108


                  wine quality ‚Üì                                       isolet ‚Üì
  Method       Single model      Ensemble           Method       Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.6707 ¬± 0.0178 0.6530 ¬± 0.0152      MLP          2.2744 ¬± 0.2203 2.0018 ¬± 0.1111
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.6687 ¬± 0.0166 0.6543 ¬± 0.0170      ResNet       2.2077 ¬± 0.2248 1.9206 ¬± 0.1478
  DCN2         0.7010 ¬± 0.0171 0.6699 ¬± 0.0139      DCN2         2.2449 ¬± 0.1579 2.0176 ¬± 0.0770
  SNN          0.6604 ¬± 0.0174 0.6245 ¬± 0.0140      SNN          2.4269 ¬± 0.2382 2.1142 ¬± 0.1262
  Trompt       0.6605 ¬± 0.0153 ‚Äì                    Trompt       2.6219 ¬± 0.0315 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.6840 ¬± 0.0126 0.6478 ¬± 0.0146      AutoInt      2.6130 ¬± 0.1658 2.3308 ¬± 0.1088
  MLP-Mixer    0.6672 ¬± 0.0263 0.6294 ¬± 0.0200      MLP-Mixer    2.3344 ¬± 0.2073 2.0915 ¬± 0.1159
  Excel‚àó       0.6881 ¬± 0.0182 0.6664 ¬± 0.0179      Excel‚àó       2.8691 ¬± 0.0882 2.5989 ¬± 0.0664
  SAINT        0.6797 ¬± 0.0161 ‚Äì                    SAINT        2.7696 ¬± 0.0200 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.6787 ¬± 0.0149 0.6564 ¬± 0.0250      FT-T         2.4879 ¬± 0.2524 2.1501 ¬± 0.1506
  T2G          0.6783 ¬± 0.0170 0.6570 ¬± 0.0273      T2G          2.2867 ¬± 0.2489 1.9179 ¬± 0.1530
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.6569 ¬± 0.0167 0.6328 ¬± 0.0155      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    2.2719 ¬± 0.1006 2.1026 ¬± 0.1088
  MLP‚Ä°         0.6532 ¬± 0.0133 0.6336 ¬± 0.0140      MLP‚Ä°         2.1832 ¬± 0.1124 2.0775 ¬± 0.0805
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.6721 ¬± 0.0180 0.6463 ¬± 0.0262      MLP‚ÄÝ         2.0979 ¬± 0.1779 1.9283 ¬± 0.1334
  XGBoost      0.6039 ¬± 0.0134 0.6025 ¬± 0.0139      XGBoost      2.7567 ¬± 0.0470 2.7294 ¬± 0.0366
  LightGBM     0.6135 ¬± 0.0138 0.6122 ¬± 0.0144      LightGBM     2.7005 ¬± 0.0296 2.6903 ¬± 0.0290
  CatBoost     0.6088 ¬± 0.0132 0.6060 ¬± 0.0137      CatBoost     2.8847 ¬± 0.0227 2.8574 ¬± 0.0148
  TabR         0.6315 ¬± 0.0097 0.6197 ¬± 0.0096      TabR         1.9760 ¬± 0.1738 1.7627 ¬± 0.1520
  TabR‚Ä°        0.6412 ¬± 0.0105 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°        1.9919 ¬± 0.1813 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.6154 ¬± 0.0083 0.6058 ¬± 0.0149      MNCA         1.7905 ¬± 0.1594 1.6205 ¬± 0.1676
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.6099 ¬± 0.0144 0.6028 ¬± 0.0157      MNCA‚Ä°        1.8912 ¬± 0.1851 1.7147 ¬± 0.1348
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.6169 ¬± 0.0123 0.6131 ¬± 0.0126      TabM‚ôÝ        1.8831 ¬± 0.1194 1.8578 ¬± 0.1088
  TabM         0.6328 ¬± 0.0172 0.6297 ¬± 0.0180      TabM         1.8433 ¬± 0.1196 1.8230 ¬± 0.1197
  TabM[G]      0.6369 ¬± 0.0179 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]      1.9091 ¬± 0.1345 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.6314 ¬± 0.0142 0.6272 ¬± 0.0146      TabMmini     1.9421 ¬± 0.0971 1.9013 ¬± 0.0813
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.6294 ¬± 0.0120 0.6241 ¬± 0.0118      TabM‚ÄÝmini    1.7799 ¬± 0.0859 1.7560 ¬± 0.0795


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    cpu act ‚Üì                                    bank-marketing ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model     Ensemble
  MLP          2.6814 ¬± 0.2291 2.4953 ¬± 0.1150      MLP         0.7860 ¬± 0.0057 0.7887 ¬± 0.0052
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì                0.7894 ¬± 0.0091
  ResNet       2.3933 ¬± 0.0641 2.3005 ¬± 0.0397      ResNet      0.7921 ¬± 0.0076 0.7932 ¬± 0.0066
  DCN2         2.7868 ¬± 0.1999 2.4884 ¬± 0.0327      DCN2        0.7859 ¬± 0.0068 0.7917 ¬± 0.0078
  SNN          2.5811 ¬± 0.1480 2.3863 ¬± 0.0324      SNN         0.7836 ¬± 0.0074 0.7882 ¬± 0.0054
  Trompt       2.2133 ¬± 0.0221 ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.7975 ¬± 0.0080 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      2.2537 ¬± 0.0536 2.1708 ¬± 0.0349      AutoInt     0.7917 ¬± 0.0071 0.7956 ¬± 0.0058
  MLP-Mixer    2.3079 ¬± 0.0829 2.1831 ¬± 0.0470      MLP-Mixer   0.7954 ¬± 0.0059 0.8001 ¬± 0.0048
  Excel‚àó       2.3094 ¬± 0.2401 2.1411 ¬± 0.0767      Excel‚àó      0.7957 ¬± 0.0090 0.7985 ¬± 0.0106
  SAINT        2.2781 ¬± 0.0630 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.7953 ¬± 0.0058 ‚Äì
  FT-T         2.2394 ¬± 0.0508 2.1494 ¬± 0.0268      FT-T        0.7918 ¬± 0.0076 0.7951 ¬± 0.0071
  T2G          2.2111 ¬± 0.0413 2.1330 ¬± 0.0316      T2G         0.7918 ¬± 0.0058 0.7955 ¬± 0.0047
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    2.2730 ¬± 0.0457 2.1899 ¬± 0.0419      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.7947 ¬± 0.0101 0.7977 ¬± 0.0117
  MLP‚Ä°         2.2671 ¬± 0.0383 2.1940 ¬± 0.0433      MLP‚Ä°        0.7988 ¬± 0.0092 0.8024 ¬± 0.0093
  MLP‚ÄÝ         2.3309 ¬± 0.0719 2.2516 ¬± 0.0574      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.7981 ¬± 0.0065 0.8008 ¬± 0.0057
  XGBoost      2.5237 ¬± 0.3530 2.4723 ¬± 0.3789      XGBoost     0.8013 ¬± 0.0081 0.8030 ¬± 0.0076
  LightGBM     2.2223 ¬± 0.0894 2.2067 ¬± 0.0916      LightGBM    0.8006 ¬± 0.0078 0.8013 ¬± 0.0072
  CatBoost     2.1239 ¬± 0.0489 2.1092 ¬± 0.0499      CatBoost    0.8026 ¬± 0.0068 0.8056 ¬± 0.0082
  TabR         2.2980 ¬± 0.0529 2.2228 ¬± 0.0501      TabR        0.7995 ¬± 0.0054 0.8015 ¬± 0.0037
  TabR‚Ä°        2.1278 ¬± 0.0783 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8023 ¬± 0.0088 ‚Äì
  MNCA         2.2603 ¬± 0.0479 2.2339 ¬± 0.0508      MNCA        0.7961 ¬± 0.0065 0.8003 ¬± 0.0077
  MNCA‚Ä°        2.2105 ¬± 0.0483 2.1396 ¬± 0.0474      MNCA‚Ä°       0.7977 ¬± 0.0081 0.8010 ¬± 0.0084
  TabM‚ôÝ        2.1940 ¬± 0.0523 2.1677 ¬± 0.0487      TabM‚ôÝ       0.7908 ¬± 0.0068 0.7915 ¬± 0.0068
  TabM         2.1402 ¬± 0.0588 2.1265 ¬± 0.0580      TabM        0.7944 ¬± 0.0060 0.7944 ¬± 0.0052
  TabM[G]      2.1549 ¬± 0.0626 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.7935 ¬± 0.0064 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     2.1638 ¬± 0.0420 2.1508 ¬± 0.0416      TabMmini    0.7941 ¬± 0.0055 0.7943 ¬± 0.0045
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    2.1391 ¬± 0.0542 2.1221 ¬± 0.0570      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.7989 ¬± 0.0086 0.8002 ¬± 0.0074


                Brazilian houses ‚Üì                               MagicTelescope ‚Üë
  Method       Single model      Ensemble           Method      Single model     Ensemble
  MLP          0.0473 ¬± 0.0179 0.0440 ¬± 0.0207      MLP         0.8539 ¬± 0.0060 0.8566 ¬± 0.0061
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì                0.8579 ¬± 0.0064
  ResNet       0.0505 ¬± 0.0181 0.0458 ¬± 0.0207      ResNet      0.8589 ¬± 0.0068 0.8651 ¬± 0.0049
  DCN2         0.0477 ¬± 0.0172 0.0427 ¬± 0.0207      DCN2        0.8432 ¬± 0.0074 0.8490 ¬± 0.0046
  SNN          0.0630 ¬± 0.0162 0.0556 ¬± 0.0175      SNN         0.8536 ¬± 0.0052 0.8567 ¬± 0.0047
  Trompt       0.0404 ¬± 0.0266 ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.8605 ¬± 0.0102 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.0470 ¬± 0.0192 0.0437 ¬± 0.0217      AutoInt     0.8522 ¬± 0.0056 0.8560 ¬± 0.0034
  MLP-Mixer    0.0513 ¬± 0.0234 0.0484 ¬± 0.0262      MLP-Mixer   0.8571 ¬± 0.0080 0.8624 ¬± 0.0044
  Excel‚àó       0.0450 ¬± 0.0156 0.0418 ¬± 0.0190      Excel‚àó      0.8480 ¬± 0.0090 0.8543 ¬± 0.0075
  SAINT        0.0479 ¬± 0.0205 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.8595 ¬± 0.0060 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.0438 ¬± 0.0181 0.0412 ¬± 0.0204      FT-T        0.8588 ¬± 0.0046 0.8643 ¬± 0.0037
  T2G          0.0468 ¬± 0.0165 0.0436 ¬± 0.0211      T2G         0.8553 ¬± 0.0055 0.8595 ¬± 0.0051
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.0426 ¬± 0.0180 0.0397 ¬± 0.0206      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8591 ¬± 0.0061 0.8626 ¬± 0.0044
  MLP‚Ä°         0.0437 ¬± 0.0203 0.0407 ¬± 0.0230      MLP‚Ä°        0.8575 ¬± 0.0056 0.8605 ¬± 0.0051
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.0421 ¬± 0.0209 0.0409 ¬± 0.0226      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8593 ¬± 0.0054 0.8621 ¬± 0.0037
  XGBoost      0.0541 ¬± 0.0270 0.0535 ¬± 0.0287      XGBoost     0.8550 ¬± 0.0094 0.8589 ¬± 0.0110
  LightGBM     0.0603 ¬± 0.0249 0.0589 ¬± 0.0271      LightGBM    0.8547 ¬± 0.0085 0.8556 ¬± 0.0086
  CatBoost     0.0468 ¬± 0.0312 0.0456 ¬± 0.0332      CatBoost    0.8586 ¬± 0.0070 0.8588 ¬± 0.0077
  TabR         0.0490 ¬± 0.0152 0.0454 ¬± 0.0170      TabR        0.8682 ¬± 0.0058 0.8729 ¬± 0.0038
  TabR‚Ä°        0.0451 ¬± 0.0163 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8641 ¬± 0.0052 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.0527 ¬± 0.0157 0.0509 ¬± 0.0180      MNCA        0.8602 ¬± 0.0061 0.8628 ¬± 0.0041
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.0553 ¬± 0.0192 0.0511 ¬± 0.0191      MNCA‚Ä°       0.8622 ¬± 0.0085 0.8681 ¬± 0.0064
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.0443 ¬± 0.0213 0.0431 ¬± 0.0233      TabM‚ôÝ       0.8607 ¬± 0.0058 0.8622 ¬± 0.0050
  TabM         0.0417 ¬± 0.0208 0.0413 ¬± 0.0222      TabM        0.8622 ¬± 0.0049 0.8631 ¬± 0.0046
  TabM[G]      0.0424 ¬± 0.0201 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.8600 ¬± 0.0055 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.0433 ¬± 0.0232 0.0428 ¬± 0.0247      TabMmini    0.8606 ¬± 0.0055 0.8618 ¬± 0.0049
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.0416 ¬± 0.0215 0.0406 ¬± 0.0230      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8644 ¬± 0.0088 0.8673 ¬± 0.0075


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Ailerons ‚Üì                                  MiamiHousing2016 ‚Üì
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MLP         0.1614 ¬± 0.0033 0.1574 ¬± 0.0043
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      ResNet      0.1548 ¬± 0.0030 0.1511 ¬± 0.0027
  DCN2         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      DCN2        0.1683 ¬± 0.0099 0.1575 ¬± 0.0047
  SNN          0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      SNN         0.1618 ¬± 0.0029 0.1557 ¬± 0.0021
  Trompt       0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.1478 ¬± 0.0028 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      AutoInt     0.1537 ¬± 0.0035 0.1478 ¬± 0.0027
  MLP-Mixer    0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MLP-Mixer   0.1527 ¬± 0.0037 0.1479 ¬± 0.0033
  Excel‚àó       0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      Excel‚àó      0.1519 ¬± 0.0038 0.1442 ¬± 0.0022
  SAINT        0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.1507 ¬± 0.0022 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      FT-T        0.1514 ¬± 0.0029 0.1462 ¬± 0.0031
  T2G          0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      T2G         0.1523 ¬± 0.0023 0.1478 ¬± 0.0024
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.1514 ¬± 0.0025 0.1479 ¬± 0.0017
  MLP‚Ä°         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚Ä°        0.1512 ¬± 0.0019 0.1470 ¬± 0.0024
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.1461 ¬± 0.0015 0.1433 ¬± 0.0022
  XGBoost      0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      XGBoost     0.1440 ¬± 0.0029 0.1434 ¬± 0.0029
  LightGBM     0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      LightGBM    0.1461 ¬± 0.0025 0.1455 ¬± 0.0030
  CatBoost     0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      CatBoost    0.1417 ¬± 0.0021 0.1408 ¬± 0.0026
  TabR         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      TabR        0.1417 ¬± 0.0025 0.1390 ¬± 0.0020
  TabR‚Ä°        0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.1392 ¬± 0.0023 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MNCA        0.1503 ¬± 0.0040 0.1477 ¬± 0.0032
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      MNCA‚Ä°       0.1475 ¬± 0.0031 0.1438 ¬± 0.0024
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ôÝ       0.1483 ¬± 0.0030 0.1465 ¬± 0.0029
  TabM         0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      TabM        0.1478 ¬± 0.0012 0.1471 ¬± 0.0011
  TabM[G]      0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.1482 ¬± 0.0012 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      TabMmini    0.1481 ¬± 0.0021 0.1471 ¬± 0.0020
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.0002 ¬± 0.0000 0.0002 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.1408 ¬± 0.0019 0.1399 ¬± 0.0018


            OnlineNewsPopularity ‚Üì                                    credit ‚Üë
  Method     Single model     Ensemble              Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP        0.8643 ¬± 0.0007 0.8632 ¬± 0.0005        MLP         0.7735 ¬± 0.0042 0.7729 ¬± 0.0047
  TabPFN     ‚Äì                ‚Äì                     TabPFN      ‚Äì               0.7636 ¬± 0.0045
  ResNet     0.8665 ¬± 0.0011 0.8639 ¬± 0.0000        ResNet      0.7721 ¬± 0.0033 0.7738 ¬± 0.0027
  DCN2       0.8714 ¬± 0.0013 0.8648 ¬± 0.0004        DCN2        0.7703 ¬± 0.0034 0.7746 ¬± 0.0026
  SNN        0.8692 ¬± 0.0015 0.8665 ¬± 0.0005        SNN         0.7712 ¬± 0.0045 0.7716 ¬± 0.0059
  Trompt     0.8623 ¬± nan     ‚Äì                     Trompt      0.7740 ¬± 0.0006 ‚Äì
  AutoInt    0.8636 ¬± 0.0022 0.8596 ¬± 0.0008        AutoInt     0.7737 ¬± 0.0050 0.7765 ¬± 0.0058
  MLP-Mixer 0.8615 ¬± 0.0008 0.8598 ¬± 0.0004         MLP-Mixer   0.7748 ¬± 0.0038 0.7768 ¬± 0.0059
  Excel‚àó     0.8605 ¬± 0.0024 0.8556 ¬± nan           Excel‚àó      0.7724 ¬± 0.0038 0.7740 ¬± 0.0069
  SAINT      0.8600 ¬± 0.0007 ‚Äì                      SAINT       0.7739 ¬± 0.0052 ‚Äì
  FT-T       0.8629 ¬± 0.0019 0.8603 ¬± 0.0000        FT-T        0.7745 ¬± 0.0041 0.7767 ¬± 0.0040
  T2G        0.8632 ¬± 0.0009 0.8572 ¬± nan           T2G         0.7744 ¬± 0.0046 0.7762 ¬± 0.0057
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite  0.8604 ¬± 0.0009 0.8591 ¬± 0.0004        MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.7749 ¬± 0.0055 0.7767 ¬± 0.0075
  MLP‚Ä°       0.8594 ¬± 0.0004 0.8585 ¬± 0.0001        MLP‚Ä°        0.7734 ¬± 0.0034 0.7747 ¬± 0.0043
  MLP‚ÄÝ       0.8585 ¬± 0.0003 0.8581 ¬± 0.0001        MLP‚ÄÝ        0.7758 ¬± 0.0040 0.7772 ¬± 0.0055
  XGBoost    0.8545 ¬± 0.0002 0.8543 ¬± 0.0000        XGBoost     0.7698 ¬± 0.0027 0.7706 ¬± 0.0029
  LightGBM 0.8546 ¬± 0.0002 0.8544 ¬± 0.0000          LightGBM    0.7686 ¬± 0.0028 0.7726 ¬± 0.0034
  CatBoost   0.8532 ¬± 0.0003 0.8527 ¬± 0.0001        CatBoost    0.7734 ¬± 0.0035 0.7752 ¬± 0.0038
  TabR       0.8677 ¬± 0.0013 0.8633 ¬± 0.0009        TabR        0.7730 ¬± 0.0043 0.7740 ¬± 0.0040
  TabR‚Ä°      0.8624 ¬± 0.0011 ‚Äì                      TabR‚Ä°       0.7723 ¬± 0.0037 ‚Äì
  MNCA       0.8651 ¬± 0.0003 0.8650 ¬± 0.0002        MNCA        0.7739 ¬± 0.0032 0.7757 ¬± 0.0026
  MNCA‚Ä°      0.8647 ¬± 0.0010 0.8624 ¬± 0.0006        MNCA‚Ä°       0.7734 ¬± 0.0045 0.7754 ¬± 0.0040
  TabM‚ôÝ      0.8584 ¬± 0.0003 0.8581 ¬± 0.0001        TabM‚ôÝ       0.7751 ¬± 0.0042 0.7755 ¬± 0.0049
  TabM       0.8579 ¬± 0.0003 0.8575 ¬± 0.0001        TabM        0.7760 ¬± 0.0043 0.7771 ¬± 0.0044
  TabM[G]    0.8579 ¬± 0.0004 ‚Äì                      TabM[G]     0.7754 ¬± 0.0045 ‚Äì
  TabMmini   0.8588 ¬± 0.0004 0.8581 ¬± 0.0003        TabMmini    0.7752 ¬± 0.0047 0.7754 ¬± 0.0048
  TabM‚ÄÝmini  0.8563 ¬± 0.0004 0.8558 ¬± 0.0002        TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.7761 ¬± 0.0033 0.7760 ¬± 0.0028


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   elevators ‚Üì                                         fifa ‚Üì
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.0020 ¬± 0.0001 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      MLP         0.8038 ¬± 0.0124 0.8011 ¬± 0.0143
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      ResNet      0.8025 ¬± 0.0140 0.7985 ¬± 0.0149
  DCN2         0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      DCN2        0.8046 ¬± 0.0135 0.7993 ¬± 0.0129
  SNN          0.0020 ¬± 0.0001 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      SNN         0.8074 ¬± 0.0140 0.8031 ¬± 0.0147
  Trompt       0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.7880 ¬± 0.0180 ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      AutoInt     0.7923 ¬± 0.0128 0.7886 ¬± 0.0127
  MLP-Mixer    0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      MLP-Mixer   0.7936 ¬± 0.0119 0.7903 ¬± 0.0133
  Excel‚àó       0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      Excel‚àó      0.7909 ¬± 0.0111 0.7862 ¬± 0.0161
  SAINT        0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.7901 ¬± 0.0118 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      FT-T        0.7928 ¬± 0.0132 0.7888 ¬± 0.0130
  T2G          0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      T2G         0.7928 ¬± 0.0139 0.7904 ¬± 0.0183
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.7940 ¬± 0.0118 0.7898 ¬± 0.0141
  MLP‚Ä°         0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚Ä°        0.7907 ¬± 0.0092 0.7870 ¬± 0.0096
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.7806 ¬± 0.0104 0.7800 ¬± 0.0114
  XGBoost      0.0020 ¬± 0.0000 0.0020 ¬± 0.0000      XGBoost     0.7800 ¬± 0.0108 0.7795 ¬± 0.0114
  LightGBM     0.0020 ¬± 0.0000 0.0020 ¬± 0.0000      LightGBM    0.7806 ¬± 0.0120 0.7787 ¬± 0.0122
  CatBoost     0.0020 ¬± 0.0000 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      CatBoost    0.7835 ¬± 0.0116 0.7817 ¬± 0.0114
  TabR         0.0049 ¬± 0.0000 0.0049 ¬± 0.0000      TabR        0.7902 ¬± 0.0119 0.7863 ¬± 0.0120
  TabR‚Ä°        0.0019 ¬± 0.0001 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.7914 ¬± 0.0136 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0019 ¬± 0.0000      MNCA        0.7967 ¬± 0.0138 0.7933 ¬± 0.0145
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      MNCA‚Ä°       0.7909 ¬± 0.0107 0.7866 ¬± 0.0106
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.0019 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ôÝ       0.7974 ¬± 0.0144 0.7954 ¬± 0.0160
  TabM         0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      TabM        0.7953 ¬± 0.0135 0.7942 ¬± 0.0148
  TabM[G]      0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.7948 ¬± 0.0135 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      TabMmini    0.7938 ¬± 0.0156 0.7920 ¬± 0.0176
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.0018 ¬± 0.0000 0.0018 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.7771 ¬± 0.0107 0.7761 ¬± 0.0117


                  house sales ‚Üì                                  medical charges ‚Üì
  Method       Single model     Ensemble            Method      Single model      Ensemble
  MLP          0.1790 ¬± 0.0009 0.1763 ¬± 0.0003      MLP         0.0816 ¬± 0.0001 0.0814 ¬± 0.0000
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.1755 ¬± 0.0014 0.1738 ¬± 0.0006      ResNet      0.0824 ¬± 0.0003 0.0817 ¬± 0.0001
  DCN2         0.1862 ¬± 0.0032 0.1778 ¬± 0.0015      DCN2        0.0818 ¬± 0.0003 0.0815 ¬± 0.0001
  SNN          0.1800 ¬± 0.0008 0.1770 ¬± 0.0004      SNN         0.0827 ¬± 0.0006 0.0817 ¬± 0.0001
  Trompt       0.1667 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.0812 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.1700 ¬± 0.0014 0.1670 ¬± 0.0008      AutoInt     0.0822 ¬± 0.0007 0.0814 ¬± 0.0001
  MLP-Mixer    0.1704 ¬± 0.0007 0.1690 ¬± 0.0005      MLP-Mixer   0.0814 ¬± 0.0002 0.0811 ¬± 0.0000
  Excel‚àó       0.1713 ¬± 0.0010 0.1668 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.0817 ¬± 0.0004 0.0813 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.1713 ¬± 0.0015 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.0814 ¬± 0.0002 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.1690 ¬± 0.0010 0.1659 ¬± 0.0004      FT-T        0.0814 ¬± 0.0002 0.0812 ¬± 0.0000
  T2G          0.1689 ¬± 0.0010 0.1664 ¬± nan         T2G         0.0813 ¬± 0.0002 0.0811 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.1699 ¬± 0.0008 0.1687 ¬± 0.0007      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.0812 ¬± 0.0002 0.0810 ¬± 0.0000
  MLP‚Ä°         0.1690 ¬± 0.0005 0.1676 ¬± 0.0003      MLP‚Ä°        0.0812 ¬± 0.0001 0.0809 ¬± 0.0001
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.1687 ¬± 0.0004 0.1681 ¬± 0.0001      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.0812 ¬± 0.0000 0.0811 ¬± 0.0000
  XGBoost      0.1694 ¬± 0.0003 0.1689 ¬± 0.0001      XGBoost     0.0825 ¬± 0.0001 0.0825 ¬± 0.0000
  LightGBM     0.1692 ¬± 0.0004 0.1686 ¬± 0.0001      LightGBM    0.0820 ¬± 0.0000 0.0820 ¬± 0.0000
  CatBoost     0.1669 ¬± 0.0001 0.1667 ¬± 0.0000      CatBoost    0.0816 ¬± 0.0000 0.0815 ¬± 0.0000
  TabR         0.1689 ¬± 0.0009 0.1657 ¬± 0.0003      TabR        0.0815 ¬± 0.0002 0.0812 ¬± 0.0000
  TabR‚Ä°        0.1636 ¬± 0.0009 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.0811 ¬± 0.0001 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.1737 ¬± 0.0013 0.1714 ¬± 0.0005      MNCA        0.0811 ¬± 0.0001 0.0810 ¬± 0.0000
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.1694 ¬± 0.0007 0.1670 ¬± 0.0003      MNCA‚Ä°       0.0809 ¬± 0.0000 0.0808 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.1692 ¬± 0.0011 0.1680 ¬± 0.0005      TabM‚ôÝ       0.0813 ¬± 0.0001 0.0812 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM         0.1666 ¬± 0.0003 0.1662 ¬± 0.0002      TabM        0.0812 ¬± 0.0000 0.0812 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM[G]      0.1667 ¬± 0.0003 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.0812 ¬± 0.0000 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.1673 ¬± 0.0004 0.1668 ¬± 0.0001      TabMmini    0.0813 ¬± 0.0000 0.0813 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.1652 ¬± 0.0003 0.1644 ¬± 0.0001      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.0811 ¬± 0.0001 0.0811 ¬± 0.0000


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      pol ‚Üì                                        superconduct ‚Üì
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model      Ensemble
  MLP          5.5244 ¬± 0.5768 4.9945 ¬± 0.5923      MLP         10.8740 ¬± 0.0868 10.4118 ¬± 0.0429
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì                ‚Äì
  ResNet       6.3739 ¬± 0.6286 5.8181 ¬± 0.6054      ResNet      10.7711 ¬± 0.1454 10.3495 ¬± 0.0168
  DCN2         6.5374 ¬± 0.9479 5.1814 ¬± 0.7775      DCN2        10.8108 ¬± 0.0957 10.4342 ¬± 0.0179
  SNN          6.1816 ¬± 0.7366 5.5959 ¬± 0.8243      SNN         10.8562 ¬± 0.1300 10.3342 ¬± 0.0509
  Trompt       3.2337 ¬± 0.0605 ‚Äì                    Trompt      10.4442 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      3.3295 ¬± 0.3379 2.7999 ¬± 0.1776      AutoInt     11.0019 ¬± 0.1391 10.4469 ¬± 0.0521
  MLP-Mixer    3.2011 ¬± 0.2921 2.8698 ¬± 0.2577      MLP-Mixer   10.7502 ¬± 0.0800 10.3281 ¬± 0.0450
  Excel‚àó       3.0682 ¬± 0.2389 2.5816 ¬± 0.0368      Excel‚àó      11.0879 ¬± 0.1571 10.4094 ¬± nan
  SAINT        2.7203 ¬± 0.1858 ‚Äì                    SAINT       10.7807 ¬± 0.1074 ‚Äì
  FT-T         2.6974 ¬± 0.1666 2.3718 ¬± 0.0724      FT-T        10.8256 ¬± 0.1692 10.3391 ¬± 0.0794
  T2G          2.9539 ¬± 0.1994 2.6282 ¬± 0.0730      T2G         10.8310 ¬± 0.1406 10.3017 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    2.8239 ¬± 0.2173 2.5266 ¬± 0.0605      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   10.5058 ¬± 0.0758 10.2322 ¬± 0.0463
  MLP‚Ä°         2.5452 ¬± 0.1221 2.3700 ¬± 0.0867      MLP‚Ä°        10.5061 ¬± 0.0330 10.2440 ¬± 0.0127
  MLP‚ÄÝ         2.4958 ¬± 0.1292 2.3651 ¬± 0.1223      MLP‚ÄÝ        10.7220 ¬± 0.0757 10.3758 ¬± 0.0606
  XGBoost      4.2963 ¬± 0.0644 4.2548 ¬± 0.0488      XGBoost     10.1610 ¬± 0.0201 10.1413 ¬± 0.0025
  LightGBM     4.2320 ¬± 0.3369 4.1880 ¬± 0.3110      LightGBM    10.1634 ¬± 0.0118 10.1552 ¬± 0.0050
  CatBoost     3.6320 ¬± 0.1006 3.5505 ¬± 0.0896      CatBoost    10.2422 ¬± 0.0222 10.2116 ¬± 0.0058
  TabR         6.0708 ¬± 0.5368 5.5578 ¬± 0.4036      TabR        10.8842 ¬± 0.1073 10.4800 ¬± 0.0280
  TabR‚Ä°        2.5770 ¬± 0.1689 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       10.3835 ¬± 0.0562 ‚Äì
  MNCA         5.7878 ¬± 0.4884 5.3773 ¬± 0.5463      MNCA        10.4419 ¬± 0.0640 10.2926 ¬± 0.0261
  MNCA‚Ä°        2.9083 ¬± 0.1364 2.6717 ¬± 0.0530      MNCA‚Ä°       10.5651 ¬± 0.0616 10.3155 ¬± 0.0253
  TabM‚ôÝ        3.3595 ¬± 0.4017 3.2130 ¬± 0.3979      TabM‚ôÝ       10.3379 ¬± 0.0338 10.1943 ¬± 0.0291
  TabM         3.0198 ¬± 0.2975 2.9595 ¬± 0.3107      TabM        10.2628 ¬± 0.0275 10.2300 ¬± 0.0108
  TabM[G]      3.0358 ¬± 0.3077 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     10.2572 ¬± 0.0463 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     3.1351 ¬± 0.1952 3.0478 ¬± 0.2061      TabMmini    10.2472 ¬± 0.0208 10.2094 ¬± 0.0057
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    2.2808 ¬± 0.0343 2.2383 ¬± 0.0111      TabM‚ÄÝmini   10.1326 ¬± 0.0186 10.0866 ¬± 0.0070


                     jannis ‚Üë                                      MiniBooNE ‚Üë
  Method       Single model    Ensemble             Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.7840 ¬± 0.0018 0.7872 ¬± 0.0007      MLP         0.9480 ¬± 0.0007 0.9498 ¬± 0.0001
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               0.7419 ¬± 0.0018      TabPFN      ‚Äì               0.9266 ¬± 0.0012
  ResNet       0.7923 ¬± 0.0024 0.7958 ¬± 0.0010      ResNet      0.9488 ¬± 0.0011 0.9504 ¬± 0.0005
  DCN2         0.7712 ¬± 0.0029 0.7825 ¬± 0.0009      DCN2        0.9433 ¬± 0.0011 0.9470 ¬± 0.0010
  SNN          0.7818 ¬± 0.0025 0.7859 ¬± 0.0011      SNN         0.9476 ¬± 0.0013 0.9491 ¬± 0.0010
  Trompt       0.8027 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.9473 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.7933 ¬± 0.0018 0.7983 ¬± 0.0013      AutoInt     0.9447 ¬± 0.0014 0.9473 ¬± 0.0010
  MLP-Mixer    0.7927 ¬± 0.0025 0.8019 ¬± 0.0012      MLP-Mixer   0.9446 ¬± 0.0014 0.9483 ¬± 0.0002
  Excel‚àó       0.7954 ¬± 0.0015 0.8021 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.9430 ¬± 0.0015 0.9451 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.7971 ¬± 0.0028 ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.9471 ¬± 0.0009 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.7940 ¬± 0.0028 0.7998 ¬± 0.0006      FT-T        0.9467 ¬± 0.0014 0.9486 ¬± 0.0010
  T2G          0.7998 ¬± 0.0024 0.8052 ¬± nan         T2G         0.9475 ¬± 0.0014 0.9508 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.7923 ¬± 0.0018 0.7945 ¬± 0.0010      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.9466 ¬± 0.0009 0.9478 ¬± 0.0004
  MLP‚Ä°         0.7947 ¬± 0.0017 0.7967 ¬± 0.0011      MLP‚Ä°        0.9473 ¬± 0.0010 0.9493 ¬± 0.0004
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.7891 ¬± 0.0013 0.7900 ¬± 0.0006      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.9482 ¬± 0.0008 0.9492 ¬± 0.0001
  XGBoost      0.7967 ¬± 0.0019 0.7998 ¬± 0.0007      XGBoost     0.9436 ¬± 0.0006 0.9452 ¬± 0.0003
  LightGBM     0.7956 ¬± 0.0017 0.7968 ¬± 0.0005      LightGBM    0.9422 ¬± 0.0009 0.9427 ¬± 0.0003
  CatBoost     0.7985 ¬± 0.0018 0.8009 ¬± 0.0012      CatBoost    0.9453 ¬± 0.0008 0.9459 ¬± 0.0005
  TabR         0.7983 ¬± 0.0022 0.8023 ¬± 0.0018      TabR        0.9487 ¬± 0.0008 0.9500 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR‚Ä°        0.8051 ¬± 0.0023 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.9475 ¬± 0.0007 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.7993 ¬± 0.0019 0.8042 ¬± 0.0013      MNCA        0.9488 ¬± 0.0010 0.9505 ¬± 0.0001
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.8068 ¬± 0.0021 0.8128 ¬± 0.0007      MNCA‚Ä°       0.9493 ¬± 0.0012 0.9501 ¬± 0.0008
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.8066 ¬± 0.0015 0.8075 ¬± 0.0004      TabM‚ôÝ       0.9500 ¬± 0.0005 0.9505 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM         0.8080 ¬± 0.0019 0.8102 ¬± 0.0017      TabM        0.9503 ¬± 0.0006 0.9501 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM[G]      0.8064 ¬± 0.0018 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.9496 ¬± 0.0010 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.8053 ¬± 0.0012 0.8066 ¬± 0.0001      TabMmini    0.9495 ¬± 0.0005 0.9500 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.8078 ¬± 0.0008 0.8086 ¬± 0.0005      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.9490 ¬± 0.0004 0.9492 ¬± 0.0002


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            nyc-taxi-green-dec-2016 ‚Üì                       particulate-matter-ukair-2017 ‚Üì
  Method       Single model      Ensemble           Method        Single model       Ensemble
  MLP          0.3951 ¬± 0.0009 0.3921 ¬± 0.0003      MLP           0.3759 ¬± 0.0004 0.3729 ¬± 0.0003
  TabPFN       ‚Äì                 ‚Äì                  TabPFN        ‚Äì                  ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.3899 ¬± 0.0016 0.3873 ¬± 0.0009      ResNet        0.3743 ¬± 0.0007 0.3718 ¬± 0.0005
  DCN2         0.3919 ¬± 0.0009 0.3889 ¬± 0.0003      DCN2          0.3759 ¬± 0.0012 0.3738 ¬± 0.0004
  SNN          0.3933 ¬± 0.0013 0.3899 ¬± 0.0004      SNN           0.3790 ¬± 0.0007 0.3744 ¬± 0.0002
  Trompt       0.3979 ¬± nan      ‚Äì                  Trompt        0.3700 ¬± nan       ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.4084 ¬± 0.0256 0.3967 ¬± 0.0059      AutoInt       0.3723 ¬± 0.0011 0.3692 ¬± 0.0010
  MLP-Mixer 0.3914 ¬± 0.0026 0.3861 ¬± 0.0013         MLP-Mixer 0.3741 ¬± 0.0010 0.3698 ¬± 0.0004
  Excel‚àó       0.3969 ¬± 0.0036 0.3897 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó        0.3699 ¬± 0.0014 0.3652 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.3905 ¬± 0.0013 ‚Äì                    SAINT         0.3704 ¬± 0.0014 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.3937 ¬± 0.0064 0.3889 ¬± 0.0018      FT-T          0.3735 ¬± 0.0012 0.3686 ¬± 0.0004
  T2G          0.3908 ¬± 0.0045 0.3858 ¬± nan         T2G           0.3676 ¬± 0.0024 0.3631 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.3812 ¬± 0.0018 0.3761 ¬± 0.0016      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite     0.3665 ¬± 0.0008 0.3642 ¬± 0.0003
  MLP‚Ä°         0.3795 ¬± 0.0016 0.3733 ¬± 0.0013      MLP‚Ä°          0.3657 ¬± 0.0007 0.3629 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.3680 ¬± 0.0006 0.3653 ¬± 0.0005      MLP‚ÄÝ          0.3649 ¬± 0.0011 0.3637 ¬± 0.0008
  XGBoost      0.3792 ¬± 0.0002 0.3787 ¬± 0.0000      XGBoost       0.3641 ¬± 0.0001 0.3640 ¬± 0.0000
  LightGBM 0.3688 ¬± 0.0002 0.3684 ¬± 0.0000          LightGBM 0.3637 ¬± 0.0001 0.3635 ¬± 0.0000
  CatBoost     0.3647 ¬± 0.0005 0.3632 ¬± 0.0003      CatBoost      0.3647 ¬± 0.0004 0.3637 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR         0.3577 ¬± 0.0222 0.3380 ¬± 0.0027      TabR          0.3613 ¬± 0.0005 0.3590 ¬± 0.0002
  TabR‚Ä°        0.3725 ¬± 0.0091 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°         0.3596 ¬± 0.0004 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.3728 ¬± 0.0012 0.3720 ¬± 0.0010      MNCA          0.3670 ¬± 0.0004 0.3649 ¬± 0.0002
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.3536 ¬± 0.0052 0.3407 ¬± 0.0009      MNCA‚Ä°         0.3646 ¬± 0.0001 0.3643 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.3866 ¬± 0.0006 0.3855 ¬± 0.0003      TabM‚ôÝ         0.3686 ¬± 0.0006 0.3679 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM         0.3849 ¬± 0.0005 0.3843 ¬± 0.0002      TabM          0.3671 ¬± 0.0007 0.3665 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM[G]      0.3848 ¬± 0.0005 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]       0.3667 ¬± 0.0009 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.3853 ¬± 0.0005 0.3845 ¬± 0.0003      TabMmini      0.3664 ¬± 0.0006 0.3655 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.3485 ¬± 0.0038 0.3448 ¬± 0.0020      TabM‚ÄÝmini     0.3593 ¬± 0.0004 0.3589 ¬± 0.0000


                  road-safety ‚Üë                                         year ‚Üì
  Method       Single model     Ensemble            Method       Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.7857 ¬± 0.0019 0.7873 ¬± 0.0004      MLP          8.9628 ¬± 0.0232 8.8931 ¬± 0.0066
  TabPFN       ‚Äì                0.7338 ¬± 0.0032     TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       0.7875 ¬± 0.0007 0.7898 ¬± 0.0008      ResNet       8.9658 ¬± 0.0239 8.8755 ¬± 0.0066
  DCN2         0.7781 ¬± 0.0014 0.7823 ¬± 0.0012      DCN2         9.2761 ¬± 0.0401 9.0640 ¬± 0.0156
  SNN          0.7847 ¬± 0.0010 0.7865 ¬± 0.0002      SNN          9.0054 ¬± 0.0256 8.9351 ¬± 0.0073
  Trompt       0.7804 ¬± nan     ‚Äì                   Trompt       8.9707 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      0.7826 ¬± 0.0030 0.7883 ¬± 0.0013      AutoInt      9.0430 ¬± 0.0280 8.9619 ¬± 0.0092
  MLP-Mixer    0.7878 ¬± 0.0032 0.7919 ¬± 0.0015      MLP-Mixer    8.9589 ¬± 0.0182 8.9086 ¬± 0.0177
  Excel‚àó       0.7864 ¬± 0.0053 0.7907 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó       9.0395 ¬± 0.0266 8.9551 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.7584 ¬± 0.0584 ‚Äì                    SAINT        9.0248 ¬± 0.0225 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.7907 ¬± 0.0012 0.7943 ¬± 0.0007      FT-T         9.0005 ¬± 0.0215 8.9360 ¬± 0.0013
  T2G          0.7912 ¬± 0.0026 0.7961 ¬± nan         T2G          8.9775 ¬± 0.0138 8.8979 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.7867 ¬± 0.0018 0.7903 ¬± 0.0002      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    8.9355 ¬± 0.0103 8.9063 ¬± 0.0030
  MLP‚Ä°         0.7853 ¬± 0.0014 0.7881 ¬± 0.0007      MLP‚Ä°         8.9455 ¬± 0.0173 8.9083 ¬± 0.0046
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.7899 ¬± 0.0009 0.7935 ¬± 0.0003      MLP‚ÄÝ         8.9379 ¬± 0.0206 8.8753 ¬± 0.0038
  XGBoost      0.8101 ¬± 0.0017 0.8129 ¬± 0.0004      XGBoost      9.0307 ¬± 0.0028 9.0245 ¬± 0.0015
  LightGBM     0.7982 ¬± 0.0012 0.7996 ¬± 0.0005      LightGBM     9.0200 ¬± 0.0025 9.0128 ¬± 0.0015
  CatBoost     0.8012 ¬± 0.0009 0.8022 ¬± 0.0002      CatBoost     9.0370 ¬± 0.0073 9.0054 ¬± 0.0028
  TabR         0.8403 ¬± 0.0014 0.8441 ¬± 0.0005      TabR         9.0069 ¬± 0.0152 8.9132 ¬± 0.0088
  TabR‚Ä°        0.8374 ¬± 0.0013 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°        8.9721 ¬± 0.0105 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.8080 ¬± 0.0013 0.8121 ¬± 0.0006      MNCA         8.9476 ¬± 0.0152 8.8977 ¬± 0.0037
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.8232 ¬± 0.0017 0.8287 ¬± 0.0008      MNCA‚Ä°        8.8973 ¬± 0.0082 8.8550 ¬± 0.0031
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.7946 ¬± 0.0013 0.7961 ¬± 0.0005      TabM‚ôÝ        8.8701 ¬± 0.0110 8.8517 ¬± 0.0022
  TabM         0.7958 ¬± 0.0011 0.7968 ¬± 0.0004      TabM         8.8705 ¬± 0.0043 8.8642 ¬± 0.0028
  TabM[G]      0.7954 ¬± 0.0016 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]      8.8723 ¬± 0.0080 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.7933 ¬± 0.0030 0.7970 ¬± 0.0006      TabMmini     8.9164 ¬± 0.0089 8.9021 ¬± 0.0036
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.7999 ¬± 0.0023 0.8059 ¬± 0.0012      TabM‚ÄÝmini    8.8737 ¬± 0.0119 8.8564 ¬± 0.0054


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 20: Extended results for TabReD Rubachev et al. (2024) benchmark. Results are grouped by
  datasets. One ensemble consists of five models trained independently under different random seeds.

               sberbank-housing ‚Üì                                     ecom-offers ‚Üë
  Method       Single model     Ensemble             Method        Single model     Ensemble
  MLP          0.2529 ¬± 0.0078 0.2474 ¬± 0.0052       MLP           0.5989 ¬± 0.0017 0.5995 ¬± 0.0011
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     TabPFN        ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     ResNet        ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  DCN2         0.2616 ¬± 0.0049 0.2506 ¬± 0.0015       DCN2          0.5996 ¬± 0.0043 0.6039 ¬± 0.0028
  SNN          0.2671 ¬± 0.0140 0.2555 ¬± 0.0033       SNN           0.5912 ¬± 0.0056 0.5961 ¬± 0.0033
  Trompt       0.2509 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                     Trompt        0.5803 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     AutoInt       ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  MLP-Mixer    ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     MLP-Mixer     ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  Excel‚àó       0.2533 ¬± 0.0046 0.2485 ¬± nan          Excel‚àó        0.5759 ¬± 0.0066 0.5759 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.2467 ¬± 0.0019 ‚Äì                     SAINT         0.5812 ¬± 0.0098 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.2440 ¬± 0.0038 0.2367 ¬± 0.0010       FT-T          0.5775 ¬± 0.0063 0.5817 ¬± 0.0021
  T2G          0.2416 ¬± 0.0025 0.2343 ¬± nan          T2G           0.5791 ¬± 0.0056 0.5824 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.2528 ¬± 0.0055 0.2503 ¬± 0.0029       MLP‚Ä°‚àílite     0.5800 ¬± 0.0029 0.5819 ¬± 0.0011
  MLP‚Ä°         0.2412 ¬± 0.0031 0.2355 ¬± 0.0006       MLP‚Ä°          0.5846 ¬± 0.0048 0.5872 ¬± 0.0018
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.2383 ¬± 0.0032 0.2327 ¬± 0.0009       MLP‚ÄÝ          0.5949 ¬± 0.0013 0.5953 ¬± 0.0006
  XGBoost      0.2419 ¬± 0.0012 0.2416 ¬± 0.0007       XGBoost       0.5763 ¬± 0.0072 0.5917 ¬± 0.0035
  LightGBM     0.2468 ¬± 0.0009 0.2467 ¬± 0.0002       LightGBM      0.5758 ¬± 0.0006 0.5758 ¬± 0.0003
  CatBoost     0.2482 ¬± 0.0034 0.2473 ¬± 0.0016       CatBoost      0.5596 ¬± 0.0068 0.5067 ¬± 0.0011
  TabR         0.2820 ¬± 0.0323 0.2603 ¬± 0.0048       TabR          0.5943 ¬± 0.0019 0.5977 ¬± 0.0009
  TabR‚Ä°        0.2542 ¬± 0.0101 ‚Äì                     TabR‚Ä°         0.5762 ¬± 0.0052 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.2593 ¬± 0.0053 0.2520 ¬± 0.0032       MNCA          0.5765 ¬± 0.0087 0.5820 ¬± 0.0047
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.2448 ¬± 0.0039 0.2404 ¬± 0.0025       MNCA‚Ä°         0.5758 ¬± 0.0050 0.5796 ¬± 0.0009
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.2469 ¬± 0.0035 0.2440 ¬± 0.0026       TabM‚ôÝ         0.5948 ¬± 0.0006 0.5952 ¬± 0.0004
  TabM         0.2439 ¬± 0.0021 0.2428 ¬± 0.0006       TabM          0.5941 ¬± 0.0003 0.5941 ¬± 0.0000
  TabM[G]      0.2436 ¬± 0.0027 ‚Äì                     TabM[G]       0.5970 ¬± 0.0010 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.2433 ¬± 0.0017 0.2422 ¬± 0.0004       TabMmini      0.5942 ¬± 0.0003 0.5943 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.2334 ¬± 0.0018 0.2324 ¬± 0.0009       TabM‚ÄÝmini     0.5910 ¬± 0.0012 0.5913 ¬± 0.0002


                 maps-routing ‚Üì                                   homesite-insurance ‚Üë
  Method       Single model     Ensemble             Method       Single model      Ensemble
  MLP          0.1625 ¬± 0.0001 0.1621 ¬± 0.0000       MLP          0.9506 ¬± 0.0005 0.9514 ¬± 0.0001
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     TabPFN        ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     ResNet        ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  DCN2         0.1656 ¬± 0.0004 0.1636 ¬± 0.0001       DCN2          0.9398 ¬± 0.0053 0.9432 ¬± 0.0018
  SNN          0.1634 ¬± 0.0002 0.1625 ¬± 0.0000       SNN           0.9473 ¬± 0.0013 0.9484 ¬± 0.0007
  Trompt       0.1624 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                     Trompt        0.9588 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     AutoInt       ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  MLP-Mixer    ‚Äì               ‚Äì                     MLP-Mixer     ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  Excel‚àó       0.1628 ¬± 0.0001 0.1621 ¬± nan          Excel‚àó        0.9622 ¬± 0.0004 0.9635 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.1634 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                     SAINT         0.9613 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.1625 ¬± 0.0003 0.1619 ¬± 0.0001       FT-T          0.9622 ¬± 0.0006 0.9633 ¬± 0.0001
  T2G          0.1616 ¬± 0.0001 0.1608 ¬± nan          T2G           0.9624 ¬± 0.0006 0.9637 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.1618 ¬± 0.0002 0.1613 ¬± 0.0000       MLP‚Ä°‚àílite     0.9609 ¬± 0.0009 0.9626 ¬± 0.0003
  MLP‚Ä°         0.1618 ¬± 0.0002 0.1613 ¬± 0.0001       MLP‚Ä°          0.9617 ¬± 0.0004 0.9630 ¬± 0.0002
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.1620 ¬± 0.0002 0.1614 ¬± 0.0000       MLP‚ÄÝ          0.9582 ¬± 0.0014 0.9599 ¬± 0.0002
  XGBoost      0.1616 ¬± 0.0001 0.1614 ¬± 0.0000       XGBoost       0.9601 ¬± 0.0002 0.9602 ¬± 0.0000
  LightGBM     0.1618 ¬± 0.0000 0.1616 ¬± 0.0000       LightGBM      0.9603 ¬± 0.0002 0.9604 ¬± 0.0001
  CatBoost     0.1619 ¬± 0.0001 0.1615 ¬± 0.0000       CatBoost      0.9606 ¬± 0.0003 0.9609 ¬± 0.0001
  TabR         0.1639 ¬± 0.0003 0.1622 ¬± 0.0002       TabR          0.9487 ¬± 0.0014 0.9505 ¬± 0.0001
  TabR‚Ä°        0.1622 ¬± 0.0002 ‚Äì                     TabR‚Ä°         0.9556 ¬± 0.0021 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.1625 ¬± 0.0001 0.1621 ¬± 0.0001       MNCA          0.9514 ¬± 0.0038 0.9522 ¬± 0.0027
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.1627 ¬± 0.0002 0.1623 ¬± 0.0001       MNCA‚Ä°         0.9620 ¬± 0.0006 0.9635 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.1612 ¬± 0.0001 0.1609 ¬± 0.0000       TabM‚ôÝ         0.9641 ¬± 0.0004 0.9644 ¬± 0.0003
  TabM         0.1612 ¬± 0.0001 0.1610 ¬± 0.0001       TabM          0.9640 ¬± 0.0002 0.9642 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM[G]      0.1611 ¬± 0.0001 ‚Äì                     TabM[G]       0.9641 ¬± 0.0003 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.1612 ¬± 0.0001 0.1610 ¬± 0.0000       TabMmini      0.9643 ¬± 0.0003 0.9645 ¬± 0.0001
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.1610 ¬± 0.0001 0.1609 ¬± 0.0000       TabM‚ÄÝmini     0.9631 ¬± 0.0003 0.9634 ¬± 0.0001


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 cooking-time ‚Üì                                 homecredit-default ‚Üë
  Method       Single model     Ensemble            Method      Single model      Ensemble
  MLP          0.4828 ¬± 0.0002 0.4822 ¬± 0.0000      MLP         0.8538 ¬± 0.0014 0.8566 ¬± 0.0005
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    ResNet      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  DCN2         0.4834 ¬± 0.0003 0.4822 ¬± 0.0001      DCN2        0.8471 ¬± 0.0019 0.8549 ¬± 0.0002
  SNN          0.4835 ¬± 0.0006 0.4818 ¬± 0.0002      SNN         0.8541 ¬± 0.0016 0.8569 ¬± 0.0010
  Trompt       0.4809 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      0.8355 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    AutoInt     ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  MLP-Mixer    ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    MLP-Mixer   ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  Excel‚àó       0.4821 ¬± 0.0005 0.4808 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      0.8513 ¬± 0.0024 0.8564 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.4840 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    SAINT       0.8377 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.4820 ¬± 0.0008 0.4813 ¬± 0.0005      FT-T        0.8571 ¬± 0.0023 0.8611 ¬± 0.0013
  T2G          0.4809 ¬± 0.0008 0.4797 ¬± nan         T2G         0.8597 ¬± 0.0007 0.8629 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.4811 ¬± 0.0004 0.4805 ¬± 0.0001      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   0.8598 ¬± 0.0009 0.8607 ¬± 0.0003
  MLP‚Ä°         0.4809 ¬± 0.0006 0.4804 ¬± 0.0003      MLP‚Ä°        0.8572 ¬± 0.0011 0.8590 ¬± 0.0003
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.4812 ¬± 0.0004 0.4807 ¬± 0.0002      MLP‚ÄÝ        0.8568 ¬± 0.0039 0.8614 ¬± 0.0014
  XGBoost      0.4823 ¬± 0.0001 0.4821 ¬± 0.0000      XGBoost     0.8670 ¬± 0.0005 0.8674 ¬± 0.0001
  LightGBM     0.4826 ¬± 0.0001 0.4825 ¬± 0.0001      LightGBM    0.8664 ¬± 0.0004 0.8667 ¬± 0.0000
  CatBoost     0.4823 ¬± 0.0001 0.4820 ¬± 0.0001      CatBoost    0.8627 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  TabR         0.4828 ¬± 0.0008 0.4814 ¬± 0.0004      TabR        0.8501 ¬± 0.0027 0.8548 ¬± 0.0003
  TabR‚Ä°        0.4818 ¬± 0.0006 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       0.8547 ¬± 0.0021 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.4825 ¬± 0.0004 0.4819 ¬± 0.0003      MNCA        0.8531 ¬± 0.0018 0.8569 ¬± 0.0004
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.4818 ¬± 0.0005 0.4809 ¬± 0.0003      MNCA‚Ä°       0.8544 ¬± 0.0033 0.8606 ¬± 0.0024
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.4803 ¬± 0.0006 0.4797 ¬± 0.0003      TabM‚ôÝ       0.8583 ¬± 0.0010 0.8599 ¬± 0.0006
  TabM         0.4804 ¬± 0.0002 0.4802 ¬± 0.0000      TabM        0.8599 ¬± 0.0010 0.8607 ¬± 0.0002
  TabM[G]      0.4800 ¬± 0.0002 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     0.8588 ¬± 0.0013 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.4803 ¬± 0.0001 0.4801 ¬± 0.0001      TabMmini    0.8605 ¬± 0.0010 0.8614 ¬± 0.0007
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.4804 ¬± 0.0001 0.4803 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ÄÝmini   0.8635 ¬± 0.0008 0.8646 ¬± 0.0004


                  delivery-eta ‚Üì                                     weather ‚Üì
  Method       Single model      Ensemble           Method      Single model    Ensemble
  MLP          0.5493 ¬± 0.0007 0.5478 ¬± 0.0006      MLP         1.5378 ¬± 0.0054 1.5111 ¬± 0.0029
  TabPFN       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    TabPFN      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  ResNet       ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    ResNet      ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  DCN2         0.5516 ¬± 0.0014 0.5495 ¬± 0.0004      DCN2        1.5606 ¬± 0.0057 1.5292 ¬± 0.0028
  SNN          0.5495 ¬± 0.0008 0.5479 ¬± 0.0001      SNN         1.5280 ¬± 0.0085 1.5013 ¬± 0.0034
  Trompt       0.5519 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    Trompt      1.5187 ¬± nan    ‚Äì
  AutoInt      ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    AutoInt     ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  MLP-Mixer    ‚Äì               ‚Äì                    MLP-Mixer   ‚Äì               ‚Äì
  Excel‚àó       0.5552 ¬± 0.0030 0.5524 ¬± nan         Excel‚àó      1.5131 ¬± 0.0022 1.4707 ¬± nan
  SAINT        0.5528 ¬± nan    ‚Äì                    SAINT       1.5097 ¬± 0.0045 ‚Äì
  FT-T         0.5542 ¬± 0.0026 0.5523 ¬± 0.0018      FT-T        1.5104 ¬± 0.0097 1.4719 ¬± 0.0040
  T2G          0.5527 ¬± 0.0016 0.5512 ¬± nan         T2G         1.4849 ¬± 0.0087 1.4513 ¬± nan
  MLP‚Ä°‚àílite    0.5521 ¬± 0.0014 0.5512 ¬± 0.0005      MLP‚Ä°‚àílite   1.5170 ¬± 0.0040 1.4953 ¬± 0.0023
  MLP‚Ä°         0.5535 ¬± 0.0019 0.5526 ¬± 0.0009      MLP‚Ä°        1.5139 ¬± 0.0031 1.4978 ¬± 0.0020
  MLP‚ÄÝ         0.5521 ¬± 0.0019 0.5511 ¬± 0.0007      MLP‚ÄÝ        1.5162 ¬± 0.0020 1.5066 ¬± 0.0008
  XGBoost      0.5468 ¬± 0.0002 0.5463 ¬± 0.0001      XGBoost     1.4671 ¬± 0.0006 1.4629 ¬± 0.0002
  LightGBM     0.5468 ¬± 0.0001 0.5465 ¬± 0.0000      LightGBM    1.4625 ¬± 0.0008 1.4581 ¬± 0.0003
  CatBoost     0.5465 ¬± 0.0001 0.5461 ¬± 0.0000      CatBoost    1.4688 ¬± 0.0019 ‚Äì
  TabR         0.5514 ¬± 0.0024 0.5480 ¬± 0.0005      TabR        1.4666 ¬± 0.0039 1.4547 ¬± 0.0008
  TabR‚Ä°        0.5520 ¬± 0.0015 ‚Äì                    TabR‚Ä°       1.4458 ¬± 0.0018 ‚Äì
  MNCA         0.5498 ¬± 0.0007 0.5488 ¬± 0.0002      MNCA        1.5062 ¬± 0.0054 1.4822 ¬± 0.0013
  MNCA‚Ä°        0.5507 ¬± 0.0013 0.5494 ¬± 0.0006      MNCA‚Ä°       1.5008 ¬± 0.0034 1.4782 ¬± 0.0011
  TabM‚ôÝ        0.5510 ¬± 0.0015 0.5504 ¬± 0.0004      TabM‚ôÝ       1.4786 ¬± 0.0039 1.4715 ¬± 0.0020
  TabM         0.5494 ¬± 0.0004 0.5492 ¬± 0.0001      TabM        1.4722 ¬± 0.0024 1.4675 ¬± 0.0009
  TabM[G]      0.5509 ¬± 0.0003 ‚Äì                    TabM[G]     1.4728 ¬± 0.0022 ‚Äì
  TabMmini     0.5497 ¬± 0.0007 0.5495 ¬± 0.0003      TabMmini    1.4716 ¬± 0.0016 1.4669 ¬± 0.0010
  TabM‚ÄÝmini    0.5510 ¬± 0.0019 0.5502 ¬± 0.0000      TabM‚ÄÝmini   1.4651 ¬± 0.0020 1.4581 ¬± 0.0016


                                               37
