Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


NE X UME: A DAPTIVE T RAINING AND I NFERENCE FOR
DNN S UNDER I NTERMITTENT P OWER E NVIRONMENTS
 Cyan Subhra Mishra, Deeksha Chaudhary, Jack Sampson, Mahmut Taylan Knademir, Chita Das
 CSE Department, The Pennsylvania State University
 {cyan, dmc6955, jms1257, mtk2, cxd12}@psu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

         The deployment of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in energy-constrained envi-
         ronments, such as Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensor Networks (EH-WSNs),
         introduces significant challenges due to the intermittent nature of power availability.
         This study introduces NExUME, a novel training methodology designed specifically
         for DNNs operating under such constraints. We propose a dynamic adjustment of
         training parameters—dropout rates and quantization levels—that adapt in real-time
         to the available energy, which varies in energy harvesting scenarios.
         This approach utilizes a model that integrates the characteristics of the network
         architecture and the specific energy harvesting profile. It dynamically adjusts
         training strategies, such as the intensity and timing of dropout and quantization,
         based on predictions of energy availability. This method not only conserves energy
         but also enhances the network’s adaptability, ensuring robust learning and inference
         capabilities even under stringent power constraints. Our results show a 6% to 22%
         improvement in accuracy over current methods, with an increase of less than 5%
         in computational overhead. This paper details the development of the adaptive
         training framework, describes the integration of energy profiles with dropout and
         quantization adjustments, and presents a comprehensive evaluation using real-
         world data. Additionally, we introduce a novel dataset aimed at furthering the
         application of energy harvesting in computational settings.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The increasing demand for ubiquitous, sustainable, and energy-efficient computing, combined
with advancements in energy harvesting systems, has spurred significant research into battery-less
devices (Gobieski et al., 2019; Resch et al., 2020; Mishra et al., 2021; Saffari et al., 2021; Afzal et al.,
2022). Such platforms represent the future of the Internet of Things (IoT) and energy harvesting
wireless sensor networks (EH-WSNs). Equipped with modern machine learning (ML) techniques,
these devices can revolutionize computing, monitoring, and analytics in remote, risky, and critical
environments such as oil wells, mines, deep forests, oceans, remote industries, and smart cities.
However, the intermittent and limited energy income of these deployments demands optimizations
for ML applications at the algorithm (Yang et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2022; Mendis et al., 2021),
orchestration (Maeng & Lucia, 2018; Mishra et al., 2021), compilation (Gobieski et al., 2018), and
hardware development (Qiu et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2024) layers. Despite
these advancements, achieving consistent and accurate inference—thereby meeting service level
objectives (SLOs)—in such intermittent environments remains a significant challenge, exacerbated by
unpredictable resources, form-factor limitations, and variable computational availability, particularly
when employing task-optimized deep neural networks (DNNs).
There are two major problems with performing DNN inference under intermittent power. (I) Energy
Variability: Even though DNNs can be tailored to match the average energy income of the energy
harvesting (EH) source through pruning, quantization, distillation, or network architecture search
(NAS) (Yang et al., 2018; 2017; Mendis et al., 2021), there is no guarantee that the energy income con-
sistently meets or exceeds this average. When the income falls below the threshold, the system halts
the inference and checkpoints the intermediate states (via software or persistent hardware) (Maeng
& Lucia, 2018; Qiu et al., 2020), resuming upon energy recovery. Depending on the EH profile,


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this might lead to significant delays and SLO violations. (II) Computational Approximation: To
address (I) and maintain continuous operation, EH-WSNs may skip some compute during energy
shortfalls by dropping neurons (zero padding) or by approximating computations (quantization).
Adding further approximation to save energy atop an already heavily reduced network can propagate
errors through the layers, leading to significant accuracy drops (Islam & Nirjon, 2019; Kang et al.,
2022; Lv & Xu, 2022; Kang et al., 2020), further violating SLOs.
In certain energy-critical scenarios, even EH-WSNs applying state-of-the-art techniques fail to
consistently meet SLOs, sometimes skipping entire inferences to deliver results on time. Funda-
mentally, while current DNNs can be trained or fine-tuned to fit within a given resource budget—be
it compute, memory, or energy—they are not trained to expect a variable or intermittent resource
income. Although intermittency-aware NAS (Mendis et al., 2021), could alleviate certain problems,
they often assume fixed resource constraints and do not account for real-time energy fluctuations.
Moreover, existing works like Keep in Balance (Yen et al., 2023), Stateful Neural Networks (Yen
et al., 2022), ePerceptive (Montanari et al., 2020), and Zygarde (Islam & Nirjon, 2019) address
aspects of intermittent computing but do not integrate energy variability awareness directly into the
training and inference processes to enable dynamic adaptation. This calls for revisiting the entire
training process; we need to train the DNN in such a way that it is aware of the intermittency and
adapts to it.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose NExUME (Neural Execution Under InterMittent
Environments), a novel framework designed specifically for environments with intermittent power
and EH-WSNs, with potential applications in any ultra-low-power inference system. NExUME
uniquely integrates energy variability awareness directly into both the training (DynFit) and inference
(DynInfer) processes, enabling DNNs to dynamically adapt computations based on real-time energy
availability. This involves an innovative strategy of learning instantaneous energy-aware dynamic
dropout and quantization selection during training, and an intermittency-aware task scheduler during
inference. The method includes targeted fine-tuning that not only regularizes the model but also pre-
vents overfitting, enhancing robustness to fluctuations in resource availability. Our key contributions
can be summarized as follows:

• DynFit: A novel training optimizer that embeds energy variability awareness directly into the DNN
  training process. This optimizer allows for dynamic adjustments of dropout rates and quantization
  levels based on real-time energy availability, thus maintaining learning stability and improving
  model accuracy under power constraints.
• DynInfer: An intermittency- and platform-aware task scheduler that optimizes computational
  tasks for intermittent power supply, ensuring consistent and reliable DNN operation. DynInfer
  leverages software-compiler-hardware co-design to manage and deploy tasks. With the help of
  DynFit, DynInfer provides 6%–22% accuracy improvements with ≤ 5% additional compute over
  existing methods.
• Dataset: A first-of-its-kind machine status monitoring dataset, involving multiple types of EH
  sensors mounted at various locations on a Bridgeport machine to monitor its activity status,
  facilitating research in predictive maintenance and Industry 4.0 applications.


2   BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
Energy Harvesting and Intermittent Computing: The exploding usage of IoTs, connected devices,
and wearable electronics project the number of battery operated devices to be 24.1 Billion by
2030 (Insights, 2023). This has a significant economic (users, products and data generating dollar
value) as well as environmental (battery and e-waste) impact (Mishra et al., 2024). In fact, advances
in EH has lead to a staggering development in intermittently powered battery-free devices (Maeng
& Lucia, 2018; Gobieski et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2020; Saffari et al., 2021; Afzal et al., 2022). A
typical EH setup consists of 5 components, namely, energy capture (solar panel, thermocouple, etc),
power conditioning, voltage regulation (buck or boost converter), energy storage (super capacitor)
and compute unit (refer §Appendix B for details about each of them). To cater towards the sporadic
power income and failures, an existing body of works explores algorithms, orchestration, compiler
support, and hardware development (Yang et al., 2017; 2018; Mendis et al., 2021; Maeng & Lucia,
2018; Gobieski et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2024; 2021; Ma
et al., 2016; 2017; Liu et al., 2015). Most of these works rely on software checkpointing (static


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and dynamic (Maeng & Lucia, 2018), refer §Appendix C) to save and restore, while some of the
prior works developed nonvolatile hardware (Ma et al., 2016; 2017) which inherently takes care
of the checkpointing. Considering the scope of these initiatives, it is crucial to acknowledge that,
despite the substantial support for energy harvesting and intermittency management, developing
intermittency-aware applications and hardware necessitates multi-dimensional efforts that span from
theoretical foundations to circuit design.
Intermittent DNN Execution/Training: As the applications deployed on such EH devices demand
analytics, executing DNNs on EH devices and EH-WSNs have become prominent (Lv & Xu, 2022;
Gobieski et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2020; Mishra et al., 2021). However, due to computational constraints,
limited memory capacity and restricted operating frequencies, many of these applications fail to
complete inference execution with satisfactory SLOs, despite comprehensive software and hardware
support (Mishra et al., 2021). While the works relying on loop-decomposition or task partition (e.g.,
see (Qiu et al., 2020; Gobieski et al., 2019) and the references therein) ensure “forward progress”,
they do not guarantee an inference completion while meeting SLOs. Optimizing DNNs for the energy
constraints (Yang et al., 2018; 2017), or performing early exit and depth-first slicing (Lv & Xu, 2022;
Islam & Nirjon, 2019) does ensure more forward progress, but such approaches compromise accuracy
while often imposing scheduling overheads and higher memory footprint. One major issue is, most of
the works leverage “pre-existing” DNNs, which are typically designed for running on a stable resource
environment, while being deployed on an intermittent environment with pseudo notion of stability
via check-pointing, and therefore, one direction of works (Mendis et al., 2021) looks for performing
network architecture search for intermittent devices. However, this research direction only accounts
for fixed lower and upper bounds of energy and compute capacities, overlooking the “sporadic” nature
of energy availability and the elasticity of the compute hardware (i.e., the ability to dynamically scale
frequency, compute, and memory). Moreover, while the DNN is designed to operate within a specific
power window, it is not trained to adapt to these fluctuations. Consequently, during extended periods
of energy scarcity, the system lacks mechanisms for computational approximation, such as dynamic
dropouts (neuron skipping) and dynamic quantization. Essentially, the DNN is trained to manage
within a static resource budget, ignoring the “dynamism” of the resources. In contrast, our work
prioritizes the integration of this dynamism in both the network architecture search (NAS) and the
training phases, adapting more effectively to fluctuating energy and compute conditions.


3     NE X UME F RAMEWORK

To address the issues with intermittency-aware DNN training and inference, we propose NExUME:
(Neural Execution Under InterMittent Environments). NExUME has three interrelated compo-
nents: (1) DynNAS: Intermittency- and platform-aware neural architecture search; (2) DynFit:
Intermittency- and platform-aware DNN training with dynamic dropouts and quantization; and (3)
DynInfer: Intermittency- and platform-aware task scheduling for inference. While each component
can individually optimize DNNs for intermittent environments, their combination yields the best
results. Our innovation lies in the integration of energy variability awareness directly into both the
training and inference processes, enabling dynamic adaptation to real-time energy conditions, which
is not addressed by existing methods (Mendis et al., 2021; Yen et al., 2023; 2022; Montanari et al.,
2020; Islam & Nirjon, 2019). To search for the best architecture for the given intermittent environ-
ment, DynNAS utilizes the approach proposed by iNAS (Mendis et al., 2021). After the network
architecture is determined, DynFit is used to train the network considering energy intermittency, and
DynInfer is employed to perform inference under intermittent power conditions.
In this section, we elaborate on the key components, focusing on DynFit and DynInfer, and explain
how they uniquely adapt DNN training and inference to intermittent power conditions.


3.1   DYN F IT: I NTERMITTENCY-AWARE L EARNING

DynFit is designed to optimize deep neural networks (DNNs) for execution in environments char-
acterized by intermittent power supply due to energy harvesting. The primary goal of DynFit is to
adapt the DNN’s training process to operate efficiently under unpredictable energy budgets while
maintaining acceptable accuracy and adhering to predefined service level objectives (SLOs).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DynFit introduces key mechanisms to dynamically adjust computational complexity based on energy
availability, thereby enabling energy-efficient execution of DNN models in constrained environments.
These mechanisms include: (i) Dynamic Dropout, which adjusts the dropout rates based on available
energy to reduce computational load; (ii) Dynamic Quantization, which modifies quantization levels
in response to energy constraints to save energy; and (iii) QuantaTask design, which defines atomic
computational units that can be executed without interruption given the energy budget.
Unlike standard implementations where dropout rates and quantization levels are fixed or adjusted
solely based on training dynamics, DynFit adjusts these parameters in real-time based on the energy
profile of the device. Specifically, during training, we simulate energy variability by incorporating
energy traces into the training loop. At each training iteration, the available energy Eb is sampled
from these traces. Based on Eb , we adjust the dropout rate di for each layer i according to:

                                                          Eb
                                       di = dmax 1 −             ,                                 (1)
                                                         Emax
where dmax is the maximum allowable dropout rate, and Emax is the maximum energy observed in
the traces. Similarly, the quantization levels qj are adjusted:
                                                               Eb
                                           qj = qmin + (qmax − qmin )
                                                                   .                               (2)
                                                              Emax
This ensures that when energy is low, higher dropout rates and lower quantization bit-widths are used
to reduce computational load, and vice versa.
Modeling Energy Consumption: The energy consumption of DNN operations is modeled based
on empirical profiling data from the hardware platform. Let eop denote the energy consumed per
computational operation, which varies with operation type and data precision. The total energy
consumption of a QuantaTask q is modeled as Eq = eop × ℓq , where ℓq is the number of operations
in the task. By integrating the energy model into the training process, DynFit ensures the adjustments
to dropout and quantization directly correspond to actual energy savings on the target hardware.
A QuantaTask is defined as the smallest atomic unit of computation that can be executed entirely
without interruption under the current energy and hardware constraints. Each QuantaTask ensures
that execution proceeds without partial computation, which would otherwise lead to overhead from
checkpointing and potential data corruption. The main properties of QuantaTasks are atomicity and
respect for energy constraints. Figure 1 illustrates QuantaTask execution with a simple example.

   A3                 B3

        A2                 B2
             A1
                                B1
                  X                                X                        X                      X


Figure 1: An example of variable QuantaTask in a matrix multiplication scenario. Depending on the
available energy, the task (vector inner product) can be divided into multiple iterations such that each
QuantaTask is guaranteed to finish given the energy availability. E is available energy, and Eb is the
energy required to finish one inner product.
Optimization Variables, Constraints, and Objective Function: The optimization problem is
formulated with variables: the weights W, dropout rates d, quantization levels q, and QuantaTask
sizes ℓ. The objective is to minimize the total loss, including prediction loss and regularization terms
penalizing energy consumption (subject to energy constraints):

                                                           M
                                                           X                     N
                                                                                 X
                                     min   L(Ŷ, Y) + λ1         cq (qj ) + λ2         cd (di ).       (3)
                                W,d,q,ℓ
                                                           j=1                   i=1

Formulation of the Composite Optimization Problem: The problem is non-convex due to the
discrete nature of quantization levels and dropout rates. We employ an alternating optimization
strategy, iteratively optimizing subsets of variables while keeping others fixed. Our method differs
from standard approaches by integrating energy constraints directly into the optimization, ensuring
that the network learns to adapt its parameters based on energy availability.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1.1    A DAPTIVE R EGULARIZATION S TRATEGY
DynFit introduces an adaptive regularization strategy to address potential overfitting and under-
training due to uneven weight updates caused by dynamic dropout and quantization. We monitor the
update frequency Fp of each weight wp over a window of T iterations:
                          T
                       1X                        1, if wp is updated at iteration t
                 Fp =        Up (t), Up (t) =                                                 (4)
                       T t=1                     0, otherwise
Weights with Fp < θlow are considered under-trained, and those with Fp > θhigh are considered
overfitting. We adjust dropout rates and apply L2 regularization accordingly to balance the training
process. This adaptive strategy ensures that all weights are adequately trained despite the dynamic
adjustments. Dropout scheduling techniques are incorporated, where dropout rates are increased
or decreased over time based on the training progress and energy availability, mitigating potential
overfitting introduced by static dropout variations.
Complexity Analysis of DynFit: The time complexity of DynFit during training is O(N · T ), where
N is the number of weights and T is the number of training iterations. The overhead introduced
by monitoring update frequencies and adjusting dropout rates is negligible compared to the overall
training time, as these operations are simple arithmetic computations per iteration. The space
complexity is O(N ) for storing the update frequencies and additional parameters. Compared to
classical training, DynFit adds minimal overhead, with a tradeoff of ≤ 5% additional compute for
significant gains in accuracy under intermittent power conditions.

3.2     DYN I NFER : I NTERMITTENCY-AWARE I NFERENCE S CHEDULING

DynInfer optimizes the inference phase of DNNs operating under intermittent power conditions.
Unlike traditional systems with stable power, intermittent environments pose unique challenges for
executing inference tasks efficiently and reliably.
The inference process is represented as a set of tasks T = {T1 , T2 , . . . , TN }, where each task Ti is
characterized by its energy requirement Ei , execution time τi , priority pi , deadline Di , and criticality
level ci . At any given time t, the available energy is denoted as Eb (t).
Task Fusion and Scheduling: DynInfer introduces a novel task scheduling algorithm that dynam-
ically adjusts to real-time energy availability. When the energy required for executing multiple
QuantaTasks exceeds the available energy budget, DynInfer employs task fusion to combine smaller
tasks into larger atomic units that can be executed within the energy constraints.
Formal Definition of Task Fusion: Let     P Q = {q1 , q2 , . . . , qk } be a set of QuantaTasks with in-
dividual energy requirements Eqi . If i Eqi ≤ Eb , the available P        energy budget, then tasks can
be executed sequentially without interruption. However, if i Eqi > Eb , we aim to fuse tasks to
minimize checkpointing overhead. Task fusion is formalized
                                                    P             as finding a partition of Q into subsets
Q1 , Q2 , . . . , Qm such that, for each subset Qj , qi ∈Qj Eqi ≤ Eb , and m is minimized. This
reduces the number of checkpoints and the overhead associated with task switching. For example,
Consider two convolution operations C1 and C2 with energy requirements EC1 and EC2 , respectively.
If individually EC1 , EC2 > Eb but EC1 + EC2 ≤ Eb , we fuse C1 and C2 into a single task. The
fused task executes both convolutions atomically within the energy budget, avoiding the overhead of
checkpointing between them.
Scheduling Problem Formulation: The scheduling problem is formulated with decision variables
si (task start times) and binary variables xi ∈ {0, 1} (indicating whether a task is scheduled). The
energy
P         availability constraint over time is expressed as (subject to energy and task constraints):
   i:si ≤t<fi Ei ≤ Eb (t) The objective is to maximize the total weighted priority of scheduled tasks:
                                         N
                                         X
                                               pi − αEi − β(fi − Di )+ xi .

                              max                                                                       (5)
                             {xi ,si }
                                         i=1

Scheduling Performance Assurance: Our scheduling heuristic, Energy-Aware Priority Scheduling,
while sub-optimal in the theoretical sense, is designed to perform near-optimally in practice for real-
time systems. We ensure its performance by: 1. Empirical Validation: We compare the heuristic’s


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


performance with the optimal solution on smaller problem instances using exhaustive search and find
that the heuristic achieves within 95% of the optimal task completion rate. 2. Theoretical Analysis:
The heuristic prioritizes tasks based on effective priority Pieff = Epii × ϕi , where ϕi accounts for
deadline urgency. This balances task importance against energy consumption, leading to efficient
utilization of available energy. 3. Complexity Analysis: The heuristic has a time complexity of
O(N log N ) due to sorting tasks based on Pieff , which is acceptable for real-time applications.
Complexity Analysis of DynInfer: The time complexity of the scheduling algorithm is O(N log N )
due to sorting tasks, and the space complexity is O(N ) for storing task parameters. Compared to
classical inference, DynInfer introduces additional overhead for scheduling and task fusion, but this
is offset by the gains in reliability and efficiency under intermittent power.
Handling Extremely Low or Sporadic Energy Levels: In environments with extremely low or
sporadic energy levels where consistent dropout and quantization adjustments may not be feasible,
NExUME handles this by: 1. Implementing a minimum viable model configuration that operates
at the lowest acceptable energy consumption, achieved by maximizing dropout rates and using the
lowest quantization bit-widths. 2. Prioritizing essential tasks and deferring non-critical computations.
3. Employing predictive energy harvesting models to anticipate energy availability and adjust
computations proactively. In extreme cases, the system can enter into a low-power standby mode and
resume operation when sufficient energy is available. These strategies ensure that the system remains
operational and provides degraded but acceptable performance under severe energy constraints.
Novelty in Energy-Aware Scheduling: While energy-aware scheduling is not novel in itself, our
contribution lies in adapting scheduling algorithms specifically for intermittent power environments.
Existing scheduling algorithms typically assume stable energy availability and do not account for
the atomicity constraints imposed by intermittent power supply. Our scheduling approach uniquely
integrates: 1. Real-time energy availability into scheduling decisions. 2. Task fusion to minimize
checkpointing overhead, which is critical in intermittent environments. 3. Dynamic adjustment of
computational tasks based on both energy and task criticality. These innovations enable efficient and
reliable DNN inference under intermittent power conditions, differentiating our work from existing
energy-aware schedulers.
Rationale Behind Method Design: The overall method design of NExUME is motivated by the
need to enable DNNs to function reliably in environments with intermittent and unpredictable energy
supply. By integrating energy variability into both training and inference, we allow the DNN to
adapt its computational load dynamically, ensuring that critical tasks are completed within energy
constraints. This holistic approach addresses the limitations of existing methods that treat training
and inference separately or do not account for real-time energy fluctuations.
Implementation Details: We propose a software-compiler-hardware co-designed framework for
devices with non-volatility
(e.g., MSP-EXP430FR5994          P1 User Program        Int Pred_Pwr(task_next)       backUp(task, data)
                                                                                                           Hardware Supported Monitoring, Backup and Restore
                                                                                                                                            Voltage Monitor


                                                           ...                   P2      ...
with FeRAM). Figure 2 out-      Def Infer(input,model)                                                   L1
                                    ...                    ret 2 //T=task_next          Write2FeRAM()
                                     Software


lines our design. User pro-     Def Coreset(IP,Algo)       ret 1 //save to coreset      ReStore(task)
grams ( P1 ) are supported          ...                    ret 0 //backup               ...
                                Def Communicate(Data)      ret -1 //pwr emgncy        Rdf4mFRAM(task)
by a moving-window power                                                                                  Power
predictor ( P2 ) that uses the                                                                          Emergency
                                  Middleware &


                                job conv2D(SZ_IP, SZ_mask) job convBN(SZ_IP, SZ_mask) Job ****
EH capacitor input to de-
                                    Compiler


                                     calc_compute();         C2 calc_compute();               Job ****       L3
                                                                                                                        Accelerator


                                 C1

                                                                                            ...
cide execution based on              calc_memory();              calc_memory();
                                                                                                 Job ****
                                                                                                                            LEA


                                     calc_engy();                calc_engy();
available energy. The com-                                                                           Cn
                                     reshape(input, mask)        reshape(input, mask)
piler decomposes the pro-            ret #task_Conv2D()          ret #task_BN()
                                                                                            task_Conv2D(ID#3)
                                  Assembly Code


gram into a DAG of jobs                   ret 2 //T=task_next        ret -1 //pwr emgncy     T4 ret <IP * MASK>
                                  Power Atomic


                                task_Conv2D(ID#1)     task_Conv2D(ID#2)   task_Conv2D(ID#3)                     Lr
(e.g., CONV2D ( C1 ), batch     T1 ret <IP * MASK>    T2 ret <IP * MASK>               * MASK> Rdf4mFRAM(#3)
                                                                                   BackUp(#3)
                                                                           T3 ret <IP
normalization ( C2 )). Larger               ret 1 //Coreset     ret 2 //T=task_next        Lb HOST-SIDE-Exec...
                                task_Conv2D(ID#7)     Coreset(OP#7,IS)   Communicate(IS#)       Recover(IS#)
tasks are profiled on the       T5 ret <IP * MASK>    L3... ret IS#       ... sendData()        Infer(RData)
MSP-EXP430FR5994, split
into Power Atomic Tasks        Figure 2: Software-Compiler-Hardware Driven DynInfer Flow.
(QuantaTasks), and opti-
mized in assembly. NV FeRAM is used for backup and restore during power emergencies.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

NExUME can be seamlessly integrated as a “plug-in” for both training and inference frameworks in
deep neural network (DNN) applications, specifically designed for intermittent and (ultra) low-power
deployments. In this section, we discuss the effectiveness of NExUME across two distinct types
of environments, highlighting its versatility and broad applicability. Firstly, we evaluate NExUME
using publicly available datasets (§4.2) commonly utilized in embedded applications across multiple
modalities—including image, time series sensor, and audio data. These datasets represent typical use
cases in embedded systems where energy efficiency and minimal computational overhead are crucial.
We use both commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and state-of-the-art ReRAM Xbar-based
hardware for this evaluation. Secondly, we introduce a novel dataset aimed at advancing research in
predictive maintenance and Industry 4.0 (Lasi et al., 2014), and test NExUME on a real manufacturing
testbed (§4.3) with COTS hardware. We have developed a first-of-its-kind machine status monitoring
dataset, available at https://hackmd.io/@Galben/rk7YN6jmR, which involves mounting
multiple types of sensors at various locations on a Bridgeport machine to monitor its activity status.


4.1   D EVELOPMENT AND P ROFILING OF NE X UME

NExUME uses a combination of programming languages and technologies to optimize its functional-
ity in intermittent and low-power computing environments. The software stack comprises Python3
(2.7k lines of code), CUDA (1.1k lines of code), and Embedded C (2.1k lines of code, not including
DSP libraries). Our training infrastructure utilizes NVIDIA A6000 GPUs with 48 GiB of memory,
supported by a 24-core Intel Xeon Gold 6336Y CPU. We employ PyTorch v2.3.0 coupled with CUDA
version 11.8 as our primary training framework. To assess the computational overhead introduced by
DynFit, a component of NExUME, we use NVIDIA Nsight Compute. During the training sessions
enhanced by DynFit, we observed an increase in the number of instructions ranging from a minimum
of 11.4% to a maximum of 34.2%. While the overhead in streaming multi-processor (SM) utilization
was marginal (within 5%), there was a noticeable increase in memory bandwidth usage, ranging
from 6% to 17%. Moreover, we have implemented a modified version of the matrix multiplication
operation that strategically skips the loading of rows and/or columns from the input matrices into the
GPU’s shared memory and register files. This adaptation is guided by the dropout mask vector and
the specific type of sparse matrix operation being performed. This technique effectively reduces the
number of load operations by an average of 12%, thereby enhancing the efficiency of computations
under energy constraints and contributing to the overall performance improvements in NExUME.


4.2   NE X UME ON P UBLICLY AVAILABLE DATASETS

Datasets: For image data, we consider the Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) and CIFAR10 (Alex,
2009) datasets; for time series sensor data, we focus on popular human activity recognition (HAR)
datasets, MHEALTH (Banos et al., 2014) and PAMAP2 (Reiss & Stricker, 2012); and for audio, we
use the AudioMNIST (Becker et al., 2023) dataset.
Inference Deployment Embedded Platforms: For commercially off-the-shelf micro-controllers,
we choose Texas Instruments MSP430FR5994 (Instruments, 2024a), and Arduino Nano 33 BLE
Sense (Arduino, 2024) as our deployment platforms with a Pixel-5 phone as the host device. The
host device is used for data logging—collecting SLOs, violations, power failures, etc., along with
running the “baseline” inferences without intermittency.
Baselines: We take the combination of best available approaches for DNN inference on intermittent
environment as baselines. All these DNNs are executed with the state-of-the-art checkpointing
and scheduling approach (Maeng & Lucia, 2018). Baseline Full Power is a DNN designed by
iNAS (Mendis et al., 2021) for running while the system is battery-powered and has to hit a target SLO
(latency < 500ms). Baseline AP is a DNN compressed to fit the average power of the energy harvesting
(EH) environment using iNAS (Mendis et al., 2021) and energy-aware pruning (EAP) (Yang et al.,
2017; 2018). Baseline PT takes the Full Power DNN and uses techniques proposed by (Yang et al.,
2018) and (Yang et al., 2017) to prune, quantize, and compress the model. Baseline iNAS+PT
designs the network from the ground up while combining the work of iNAS (Mendis et al., 2021) and
EAP (Yang et al., 2018; 2017).


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We also compare our approach with recent state-of-the-art methods specifically designed for in-
termittent systems, namely Stateful (Yen et al., 2022), ePerceptive (Montanari et al., 2020), and
DynBal (Yen et al., 2023). These methods introduce various techniques such as embedding state
information into the DNN, multi-resolution inference, multi-exit architectures, and runtime reconfig-
urability to handle intermittency in energy-harvesting devices. We have faithfully re-implemented
these methods as per the descriptions and adjusted them for a fair comparison under our setup.
Results: Table 1 shows the accuracy of our approach against the baselines and the recent state-of-the-
art methods using the TI MSP board powered by piezoelectric energy harvesting. The inferences
meeting the SLO requirements are the only ones considered for accuracy; i.e., a correct classification
violating the latency SLO is considered as “incorrect”.

  Datasets     Full Power      AP    PT     iNAS+PT        Stateful    ePerceptive   DynBal   NExUME
  FMNIST          98.70     71.90   79.72     83.68         85.40         86.25       87.50    88.90
  CIFAR10         89.81     55.05   62.00     66.98         68.50         70.20       71.75    76.29
 MHEALTH          89.62     59.76   65.40     71.56         73.80         74.95       76.10    80.75
  PAMAP           87.30     57.38   65.77     70.33         72.20         73.35       74.50    75.16
AudioMNIST        88.20     67.29   73.16     75.41         76.80         77.95       78.60    80.01

      Table 1: Accuracy comparison on TI MSP board using piezoelectric energy harvesting.

As observed in Table 1, NExUME consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods across
all datasets. For instance, on CIFAR10, NExUME achieves an accuracy of 76.29%, which is
approximately 4.54% higher than DynBal, the next best method. This improvement is significant in
the context of energy-harvesting intermittent systems, where achieving high accuracy under strict
energy constraints is challenging. The superior performance of NExUME can be attributed to
its unique integration of energy variability awareness directly into both the training (DynFit) and
inference (DynInfer) processes. Unlike other methods that either focus on modifying the DNN
architecture or optimizing inference configurations, NExUME adapts the DNN’s computational
complexity in real-time based on instantaneous energy availability, leading to more efficient use of
scarce energy resources and improved accuracy.

  Dataset           Platform        Energy Source        Stateful     ePerceptive    DynBal   NExUME
  FMNIST        MSP430FR5994         Piezoelectric        20.1           20.8         21.5     23.4
  CIFAR10        Arduino Nano          Thermal            16.0           16.5         17.0     18.5
 MHEALTH         ESP32 S3 Eye        Piezoelectric        18.5           19.0         19.6     21.0
  PAMAP            STM32H7             Thermal            16.5           17.0         17.5     19.0
AudioMNIST      Raspberry Pi Pico    Piezoelectric        20.5           21.0         21.7     23.2

              Table 2: Energy efficiency comparison on different hardware platforms.

Table 2 presents the energy efficiency in MOps/Joule for each dataset on different hardware platforms
using piezoelectric and thermal energy harvesting. NExUME achieves the highest energy efficiency
across all platforms and datasets. This demonstrates that NExUME not only improves accuracy but
also enhances energy utilization, making it highly suitable for deployment in energy-constrained
intermittent environments. The improvements in energy efficiency are due to NExUME’s ability to
adjust computational workload dynamically, minimizing energy wastage and ensuring that computa-
tions are matched to the available energy budget. NExUME, thanks to its inherent learnt adaptability,
significantly reduces saves, restores, reconfigurations and READ/WRITE from/to nonvolatile memory
or to the flash memory in the cases and devices where NVMs are not present which gives it edge over
the baselines across multiple devices.
Discussion of Results: 1. Dynamic Adaptation: NExUME’s DynFit and DynInfer components
enable real-time adjustments of dropout rates and quantization levels during training and inference
based on instantaneous energy availability. This allows the DNN to maintain high accuracy even
under severe energy constraints. 2. Energy Variability Awareness: By integrating energy profiles
directly into the training process, NExUME ensures that the model learns to handle fluctuations in
energy supply, leading to more robust performance compared to methods that do not consider energy
variability during training. 3. Efficient Scheduling: DynInfer’s energy-aware task scheduling and task


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fusion mechanisms reduce overhead from checkpointing and optimize the execution of tasks within
the available energy budget. 4. Holistic Approach: Unlike other methods that focus on either training
or inference optimizations, NExUME provides a comprehensive solution that addresses both phases,
leading to superior overall performance.
4.3 NE X UME ON M ACHINE S TATUS M ONITORING [Our New Dataset]

Automation and monitoring and analytics are the key ingredients in the upcoming Industry 4.0. To
enable sustainable machine status monitoring with energy harvesting (from machine vibrations or
Wifi signals) we evaluate our setup using Bridgeport machines for monitoring their status. Prior
works (Center, 2018) majorly focused on fault analysis but there are little to no datasets on predictive
maintenance. Setup and Sensor Arrangement: Two different types of 3-axis accelerometers (with
100Hz and 200Hz sampling rate) were placed in three different locations of a Bridgeport machine
to collect and analyze data under different operating status. There were 5 operating statuses: three
different speeds of rotation of the spindle (R1: 100RPM, R2: 200RPM, R3: 300RMP with no job;
RPM – rotations per minute), spindle under job (SJ), and spindle idle (SI). We collected over 700,000
samples over a period of 2 hours for each of the sensors. The sensor data were cleaned, normalized,
and converted to the power spectrum density for further analysis. We use iNAS (Mendis et al., 2021)
to find the DNNs meeting the energy income and train them using our proposed DynFit. Table 3
shows the accuracy of classification tasks against the different baselines and state-of-the-art methods.

Class    Full Power     AP       PT      iNAS+PT       Stateful   ePerceptive    DynBal     NExUME
 R1         84.93      74.46    77.02      79.62        80.85        81.50        82.15        83.60
 R2         85.85      76.21    79.18      80.36        81.95        82.60        83.25        84.50
 R3         81.09      72.43    75.38      78.18        79.05        79.70        80.35        80.85
 SJ         90.95      82.33    85.00      87.58        88.60        89.15        89.80        90.50
 SI         94.76      85.31    88.05      89.90        91.00        91.65        92.30        93.00

Table 3: Accuracy of NExUME and other methods for industry status monitoring dataset using TI
MSP board and piezoelectric energy source. Results collected over 200 experiment cycles.

NExUME demonstrates superior performance across all operating classes, achieving the highest
accuracy in each case. For example, for the spindle idle (SI) class, NExUME attains an accuracy
of 93.00%, outperforming DynBal by 0.70%. While the margins may appear small, in industrial
settings, even minor improvements in classification accuracy can have significant implications for
predictive maintenance and operational efficiency. The improved performance of NExUME in this
real-world application further validates its effectiveness and practical utility. By effectively managing
energy constraints and adapting to intermittent power conditions, NExUME enables more reliable and
accurate monitoring in industrial environments where energy harvesting is a viable power solution.

4.4     S ENSITIVITY AND A BLATION S TUDIES OF NE X UME

To elucidate the influence of variable SLOs and hardware-specific settings on system performance,
we conducted a comprehensive sensitivity study. This study involved adjusting the acceptable
latency and the capacitance of the energy harvesting setup to assess their impacts on accuracy. As
shown in Figure 3a, the accuracy improves with increased latency, but with diminishing returns.
Similarly, Figure 3b demonstrates that, while increasing capacitance should theoretically stabilize
the system, its charging characteristics can lead to extended charging times, thus exceeding the
latency SLO. Notably, some anomalies in the data were attributed to abrupt power failures, a common
challenge in intermittent energy harvesting systems. An ablation study evaluates the contributions of
individual components within NExUME. The results, plotted in Figure 3c, indicate that the greatest
improvements are derived from the “synergistic operation” of all components, particularly DynFit
and DynInfer. Although iNAS enhances network selection, its lack of intermittency awareness
significantly impacts accuracy.

4.5     L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION

We recognize that modern architectures like Transformers have become prevalent in the ML commu-
nity due to their superior performance on large-scale datasets. However, deploying such architectures


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            94 Accuracy vs. Latency for Different Classes                    Accuracy vs. Capacitance for Different Classes
                                                                            92                                                            100
                                                                                                                                                                    Abalation Study
            92                                                              90
            90                                                                                                                             80
                                                                            88
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                 Accuracy (%)
            88


                                                                                                                                 Accuracy (%)
            86                                                              86                                                             60
            84                                                              84
            82                                                              82                                                             40
            80                                                              80
            78                                                                                                                             20
                                                                            78
               200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600                             1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0                              0
                             Latency (ms)                                                   Capacitance (F)                                         FMNIST CIFAR10 MHEALTH PAMAP AudioMNISTMachine
                                                                                                                                                                       Dataset
              R1         R2           R3           SJ       SI                R1          R2         R3           SJ        SI                               DN       DN+DF        DN+DF+DI

                 (a) Accuracy vs Latency                                        (b) Accuracy vs Capacitance                                              (c) Ablation Study
                Figure 3: Sensitivity and ablation study. DN is DynNAS, DF is DynFit, and DI is DynInfer.

on ultra-low-power, energy-harvesting devices presents significant challenges due to their substantial
computational and memory requirements. NExUME focuses on enabling efficient and reliable
deployment of DNNs in intermittent environments, which are often constrained in terms of com-
putational resources and energy availability. In many real-world applications, especially in IoT
and edge computing, there is a critical need for smaller, energy-efficient models that can operate
autonomously without reliance on batteries. These tiny, reusable devices contribute to reducing
embodied carbon and represent a significant step toward sustainability. Moreover, we believe that
advancing the capabilities of smaller models in intermittent environments is crucial for widespread
adoption of sustainable, battery-free devices in various domains, including environmental monitoring,
industrial IoT, and healthcare. By addressing the challenges of intermittent computing, our work
contributes to the broader goal of enabling pervasive, sustainable intelligence at the edge.
NExUME is especially advantageous in intermittent environments, and its utility extends to ultra-
low-power or energy scavenging systems. However, the efficacy of DynFit and iNAS is contingent
upon the breadth and depth of the available dataset. Additionally, profiling devices to ascertain their
energy consumption, computational capabilities, and memory footprint necessitates detailed micro-
profiling using embedded programming. This process, while informative, yields only approximate
models that are inherently prone to errors. DynFit, with its stochastic dropout features, occasionally
leads to overfitting, necessitating meticulous fine-tuning. While effective in smaller networks, our
studies involving larger datasets (such as ImageNet) and more complex network architectures (like
MobileNetV2 and ResNet) reveal challenges in achieving convergence without precise fine-tuning.
DynFit tends to introduce multiple intermediate states during the training process, resulting in
approximately 14% additional wall-time on average. The development of DynInfer requires an
in-depth understanding of microcontroller programming and compiler directives. The absence
of comprehensive library functions along with the need for computational efficiency frequently
necessitates the development of in-line assembly code for certain computational kernels.
5               C ONCLUSIONS
This study presents NExUME, an advanced framework designed to optimize the training and inference
phases of deep neural networks within the constraints of intermittently powered, energy-harvesting
devices. By integrating adaptive neural architecture and energy-aware training techniques, NExUME
significantly enhances the viability of deploying machine learning models in environments with
limited and unreliable energy sources. The results from our extensive evaluations demonstrate
that NExUME can substantially outperform traditional methods in energy-constrained settings,
with improvements in accuracy and efficiency that facilitate real-world applications in remote and
wearable technology. Specifically, improvements ranging from 6.10% to 17.13% over existing
methods highlight NExUME’s capability to adapt dynamically to fluctuating energy conditions,
ensuring both operational longevity and computational integrity. The broader implication of this work
extends beyond technological advancements, suggesting a paradigm shift in how the machine learning
community approaches the design and deployment of systems in energy-limited environments. By
prioritizing energy efficiency and system adaptability, NExUME contributes to the sustainability
and accessibility of machine learning solutions, enabling their deployment in regions where power
infrastructure is absent or unreliable. This is particularly crucial in developing regions where
such technology can drive innovation in healthcare, agriculture, and education. Furthermore, the
development of energy-efficient, adaptive systems like NExUME is aligned with the growing need
for sustainable computing practices across all disciplines of technology. It challenges the machine
learning community to consider not only the accuracy and efficiency of algorithms but also their
environmental impact and accessibility, ensuring a broader positive social impact.


                                                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments, which have significantly
improved this paper. This work was supported in part by Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC),
the Center for Brain-inspired Computing (C-BRIC), NSF Grant #1822923, NSF Grant #2346953,
and the Clean Energy Smart Manufacturing Innovation Institute award #136067. We also gratefully
acknowledge the Factory for Advanced Manufacturing Education Lab at The Pennsylvania State
University for their support in data collection on the Bridgeport machine. All product names are used
solely for identification purposes and may be trademarks of their respective companies.

R EFERENCES
Sayed Saad Afzal, Waleed Akbar, Osvy Rodriguez, Mario Doumet, Unsoo Ha, Reza Ghaffarivar-
  davagh, and Fadel Adib. Battery-free wireless imaging of underwater environments. Nature
  communications, 13(1):5546, 2022.
Krizhevsky Alex. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. https://www. cs. toronto.
  edu/kriz/learning-features-2009-TR. pdf, 2009.
Arduino. Arduino nano 33 ble sense with headers. https://store-usa.arduino.
  cc/products/arduino-nano-33-ble-sense-with-headers, 2024. Accessed on
  05/19/2024.
Oresti Banos, Rafael Garcia, Juan A Holgado-Terriza, Miguel Damas, Hector Pomares, Ignacio Rojas,
  Alejandro Saez, and Claudia Villalonga. mhealthdroid: a novel framework for agile development
  of mobile health applications. In Ambient Assisted Living and Daily Activities: 6th International
  Work-Conference, IWAAL 2014, Belfast, UK, December 2-5, 2014. Proceedings 6, pp. 91–98.
  Springer, 2014.
Sören Becker, Johanna Vielhaben, Marcel Ackermann, Klaus-Robert Müller, Sebastian Lapuschkin,
  and Wojciech Samek. Audiomnist: Exploring explainable artificial intelligence for audio
  analysis on a simple benchmark. Journal of the Franklin Institute, 2023. ISSN 0016-0032.
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfranklin.2023.11.038. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/S0016003223007536.
Case Western Reserve University Bearing Data Center. Bearing fault data. https://
  engineering.case.edu/bearingdatacenter/download-data-file, 2018. Ac-
  cessed: 2024-11-27.
Graham Gobieski, Nathan Beckmann, and Brandon Lucia. Intermittent deep neural network inference.
  In SysML Conference, pp. 1–3, 2018.
Graham Gobieski, Brandon Lucia, and Nathan Beckmann. Intelligence beyond the edge: Inference
  on intermittent embedded systems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference
  on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pp. 199–213, 2019.
Transforma Insights. Iot & ai market forecasts. https://transformainsights.com/
  research/tam/market, 2023. Accessed: 05/19/2021.
Texas Instruments. Msp430fr5994 mixed-signal microcontrollers. https://www.ti.com/
  product/MSP430FR5994, 2024a. Accessed: 05/19/2024.
Texas Instruments. Msp dsp library: Low energy accelerator (lea) user’s guide.
  https://software-dl.ti.com/msp430/msp430_public_sw/mcu/msp430/
  DSPLib/1_30_00_02/exports/html/usersguide_lea.html, 2024b. Accessed:
  05/19/2024.
Bashima Islam and Shahriar Nirjon. Zygarde: Time-sensitive on-device deep inference and adaptation
  on intermittently-powered systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03854, 2019.
Sahidul Islam, Jieren Deng, Shanglin Zhou, Chen Pan, Caiwen Ding, and Mimi Xie. Enabling fast
  deep learning on tiny energy-harvesting iot devices. In 2022 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
  Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 921–926. IEEE, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chih-Kai Kang, Hashan Roshantha Mendis, Chun-Han Lin, Ming-Syan Chen, and Pi-Cheng Hsiu.
  Everything leaves footprints: Hardware accelerated intermittent deep inference. IEEE Transactions
  on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 39(11):3479–3491, 2020.
Chih-Kai Kang, Hashan Roshantha Mendis, Chun-Han Lin, Ming-Syan Chen, and Pi-Cheng Hsiu.
  More is less: Model augmentation for intermittent deep inference. ACM Transactions on Embedded
  Computing Systems (TECS), 21(5):1–26, 2022.
Heiner Lasi, Peter Fettke, Hans-Georg Kemper, Thomas Feld, and Michael Hoffmann. Industry 4.0.
  Business & information systems engineering, 6(4):239–242, 2014.
Yongpan Liu, Zewei Li, Hehe Li, Yiqun Wang, Xueqing Li, Kaisheng Ma, Shuangchen Li, Meng-Fan
  Chang, Sampson John, Yuan Xie, et al. Ambient energy harvesting nonvolatile processors: From
  circuit to system. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Conference, pp. 1–6,
  2015.
Mingsong Lv and Enyu Xu. Efficient dnn execution on intermittently-powered iot devices with
 depth-first inference. IEEE Access, 10:101999–102008, 2022.
Kaisheng Ma, Xueqing Li, Karthik Swaminathan, Yang Zheng, Shuangchen Li, Yongpan Liu, Yuan
  Xie, John Jack Sampson, and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan. Nonvolatile processor architectures:
  Efficient, reliable progress with unstable power. IEEE Micro, 36(3):72–83, 2016.
Kaisheng Ma, Xueqing Li, Jinyang Li, Yongpan Liu, Yuan Xie, Jack Sampson, Mahmut Taylan
  Kandemir, and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan. Incidental computing on iot nonvolatile processors. In
  Proceedings of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, pp.
  204–218, 2017.
Kiwan Maeng and Brandon Lucia. Adaptive dynamic checkpointing for safe efficient intermittent
  computing. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
  18), pp. 129–144, 2018.
Hashan Roshantha Mendis, Chih-Kai Kang, and Pi-cheng Hsiu. Intermittent-aware neural architecture
  search. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), 20(5s):1–27, 2021.
Cyan Subhra Mishra, Jack Sampson, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan.
  Origin: Enabling on-device intelligence for human activity recognition using energy harvesting
  wireless sensor networks. In 2021 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition
 (DATE), pp. 1414–1419. IEEE, 2021.
Cyan Subhra Mishra, Jack Sampson, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, Vijaykrishnan Narayanan, and
  Chita R Das. Usas: A sustainable continuous-learning´ framework for edge servers. In 2024 IEEE
  International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 891–907.
  IEEE, 2024.
Alessandro Montanari, Manuja Sharma, Dainius Jenkus, Mohammed Alloulah, Lorena Qendro, and
  Fahim Kawsar. eperceptive: energy reactive embedded intelligence for batteryless sensors. In
  Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, pp. 382–394, 2020.
Keni Qiu, Nicholas Jao, Mengying Zhao, Cyan Subhra Mishra, Gulsum Gudukbay, Sethu Jose, Jack
  Sampson, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, and Vijaykrishnan Narayanan. Resirca: A resilient energy
  harvesting reram crossbar-based accelerator for intelligent embedded processors. In 2020 IEEE
  International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pp. 315–327.
  IEEE, 2020.
Attila Reiss and Didier Stricker. Introducing a new benchmarked dataset for activity monitoring. In
  2012 16th international symposium on wearable computers, pp. 108–109. IEEE, 2012.
Salonik Resch, S Karen Khatamifard, Zamshed I Chowdhury, Masoud Zabihi, Zhengyang Zhao,
  Husrev Cilasun, Jian-Ping Wang, Sachin S Sapatnekar, and Ulya R Karpuzcu. Mouse: Inference
  in non-volatile memory for energy harvesting applications. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM
  International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pp. 400–414. IEEE, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ali Saffari, Sin Yong Tan, Mohamad Katanbaf, Homagni Saha, Joshua R Smith, and Soumik Sarkar.
  Battery-free camera occupancy detection system. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop
  on Embedded and Mobile Deep Learning, pp. 13–18, 2021.
Tianyi Shen, Cyan Subhra Mishra, Jack Sampson, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, and Vijaykrishnan
  Narayanan. An efficient edge-cloud partitioning of random forests for distributed sensor networks.
  IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, 2022.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Tien-Ju Yang, Yu-Hsin Chen, and Vivienne Sze. Designing energy-efficient convolutional neural
  networks using energy-aware pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 5687–5695, 2017.
Tien-Ju Yang, Andrew Howard, Bo Chen, Xiao Zhang, Alec Go, Mark Sandler, Vivienne Sze, and
  Hartwig Adam. Netadapt: Platform-aware neural network adaptation for mobile applications. In
  Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 285–300, 2018.
Chih-Hsuan Yen, Hashan Roshantha Mendis, Tei-Wei Kuo, and Pi-Cheng Hsiu. Stateful neural
  networks for intermittent systems. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
  Circuits and Systems, 41(11):4229–4240, 2022.
Chih-Hsuan Yen, Hashan Roshantha Mendis, Tei-Wei Kuo, and Pi-Cheng Hsiu. Keep in balance:
  Runtime-reconfigurable intermittent deep inference. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing
  Systems, 22(5s):1–25, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A    M ORE R ESULTS ON OTHER P LATFORMS AND EH S OURCES


Figure 4: Hardware setup of NExUME using MSP-EXP430FR5994 as the edge compute, Adafruit
ItsyBitsy nRF52840 Express for communicating, Energy Harvester Breakout - LTC3588 with super-
capacitors as energy rectification and storage and a Pixel-5 phone as the host.



                                                   MSP on Piezo
    Datasets        Full Power
                                     AP         PT   iNAS+PT          NExUME        Better
 FMNIST             98.70           71.90      79.72 83.68            88.90         6.24%
 CIFAR10            89.81           55.05      62.00 66.98            76.29         13.90%
 MHEALTH            89.62           59.76      65.40 71.56            80.75         12.84%
 PAMAP              87.30           57.38      65.77 65.38            75.16         14.97%
 AudioMNIST         88.20           67.29      73.16 75.41            80.01         6.10%
Table 4: Accuracy of NExUME on MSP board using vibration from a Piezoelectric harvestor. Better
refers to the improvement over iNAS+PT baseline.



                                                 MSP on Thermal
    Datasets        Full Power
                                     AP         PT   iNAS+PT NExUME                 Better
 FMNIST             98.70           80.92      86.32 88.93      95.62               7.53%
 CIFAR10            89.81           64.78      69.29 71.53      83.78               17.13%
 MHEALTH            89.62           69.77      73.99 77.70      89.62               15.34%
 PAMAP              87.30           66.33      71.84 74.47      85.24               14.46%
 AudioMNIST         88.20           73.84      78.03 81.60      87.64               7.40%
Table 5: Accuracy of NExUME on MSP board using thermocouple based thermal harvester. Better
refers to the improvement over iNAS+PT baseline.



                                                   Arduino on RF
    Datasets        Full Power
                                     AP         PT    iNAS+PT         NExUME        Better
 FMNIST             98.70           74.44      79.63 83.61            90.44         8.17%
 CIFAR10            89.81           58.11      63.91 65.01            79.60         22.44%
 MHEALTH            89.62           63.52      67.40 74.30            83.86         12.87%
 PAMAP              87.30           61.39      67.24 69.45            77.00         10.87%
 AudioMNIST         88.20           66.11      74.28 76.60            78.87         2.97%
Table 6: Accuracy of NExUME on Arduino nano board using WiFi based RF harvester. Better refers
to the improvement over iNAS+PT baseline.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   Arduino on Thermal
      Datasets        Full Power
                                        AP         PT    iNAS+PT NExUME                     Better
 FMNIST               98.70            77.04      80.44 83.08       89.90                   8.20%
 CIFAR10              89.81            60.38      65.90 66.98       80.70                   20.48%
 MHEALTH              89.62            65.74      69.88 72.41       85.75                   18.42%
 PAMAP                87.30            62.76      65.93 71.46       81.27                   13.73%
 AudioMNIST           88.20            69.12      73.86 77.79       83.54                   7.39%
Table 7: Accuracy of NExUME on Arduino nano board using thermocouple based thermal harvester.
Better refers to the improvement over iNAS+PT baseline.


B     D ETAILS ON E NERGY H ARVESTING

A typical energy harvesting (EH) setup captures and converts environmental energy into usable
electrical power, which can then support various electronic devices. Here’s a simplified breakdown of
the process:

      1. Energy Capture: The setup begins with a harvester, such as a solar panel, piezoelectric
         sensor, or thermocouple. These devices are designed to collect energy from their surround-
         ings—light, mechanical vibrations, or heat, respectively.
      2. Power Conditioning: Once energy is harvested, it often needs to be converted and stabilized
         for use. This is done using a rectifier, which transforms alternating current (AC) into a more
         usable direct current (DC).
      3. Voltage Regulation: After rectification, the power might not be at the right voltage for the
         device it needs to support. A matching circuit, including components like buck or boost
         converters, adjusts the voltage to the appropriate level, ensuring the device receives the
         correct current and voltage.
      4. Energy Storage: Finally, to ensure a continuous power supply even when the immediate
         energy source is inconsistent (like when a cloud passes over a solar panel), the system
         includes a temporary storage unit, such as a super-capacitor. This component helps smooth
         out the supply, providing steady power to the compute circuit.

By integrating these components, an EH system can sustainably power devices without relying on
traditional power grids, making it ideal for remote or mobile applications.

C     I NTERMITTENT C OMPUTING AND C HECK - POINTING

C.1     I NTERMITTENCY-AWARE G ENERAL M ATRIX M ULTIPLICATION (G E MM)

Here we explain the operation of an energy-aware algorithm for performing General Matrix Multipli-
cation (GeMM). The algorithm is designed to operate in environments where energy availability is
intermittent, such as in devices powered by energy harvesting. It includes mechanisms for loop tiling,
checkpointing, and resumption to manage computation across power interruptions effectively.

C.1.1    A LGORITHM OVERVIEW
The GeMM operation, typically expressed as C = A × B, where A, B, and C are matrices, is imple-
mented with considerations for energy limitations. The algorithm breaks the matrix multiplication
into smaller chunks (tiles), periodically saves the state before potential power losses, and resumes
computation from the last saved state upon power restoration.

C.1.2    F UNCTION D EFINITIONS
        • SAVE_STATE: Saves the current indices and the partial result of the output matrix C to
          non-volatile memory to allow recovery after a power interruption.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • LOAD_STATE: Retrieves the last saved indices and partial result from non-volatile memory
          to resume computation.

C.1.3    L OOP T ILING
The algorithm uses loop tiling to divide the computation into smaller blocks that can be managed
between power interruptions. This tiling not only makes the computation manageable but also
optimizes memory usage and cache performance, which is critical in constrained environments.

C.1.4    C HECK - POINTING M ECHANISM
Before each power interruption, detected through an energy monitoring system, the algorithm saves
the current state using the SAVE_STATE function. This state includes the loop indices and the
current value of the element being processed in C. This ensures that no computation is lost when the
power goes out.

C.1.5    R ESUMPTION M ECHANISM
Upon resuming, the algorithm loads the saved state using the LOAD_STATE function. This state
is used to continue the computation exactly where it left off, minimizing redundant operations and
ensuring efficiency.

D     F ORMULATION OF DYNAMIC D ROPOUTS :
D.1     L2 DYNAMIC D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

L2 Dynamic Dropout leverages the L2 norm of the weights to influence dropout rates, combined with
the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy constraints in intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: Let W be the weight matrix of a layer. The L2 norm of the weights is
calculated as:                             sX
                                 ∥W∥2 =           Wij2
                                                         i,j

Define the dropout probability pi for neuron i based on the L2 norm of its corresponding weights.
The idea is to use the inverse of the L2 norm to determine the probability:
                                                     α
                                          pi =
                                                ∥Wi ∥2 + ϵ
where α is a scaling factor to adjust the overall dropout rate, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid division
by zero. Define a binary dropout mask m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. Each element of
the mask is determined by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution with probability 1 − pi :
                                        mi ∼ Bernoulli(1 − pi )
Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:

                                            adropout
                                             i       = ai · mi

Training with L2 Dynamic Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Initialize the network
parameters W, dropout mask m, and scaling factor α. Define the energy budget Eb for a single
quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l. Compute the activations
a and apply the dropout mask:
                                            adropout
                                              i      = ai · mi
Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output. Calculate
the gradients of the loss with respect to the weights:
                                                   ∂L
                                                  ∂Wij

                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                              Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                         FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )
Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
Update the dropout mask m based on the L2 norm of the weights:
                                                 α
                                       pi =
                                            ∥Wi ∥2 + ϵ

                                      0 if Bernoulli(1 − pi ) = 0
                              mi =
                                      1 otherwise
Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                    ∂L
                                        W ←W−η          ⊙m
                                                   ∂W
where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with L2 Dynamic Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Check the available energy
using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate to ensure the inference can
be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce the dropout rate to improve
accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to obtain the output Y. This
approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions by incorporating dynamic
dropout influenced by the L2 norm of the weights, along with the QuantaTask optimization to handle
energy constraints.

D.2    O PTIMAL B RAIN DAMAGE D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

Optimal Brain Damage Dropout leverages a simplified version of the Optimal Brain Damage pruning
method to adjust dropout rates, combined with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy
constraints in intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: Let W be the weight matrix of a layer. The sensitivity of each weight
Wij is calculated using the second-order Taylor expansion of the loss function L:
                                           1 X ∂2L
                                    ∆L ≈               (Wij )2
                                           2 i,j ∂Wij2
         2
      ∂ L
where ∂W 2 is the second-order derivative (Hessian) of the loss with respect to the weights.
             ij

Define the dropout probability pi for neuron i based on the sensitivity of its corresponding weights.
The idea is to use the sensitivity to determine the probability:
                                               P ∂2L              2
                                             β j ∂W     2 (Wij )
                                                       ij
                                   pi =       P
                                                    ∂2L          2 +ϵ
                                         max      j ∂W 2  (W ij )
                                                         ij

where β is a scaling factor to adjust the overall dropout rate, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid division
by zero.
Define a binary dropout mask m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. Each element of the mask
is determined by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution with probability 1 − pi :
                                        mi ∼ Bernoulli(1 − pi )

Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:
                                            adropout
                                             i       = ai · mi


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training with Optimal Brain Damage Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Initialize the
network parameters W, dropout mask m, and scaling factor β. Define the energy budget Eb for a
single quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l.
Compute the activations a and apply the dropout mask:
                                                adropout
                                                 i       = ai · mi

Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output.
Calculate the gradients and Hessians of the loss with respect to the weights:
                                                  ∂L        ∂2L
                                                      ,
                                                 ∂Wij       ∂Wij2

For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                            Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                        FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )
Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )

Update the dropout mask m based on the sensitivities:
                                          P ∂2L            2
                                        β j ∂W     2 (Wij )
                                                   ij
                             pi =        P
                                               ∂2L         2 +ϵ
                                   max      j ∂W 2 (Wij )   ij


                                            0     if Bernoulli(1 − pi ) = 0
                                 mi =
                                            1     otherwise

Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                    ∂L
                                        W ←W−η          ⊙m
                                                   ∂W
where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with Optimal Brain Damage Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Check the
available energy using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate to ensure
the inference can be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce the dropout
rate to improve accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to obtain the output
Y. This approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions by incorporating
dynamic dropout influenced by the sensitivity of the weights, along with the QuantaTask optimization
to handle energy constraints.

D.3   F EATURE M AP R ECONSTRUCTION E RROR D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

Feature Map Reconstruction Error Dropout leverages the reconstruction error of feature maps to
adjust dropout rates, combined with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy constraints in
intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: Let W be the weight matrix of a layer and F be the feature maps
produced by the layer. The reconstruction error of a feature map Fi is calculated as:
                                            REi = ∥Fi − F̂i ∥2

where F̂i is the reconstructed feature map, and ∥ · ∥2 denotes the L2 norm.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Define the dropout probability pi for neuron i based on the reconstruction error of its corresponding
feature map. The idea is to use the reconstruction error to determine the probability:
                                                      γ REi
                                            pi =
                                                    max(RE) + ϵ
where γ is a scaling factor to adjust the overall dropout rate, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid division
by zero.
Define a binary dropout mask m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. Each element of the mask
is determined by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution with probability 1 − pi :
                                        mi ∼ Bernoulli(1 − pi )

Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:
                                                adropout
                                                 i       = ai · mi

Training with Feature Map Reconstruction Error Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization:
Initialize the network parameters W, dropout mask m, and scaling factor γ. Define the energy budget
Eb for a single quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l.
Compute the activations a and apply the dropout mask:
                                                adropout
                                                 i       = ai · mi

Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output.
Calculate the gradients of the loss with respect to the weights:
                                                       ∂L
                                                      ∂Wij

For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                              Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                         FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )
Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )

Update the dropout mask m based on the reconstruction error of the feature maps:
                                                      γ REi
                                            pi =
                                                    max(RE) + ϵ

                                            0     if Bernoulli(1 − pi ) = 0
                                 mi =
                                            1     otherwise

Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                    ∂L
                                        W ←W−η          ⊙m
                                                   ∂W
where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with Feature Map Reconstruction Error Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization:
Check the available energy using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate
to ensure the inference can be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce
the dropout rate to improve accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to
obtain the output Y. This approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions
by incorporating dynamic dropout influenced by the reconstruction error of the feature maps, along
with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy constraints.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4   L EARNING S PARSE M ASKS D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

Learning Sparse Masks Dropout adapts dropout masks as learnable parameters within the network,
inspired by Wen et al. (2016), combined with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy
constraints in intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: Let W be the weight matrix of a layer. Define a binary dropout mask
m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. In Learning Sparse Masks Dropout, the dropout masks
are treated as learnable parameters. The mask values are determined using a sigmoid function to
ensure they lie between 0 and 1:
                                             mi = σ(zi )
where zi are learnable parameters and σ(·) is the sigmoid function.
Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:
                                          adropout
                                           i       = ai · mi

Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output.
DynFit integrates closely with DynAgent, which serves as a repository of EH profiles and hardware
characteristics. Let Q represent the set of execution quanta, where each quanta q ∈ Q is defined by a
tuple (l, e):
                                               q = (l, e)
Here, l is the number of loop iterations and e is the estimated energy required for these iterations.
The goal is to optimize the loop iteration parameter l such that the energy consumption Eq for each
quanta q is within the energy budget Eb :
                                           X
                             minimize          Eq subject to Eq ≤ Eb
                                         q∈Q


Training with Learning Sparse Masks Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Initialize the
network parameters W, dropout mask parameters z, and scaling factor α. Define the energy budget
Eb for a single quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l.
Compute the activations a and apply the dropout mask:
                                            mi = σ(zi )
                                          adropout
                                           i       = ai · mi

Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ). Calculate the gradients of the loss with respect to the weights and
dropout mask parameters:
                                             ∂L       ∂L
                                                  ,
                                            ∂Wij     ∂zi
For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                              Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                       FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )
Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )

Update the dropout mask parameters z based on the gradients:
                                                        ∂L
                                          zi ← zi − η
                                                        ∂zi

Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                       ∂L
                                      W ←W−η              ⊙m
                                                       ∂W

                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with Learning Sparse Masks Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Check the
available energy using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate to ensure
the inference can be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce the dropout
rate to improve accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to obtain the output
Y. This approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions by incorporating
dynamic dropout with learnable mask parameters, along with the QuantaTask optimization to handle
energy constraints.

D.5    N EURON S HAPLEY VALUE D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

Neuron Shapley Value Dropout applies the concept of Shapley values from game theory (Aas et
al., 2021) to assess neuron importance for dropout, combined with the QuantaTask optimization to
handle energy constraints in intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: The Shapley value ϕi of neuron i is a measure of its contribution to
the overall network performance. It is calculated by considering all possible subsets of neurons and
computing the marginal contribution of neuron i to the network’s output:
                           1        X        |S|!(|N | − |S| − 1)!
                   ϕi =                                            [L(S ∪ {i}) − L(S)]
                          |N |!                       |N |
                                  S⊆N \{i}

where N is the set of all neurons, S is a subset of neurons not containing i, and L(·) denotes the loss
function.
Define the dropout probability pi for neuron i based on its Shapley value. Neurons with lower Shapley
values are more likely to be dropped:
                                                        δ
                                               pi =
                                                     ϕi + ϵ
where δ is a scaling factor to adjust the overall dropout rate, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid division
by zero.
Define a binary dropout mask m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. Each element of the mask
is determined by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution with probability 1 − pi :
                                         mi ∼ Bernoulli(1 − pi )

Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:

                                               adropout
                                                i       = ai · mi

Training with Neuron Shapley Value Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Initialize the
network parameters W, dropout mask m, and scaling factor δ. Define the energy budget Eb for a
single quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l.
Compute the activations a and apply the dropout mask:

                                               adropout
                                                i       = ai · mi

Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output.
Calculate the Shapley values ϕi for each neuron based on their contribution to the network’s perfor-
mance.
For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                            Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                             FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )

Update the dropout mask m based on the Shapley values:
                                                            δ
                                                  pi =
                                                         ϕi + ϵ

                                            0     if Bernoulli(1 − pi ) = 0
                                 mi =
                                            1     otherwise

Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                    ∂L
                                        W ←W−η          ⊙m
                                                   ∂W
where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with Neuron Shapley Value Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Check the
available energy using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate to
ensure the inference can be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce
the dropout rate to improve accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to
obtain the output Y. This approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions
by incorporating dynamic dropout influenced by the Shapley values of the neurons, along with the
QuantaTask optimization to handle energy constraints.

D.6    TAYLOR E XPANSION D ROPOUT WITH Q UANTATASK O PTIMIZATION

Taylor Expansion Dropout uses Taylor expansion (Li et al., 2016) to evaluate the impact of neurons
on loss for dropout adjustments, combined with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy
constraints in intermittent systems.
Mathematical Formulation: Let W be the weight matrix of a layer. The impact of neuron i on the
loss function L can be approximated using the first-order Taylor expansion:
                                                          ∂L
                                                ∆Li ≈         ai
                                                          ∂ai
                                            ∂L
where ai is the activation of neuron i, and ∂ai
                                                is the gradient of the loss with respect to the activation.
Define the dropout probability pi for neuron i based on the Taylor expansion approximation of its
impact on the loss:
                                                   λ
                                        pi =
                                                ∂L
                                               ∂ai ai + ϵ

where λ is a scaling factor to adjust the overall dropout rate, and ϵ is a small constant to avoid division
by zero.
Define a binary dropout mask m = [m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ] where mi ∈ {0, 1}. Each element of the mask
is determined by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution with probability 1 − pi :
                                        mi ∼ Bernoulli(1 − pi )

Apply the dropout mask during the forward pass. Let ai denote the activation of neuron i:
                                                adropout
                                                 i       = ai · mi

Training with Taylor Expansion Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Initialize the network
parameters W, dropout mask m, and scaling factor λ. Define the energy budget Eb for a single
quanta and for the entire inference. Initialize the loop iteration parameters l.
Compute the activations a and apply the dropout mask:
                                                adropout
                                                 i       = ai · mi


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Compute the loss L(Y, Ŷ) where Y is the output of the network and Ŷ is the target output.
Calculate the gradients of the loss with respect to the activations:
                                                       ∂L
                                                       ∂ai

For each layer L and loop i within the layer, estimate the energy Ei required for the current quanta
size li :
                              Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )
If Ei > Eb , fuse tasks to reduce the overhead:
                                        FuseTasks(L, i, li , Eb )
Update Ei after task fusion:
                               Ei ← DynAgent.estimateEnergy(L, i, li )

Update the dropout mask m based on the Taylor expansion approximation:
                                                             λ
                                                pi =
                                                       ∂L
                                                       ∂ai ai    +ϵ

                                            0     if Bernoulli(1 − pi ) = 0
                                 mi =
                                            1     otherwise

Perform the backward pass to update the network weights, considering the dropout mask:
                                                    ∂L
                                        W ←W−η          ⊙m
                                                   ∂W
where η is the learning rate and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
Inference with Taylor Expansion Dropout and QuantaTask Optimization: Check the available
energy using DynAgent. If energy is below a threshold, increase the dropout rate to ensure the
inference can be completed within the energy budget. Otherwise, maintain or reduce the dropout rate
to improve accuracy. Perform the forward pass with the updated dropout mask to obtain the output
Y. This approach ensures that the network is robust to varying energy conditions by incorporating
dynamic dropout influenced by the Taylor expansion approximation of the neurons’ impact on the
loss, along with the QuantaTask optimization to handle energy constraints.

E     W ORKINGS OF R E -RAM C ROSSBAR
E.1     R E -RAM CROSS - BAR FOR DNN INFERENCE :

ReRAM x-bars are an emerging class of computing devices that leverage resistive random-access
memory (ReRAM) technology for efficient and low-power computing. These devices can perform
multiplication and addition operations in a single operation, making them ideal for many signal pro-
cessing and machine learning applications. Moreover, these devices can also be used for performing
convolution operations, which are widely used in image and signal processing applications.

E.1.1    S IMPLE S INGLE C ELL E XAMPLE :
consider a simple example of a ReRAM crossbar array with two cells, where V1 and V2 are the
input voltages, G1 and G2 are the conductance values of the ReRAM devices, and I1 and I2 are the
resulting output currents. To perform multiplication-addition, we first apply the input voltages V1
and V2 to the rows of the crossbar array. The conductance values G1 and G2 of the ReRAM devices
are set to the corresponding weight values for the multiplication operation. The output currents I1
and I2 are then computed as follows:
                                                  I = I1 + I2
                                        = G1 × V 1 + G2 × V 2


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a) Re-RAM Cell           (b) A Full Re-RAM tile

                         Figure 5: DNN computation using ReRAM xBAR.



Here, the output currents I1 and I2 are the result of the multiplication of the input voltages V1 and
V2 by their respective weight values, which are summed together using the crossbar wires. Please
refer to Figure 5a for more details. As we can see, the input voltages V1 and V2 are applied to the
rows of the crossbar array, while the conductance values G1 and G2 are applied to the columns. The
output currents I1 and I2 are the result of the multiplication-addition operation, and are obtained by
summing the currents flowing through the ReRAM devices.
In practice, ReRAM crossbar arrays can have many more cells, and can be used to perform more
complex multiplication-addition and convolution operations. However, the basic principle remains
the same, where the input signals are applied to the rows, the weights are applied to the columns, and
the output signals are obtained by summing the currents flowing through the ReRAM devices.



E.1.2   E XTENDING TO C OMPLEX C OMPUTE :

In order to perform multiplication-addition in ReRAM x-bars, two arrays of weights and inputs are
used. The inputs are fed to the x-bar, which is a two-dimensional array of ReRAM crossbar arrays.
The crossbar arrays are composed of a set of row and column wires that intersect at a set of ReRAM
devices (refer Figure 5b). The ReRAM devices are programmed to have different resistance values,
which are used to store the weights.
During the multiplication-addition operation, the input signals are applied to the rows of the x-bar,
and the weights are applied to the columns. The output of each ReRAM device is the product of the
input and weight signals, which are added together using the crossbar wires. This results in a single
output signal that represents the sum of the weighted inputs.
To perform convolution, ReRAM x-bars use a similar approach, but with a more complex circuit.
The input signal is applied to the x-bar in the same way, but the weights are now applied in a
more structured way. Specifically, the weights are arranged in a way that mimics the convolution
operation, such that each weight corresponds to a specific location in the input signal. To perform the
convolution operation, the input signal is applied to the rows of the x-bar, and the weights are applied
to the columns in a structured way. The output signal is obtained by summing the weighted input
signals over a sliding window, which moves across the input signal to compute the convolution.
At the circuit level, the ReRAM x-bar for multiplication-addition typically includes several com-
ponents, such as digital-to-analog converters (DACs), analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), shift
registers, and hold capacitors. The DACs and ADCs are used to convert the digital input and weight
signals into analog signals that can be applied to the rows and columns of the x-bar. The shift registers
are used to apply the weight signals in a structured way, and the hold capacitors are used to store the
analog signals during the multiplication-addition operation. Similarly, for performing convolution,
the ReRAM x-bar typically includes additional components, such as delay lines and adders. The
delay lines are used to implement the sliding window for the convolution operation, while the adders
are used to sum the weighted input signals over the sliding window.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     P SEUDO C ODES


F.1     D EPTH - WISE S EPARABLE C ONVOLUTION 2D U SING TI LEA


Depth-wise separable convolution is an efficient form of convolution that reduces the computational
cost compared to standard convolution. Here we describe the implementation of depth-wise sep-
arable convolution 2D using the Low Energy Accelerator (LEA) in Texas Instruments’ MSP430
microcontrollers.


F.1.1    DEPTH - WISE S EPARABLE C ONVOLUTION 2D U SING C ONV 1D



The pseudo code described in Algorithm 1 implements a depth-wise separable convolution 2D
(DWSConv2D) using a 1D convolution primitive function (conv1D). The DWSConv2D function takes
four inputs: an input matrix, depth-wise kernels (DWsKernels), point-wise kernels (PtWsKernel), and
an output matrix. The depth-wise separable convolution is performed in two main steps: depth-wise
convolution and point-wise convolution.


Algorithm 1 Implementing Depth-wise Separable Convolution - DWSConv2D() using CONV1D ()
 1: Function DWSepConv2D(inputM atrix, DW sKernels, P tW sKernel, outputM atrix):
 2:   Initialize DW sOutput with zero values, same shape as inputM atrix
 3:   # Depth-wise Separable (DWs) convolution
 4:   for c ← 0 to channels(inputM atrix) − 1:
 5:      # Apply 1D convolution along rows
 6:      for i ← 0 to rows(inputM atrix[c]) − 1:
 7:         conv1D(inputM atrix[c][i, :], DW sKernels[c][0, :], DW sOutput[c][i, :])
 8:      # Apply 1D convolution along columns
 9:      for j ← 0 to cols(DW sOutput[c]) − 1:
10:         conv1D(DW sOutput[c][:, j], DW sKernels[c][:, 0], DW sOutput[c][:, j])
11:   # Point-wise (PtWs) convolution
12:   Initialize f inalOutput with zero values, with shape [rows(DW sOutput),
      cols(DW sOutput), channels(P tW sKernel)]
13:     for i ← 0 to rows(DW sOutput) − 1:
14:        for j ← 0 to cols(DW sOutput) − 1:
15:           for k ← 0 to channels(P tW sKernel) − 1:
16:             Initialize P tW sSum ← 0
17:             for c ← 0 to channels(DW sOutput) − 1:
18:                P tW sSum ← P tW sSum + DW sOutput[c][i][j] × P tW sKernel[c][k]
19:             f inalOutput[i][j][k] ← P tW sSum
20:     return f inalOutput


F.1.2    P SEUDOCODE WITH MICRO - CONTROLLER PRIMITIVES


The following pseudocode describes the steps to implement depth-wise separable convolution using
LEA primitives from TI’s DSP Library.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 depth-wise Separable Convolution 2D Using TI LEA
 1: function DWS EP C ONV 2D(inputM atrix, DW sKernels, P tW sKernel, outputM atrix)
 2:    Initialize tempM atrix1 and tempM atrix2 with zero values, same shape as inputM atrix
 3:    // Depth-wise convolution
 4:    for c ← 0 to channels(inputM atrix) − 1 do
 5:        // Apply 1D convolution along rows
 6:        for i ← 0 to rows(inputM atrix[c]) − 1 do
 7:             MSP _ CONV _ IQ 31(inputM atrix[c][i, :],               DW sKernels[c][0, :],
    tempM atrix1[c][i, :], cols(inputM atrix), F ILT ER_SIZE)
 8:         end for
 9:         // Apply 1D convolution along columns
10:         for j ← 0 to cols(tempM atrix1[c]) − 1 do
11:             MSP _ CONV _ IQ 31(tempM atrix1[c][:, j],                 DW sKernels[c][:, 0],
    tempM atrix2[c][:, j], rows(tempM atrix1), F ILT ER_SIZE)
12:         end for
13:    end for
14:    // Point-wise convolution
15:    Initialize f inalOutput with zero values, shape [rows(tempM atrix2), cols(tempM atrix2),
    channels(P tW sKernel)]
16:    for i ← 0 to rows(tempM atrix2) − 1 do
17:         for j ← 0 to cols(tempM atrix2) − 1 do
18:             for k ← 0 to channels(P tW sKernel) − 1 do
19:                  Initialize P tW sSum ← 0
20:                  for c ← 0 to channels(tempM atrix2) − 1 do
21:                      P tW sSum ← P tW sSum + tempM atrix2[c][i][j] × P tW sKernel[c][k]
22:                  end for
23:                  f inalOutput[i][j][k] ← P tW sSum
24:             end for
25:         end for
26:    end for
27:    return f inalOutput
28: end function


F.1.3   I MPLEMENTATION C ODE
C code that implements the pseudo-code using TI’s LEA (Instruments, 2024b) functions.

#include <msp430.h>
#include "DSPLib.h"

#define ROWS 64
#define COLS 64
#define CHANNELS 3
#define FILTER_SIZE 3

// Initialize your input, depth-wise kernels, point-wise kernels,
// and output matrices appropriately
_q31 inputMatrix[CHANNELS][ROWS][COLS];
_q31 DWsKernels[CHANNELS][FILTER_SIZE][FILTER_SIZE];
_q31 PtWsKernel[CHANNELS][CHANNELS];
_q31 tempMatrix1[CHANNELS][ROWS][COLS];
_q31 tempMatrix2[CHANNELS][ROWS][COLS];
_q31 finalOutput[ROWS][COLS][CHANNELS];

void DWSepConv2D() {
    // Depth-wise convolution
    for (int c = 0; c < CHANNELS; c++) {
        // Apply 1D convolution along rows


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            for (int i = 0; i < ROWS; i++) {
                msp_conv_iq31(&inputMatrix[c][i][0], DWsKernels[c][0],
                &tempMatrix1[c][i][0], COLS, FILTER_SIZE);
            }
            // Apply 1D convolution along columns
            for (int j = 0; j < COLS; j++) {
                msp_conv_iq31(&tempMatrix1[c][0][j], DWsKernels[c][0],
                &tempMatrix2[c][0][j], ROWS, FILTER_SIZE);
            }
      }

      // Point-wise convolution
      for (int i = 0; i < ROWS; i++) {
          for (int j = 0; j < COLS; j++) {
              for (int k = 0; k < CHANNELS; k++) {
                  _q31 PtWsSum = 0;
                  for (int c = 0; c < CHANNELS; c++) {
                      PtWsSum += tempMatrix2[c][i][j] * PtWsKernel[c][k];
                  }
                  finalOutput[i][j][k] = PtWsSum;
              }
          }
      }
}

F.2   TASK -BASED C ONV 2D

Here we describe the implementation of a task-based ‘CONV2D‘ function using the Low Energy
Accelerator (LEA) in Texas Instruments’ MSP430 microcontrollers. The function is designed to
handle energy constraints by decomposing the convolution loops into smaller quanta tasks. Foloowing
are the outline of the requirements:

      1. Define ‘QuantaTask‘ as the minimum iterations that can run.
      2. Decomposable loops: Each ‘QuantaTask‘ runs a certain part of the loop.
      3. Check for sufficient energy before launching a ‘QuantaTask‘.
      4. Fuse multiple ‘QuantaTask‘s to minimize load/store operations.
      5. Check for power loss after each ‘QuantaTask‘ or fused ‘QuantaTask‘ and checkpoint if
         necessary.


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Task-Based CONV2D Using TI LEA
 1: Define QuantaT ask as the minimum iterations we can run
 2: function TASK BASED CONV2D(inputM atrix, kernel, outputM atrix)
 3:    Initialize tempM atrix with zero values, same shape as inputM atrix
 4:    rows ← rows of inputM atrix
 5:    cols ← cols of inputM atrix
 6:    kernelSize ← size of kernel
 7:    i←0
 8:    while i < rows do
 9:        j←0
10:         while j < cols do
11:              remainingEnergy ← C HECK E NERGY(QuantaT ask)
12:              if remainingEnergy is sufficient then
13:                  E XECUTE Q UANTATASK(i, j, inputM atrix, kernel, tempM atrix)
14:                  U PDATE P ROGRESS(i, j, QuantaT ask)
15:                  if P OWER L OSS D ETECTED then
16:                       C HECKPOINT(i, j, tempM atrix)
17:                       break
18:                  end if
19:              else
20:                  wait for energy to replenish
21:              end if
22:         end while
23:    end while
24:     F USE TASKS
25:    return outputM atrix
26: end function
27: function E XECUTE Q UANTATASK(i, j, inputM atrix, kernel, tempM atrix)
28:    for ki ← 0 to kernelSize − 1 do
29:         for kj ← 0 to kernelSize − 1 do
30:              MSP _ CONV _ IQ 31(inputM atrix[i + ki][j + kj], kernel[ki][kj], tempM atrix[i][j], cols,
    kernelSize)
31:         end for
32:    end for
33: end function
34: function F USE TASKS
35:    remainingEnergy ← C HECK E NERGY(multiple_QuantaT ask)
36:    while remainingEnergy is sufficient do
37:         E XECUTE Q UANTATASK(i, j, inputM atrix, kernel, tempM atrix)
38:         U PDATE P ROGRESS(i, j, multiple_QuantaT ask)
39:         remainingEnergy ← C HECK E NERGY(multiple_QuantaT ask)
40:         if P OWER L OSS D ETECTED then
41:              C HECKPOINT(i, j, tempM atrix) break
42:         end if
43:    end while
44: end function
45: function C HECK E NERGY(QuantaT ask)
46:    # Check if there is enough energy to run the quanta task
47:    return remainingEnergy
48: end function
49: function P OWER L OSS D ETECTED
50:    # Check if power loss is detected
51:    return powerLoss
52: end function
53: function C HECKPOINT(i, j, tempM atrix)
54:    # Save the current state to non-volatile memory
55: end function
56: function U PDATE P ROGRESS(i, j, QuantaT ask)
57:    # Update loop indices based on the quanta task executed
58:    j ← j + QuantaT ask
59:    if j ≥ cols then
60:         j←0
61:         i ← i + QuantaT ask
62:    end if
63: end function

                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.1    I MPLEMENTATION C ODE

#include <msp430.h>
#include "DSPLib.h"

#define ROWS 64
#define COLS 64
#define KERNEL_SIZE 3
#define QuantaTask 8

// Define the FeRAM addresses for storing the checkpoint data
#define FERAM_ADDR_I 0xF000
#define FERAM_ADDR_J 0xF002
#define FERAM_ADDR_TEMPMATRIX 0xF004

_q31 inputMatrix[ROWS][COLS];
_q31 kernel[KERNEL_SIZE][KERNEL_SIZE];
_q31 tempMatrix[ROWS][COLS];
_q31 outputMatrix[ROWS][COLS];

void TaskBasedCONV2D() {
    int rows = ROWS;
    int cols = COLS;
    int kernelSize = KERNEL_SIZE;
    int i = 0;

        while (i < rows) {
            int j = 0;
            while (j < cols) {
                int remainingEnergy = CheckEnergy(QuantaTask);
                if (remainingEnergy > 0) {
                    ExecuteQuantaTask(i, j, inputMatrix, kernel, tempMatrix);
                    UpdateProgress(&i, &j, QuantaTask);
                    if (PowerLossDetected()) {
                         Checkpoint(i, j, tempMatrix);
                         break;
                    }
                } else {
                    // Wait for energy to replenish
                }
            }
        }

        FuseTasks();
}

void ExecuteQuantaTask(int i, int j, _q31 inputMatrix[][COLS],
    _q31 kernel[][KERNEL_SIZE], _q31 tempMatrix[][COLS]) {
    for (int ki = 0; ki < KERNEL_SIZE; ki++) {
        for (int kj = 0; kj < KERNEL_SIZE; kj++) {
            msp_conv_iq31(&inputMatrix[i + ki][j + kj],
                &kernel[ki][kj], &tempMatrix[i][j], COLS, KERNEL_SIZE);
        }
    }
}

void FuseTasks() {
    int remainingEnergy = CheckEnergy(QuantaTask);
    while (remainingEnergy > 0) {


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           ExecuteQuantaTask(i, j, inputMatrix, kernel, tempMatrix);
           UpdateProgress(&i, &j, QuantaTask);
           remainingEnergy = CheckEnergy(QuantaTask);
           if (PowerLossDetected()) {
               Checkpoint(i, j, tempMatrix);
               break;
           }
     }
}

int CheckEnergy(int QuantaTask) {
    // Energy checking - HW interrupt
    return 1;
}

int PowerLossDetected() {
    // ower loss detection - HW interrupt logic
    return 0;
}

void Checkpoint(int i, int j, _q31 tempMatrix[][COLS]) {
    // Disable interrupts to prevent corruption during the write process
    __disable_interrupt();

     // Save the indices i and j to FeRAM
     *((volatile int*)FERAM_ADDR_I) = i;
     *((volatile int*)FERAM_ADDR_J) = j;

     // Save the current state of tempMatrix to FeRAM
     // Assuming tempMatrix is a 2D array of dimensions [ROWS][COLS]
     for (int row = 0; row < ROWS; row++) {
         for (int col = 0; col < COLS; col++) {
             ((volatile _q31*)FERAM_ADDR_TEMPMATRIX)[row * COLS + col]
                 = tempMatrix[row][col];
         }
     }

     // Re-enable interrupts
     __enable_interrupt();
}

void RestoreCheckpoint(int *i, int *j, _q31 tempMatrix[][COLS]) {
    // Disable interrupts
    __disable_interrupt();

     // Restore the indices i and j from FeRAM
     *i = *((volatile int*)FERAM_ADDR_I);
     *j = *((volatile int*)FERAM_ADDR_J);

     // Restore the state of tempMatrix from FeRAM
     for (int row = 0; row < ROWS; row++) {
         for (int col = 0; col < COLS; col++) {
             tempMatrix[row][col] = ((volatile _q31*)
                 FERAM_ADDR_TEMPMATRIX)[row * COLS + col];
         }
     }

     // Re-enable interrupts
     __enable_interrupt();


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


}


void UpdateProgress(int *i, int *j, int QuantaTask) {
    *j += QuantaTask;
    if (*j >= COLS) {
        *j = 0;
        *i += QuantaTask;
    }
}


                                               31
