Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RANSFUSION : P REDICT THE N EXT T OKEN AND
D IFFUSE I MAGES WITH O NE M ULTI -M ODAL M ODEL
 Chunting Zhouµ∗     Lili Yuµ∗     Arun Babuµ     Kushal Tirumalaµ
 Michihiro Yasunagaµ      Leonid Shamisµ    Jacob Kahnµ      Xuezhe Maσ
                 µ                µ
 Luke Zettlemoyer      Omer Levy
 µ
     Work done at Meta
 σ
     University of Southern California



                                               A BSTRACT
              We introduce Transfusion, a recipe for training a multi-modal model over discrete
              and continuous data. Transfusion combines the language modeling loss function
              (next token prediction) with diffusion to train a single transformer over mixed-
              modality sequences. We pretrain multiple Transfusion models up to 7B parameters
              from scratch on a mixture of text and image data, establishing scaling laws with
              respect to a variety of uni- and cross-modal benchmarks. Our experiments show
              that Transfusion scales significantly better than quantizing images and training a
              language model over discrete image tokens. By introducing modality-specific en-
              coding and decoding layers, we can further improve the performance of Transfusion
              models, and even compress each image to just 16 patches. We further demonstrate
              that scaling our Transfusion recipe to 7B parameters and 2T multi-modal tokens
              produces a model that can generate images and text on a par with similar scale
              diffusion models and language models, reaping the benefits of both worlds.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Multi-modal generative models need to be able to perceive, process, and produce both discrete
elements (such as text or code) and continuous elements (e.g. image, audio, and video data). While
language models trained on the next token prediction objective dominate discrete modalities (OpenAI
et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024), diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022a) and their
generalizations (Lipman et al., 2022) are the state of the art for generating continuous modalities (Dai
et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2024b; Bar-Tal et al., 2024). Many efforts have been made to combine these
approaches, including extending a language model to use a diffusion model as a tool, either explicitly
(Liu et al., 2023) or by grafting a pretrained diffusion model onto the language model (Dong et al.,
2023; Koh et al., 2024). Alternatively, one can quantize the continuous modalities (Van Den Oord
et al., 2017) and train a standard language model over discrete tokens (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2022; 2023), simplifying the model’s architecture at the cost of losing information. In this work, we
show it is possible to fully integrate both modalities, with no information loss, by training a single
model to both predict discrete text tokens and diffuse continuous images.
We introduce Transfusion, a recipe for training a model that can seamlessly generate discrete and
continuous modalities. We demonstrate Transfusion by pretraining a transformer model on 50% text
and 50% image data using a different objective for each modality: next token prediction for text and
diffusion for images. The model is exposed to both modalities and loss functions at each training
step. Standard embedding layers convert text tokens to vectors, while patchification layers represent
each image as a sequence of patch vectors. We apply causal attention for text tokens and bidirectional
attention for image patches. For inference, we introduce a decoding algorithm that combines the
standard practices of text generation from language models and image generation from diffusion
models. Figure 1 illustrates Transfusion.
In a controlled comparison with Chameleon’s discretization approach (Chameleon Team, 2024),
we show that Transfusion models scale better in every combination of modalities. In text-to-image
     ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    cute   cat    .     <BOI>                                What   color    is     its   nose    ?



                                            Transformer


      A    cute   cat     .     <BOI>                        <EOI> What     color   is     its   nose

Figure 1: A high-level illustration of Transfusion. A single transformer perceives, processes, and
produces data of every modality. Discrete (text) tokens are processed autoregressively and trained on
the next token prediction objective. Continuous (image) vectors are processed together in parallel
and trained on the diffusion objective. Marker BOI and EOI tokens separate the modalities.

generation, we find that Transfusion exceeds the Chameleon approach at less than a third of the
compute, as measured by both FID and CLIP scores. When controlling for FLOPs, Transfusion
achieves approximately 2× lower FID scores than Chameleon models. We observe a similar trend in
image-to-text generation, where Transfusion matches Chameleon at 21.8% of the FLOPs. Surprisingly,
Transfusion is also more efficient at learning text-to-text prediction, achieving perplexity parity on
text tasks around 50% to 60% of Chameleon’s FLOPs.
Ablation experiments reveal critical components and potential improvements for Transfusion. We
observe that the intra-image bidirectional attention is important, and that replacing it with causal
attention hurts text-to-image generation. We also find that adding U-Net down and up blocks to
encode and decode images enables Transfusion to compress larger image patches with relatively
small loss to performance, potentially decreasing the serving costs by up to 64×.
Finally, we demonstrate that Transfusion can generate images at similar quality to other diffusion
models. We train from scratch a 7B transformer enhanced with U-Net down/up layers (0.27B
parameters) over 2T tokens: 1T text tokens, and approximately 5 epochs of 692M images and their
captions, amounting to another 1T patches/tokens. Figure 7 shows some generated images sampled
from the model. On the GenEval (Ghosh et al., 2023) benchmark, our model outperforms other
popular models such as DALL-E 2 and SDXL; unlike those image generation models, it can generate
text, reaching the same level of performance as Llama 1 on text benchmarks. Our experiments thus
show that Transfusion is a promising approach for training truly multi-modal models.

2     BACKGROUND
Transfusion is a single model trained with two objectives: language modeling and diffusion. Each of
these objectives represents the state of the art in discrete and continuous data modeling, respectively.
This section briefly defines these objectives, as well as background on latent image representations.

2.1   L ANGUAGE M ODELING
Given a sequence of discrete tokens y = y1 , ..., yn from a closed vocabulary V , a language model
                                      Qn P (y). Standard language models decompose P (y) into a
predicts the probability of the sequence
product of conditional probabilities i=1 Pθ (yi |y<i ). This creates an autoregressive classification
task, where the probability distribution of each token yi is predicted conditioned on the prefix of a
sequence y<i using a single distribution Pθ parameterized by θ. The model can be optimized by
minimizing the cross-entropy between Pθ and the empirical distribution of the data, yielding the
standard next-token prediction objective, colloquially referred to as LM loss:
                                                n
                                            1X
                                  LLM = Ey −       log Pθ (yi |y<i )                                    (1)
                                             n i=1

Once trained, language models can also be used to generate text by sampling token by token from the
model distribution Pθ , typically using temperature and top-p truncation.

2.2   D IFFUSION
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (a.k.a. DDPM or diffusion models) operate on the principle
of learning to reverse a gradual noise-addition process (Ho et al., 2020). Unlike language models that
typically work with discrete tokens (y), diffusion models operate over continuous vectors (x), making


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a)                        (b)                         (c)                         (d)


           (e)                         (f)                        (g)                         (h)
Figure 2: Generated images from a 7B Transfusion trained on 2T multi-modal tokens. Captions are:
(a) A bread, an apple, and a knife on a table. (b) A corgi. (c) Three spheres made of glass falling into
ocean. Water is splashing. Sun is setting. (d) A wall in a royal castle. There are two paintings on
the wall. The one on the left a detailed oil painting of the royal raccoon king. The one on the right a
detailed oil painting of the royal raccoon queen. (e) A kangaroo holding a beer, wearing ski goggles
and passionately singing silly songs. (f) “Transfusion" is written on the blackboard. (g) an egg and a
bird made of wheat bread. (h) A cloud in the shape of two bunnies playing with a ball. The ball is
made of clouds too.

them particularly suited for tasks involving continuous data like images. The diffusion framework
involves two processes: a forward process that describes how the original data is turned into noise,
and a reverse process of denoising that the model learns to perform.
Forward Process From a mathematical perspective, the forward process defines how the noised data
(which serves as the model input) is created. Given a data point x0 , Ho et al. (2020) define a Markov
chain that gradually adds Gaussian noise over T steps, creating a sequence of increasingly
                                                                                        √        noisy ver-
sions x1 , x2 , ..., xT . Each step of this process is defined by q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),
where βt increases over time according to a predefined noise schedule (see below). This process can
be reparameterized in a way that allows us to directly sample xt from x0 using a single sample of
Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I):
                                                √           √
                                           xt = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ                                       (2)
              Qt
Here, ᾱt = s=1 (1 − βs ), providing a useful abstraction over the original Markov chain. In fact,
both the training objective and the noise scheduler are eventually expressed (and implemented) in
these terms.
Reverse Process The diffusion model is trained to perform the reverse process pθ (xt−1 |xt ),
learning to denoise the data step by step. There are several ways to do so; in this work, we follow
the approach of Ho et al. (2020) and model the Gaussian noise ϵ in Equation 2 as a proxy for the
cumulative noise at step t. Specifically, a model ϵθ (·) with parameters θ is trained to estimate the
noise ϵ given the noised data xt and timestep t. In practice, the model often conditions on additional
contextual information c, such as a caption when generating an image. The parameters of the noise
prediction model are thus optimized by minimizing the mean squared error loss:
                               LDDPM = Ex0 ,t,ϵ ||ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, c)||2

                                                                                                   (3)

Noise Schedule When creating a noised example xt (Equation 2), ᾱt determines the variance of the
noise for timestep t. In this work,
                                √ we adopt the commonly used cosine scheduler Nichol & Dhariwal
(2021), which largely follows ᾱt ≈ cos( Tt · π2 ) with some adjustments.

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              A cute cat <BOI>              <EOI> What
            VAE Decoder
                                                        A
Linear          or             U-Net Up                cute

                                                       cat
           Transformer
                                                      <BOI>


Linear           or            U-Net Down
                     Noising
            VAE Encoder


                                                      <EOI>

Figure 3: We convert images to and from               What
latent representations using a pretrained
VAE, and then into patch representations              Figure 4: Expanding on the causal mask, Trans-
with either a simple linear layer or U-Net            fusion allows patches of the same image to con-
down blocks.                                          dition on each other.

Inference Decoding is done iteratively, pealing away some of the noise at each step. Starting
with pure Gaussian noise at xT , the model ϵθ (xt , t, c) predicts the noise accumulated at timestep
t. The predicted noise is then scaled according to the noise schedule, and the proportional amount
of predicted noise is removed from xt to produce xt−1 . In practice, inference is done over fewer
timesteps than training. Classifier-free guidance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2022) is often used to
improve generation by contrasting the prediction of the model conditioned on the context c with the
unconditioned prediction, at the cost of doubling the computation.

2.3      L ATENT I MAGE R EPRESENTATION
Early diffusion models worked directly in pixel space (Ho et al., 2020), but this proved computation-
ally expensive. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) can save compute by
encoding images into a lower-dimensional latent space. Implemented as deep CNNs, modern VAEs
are trained on a combination of reconstruction and regularization losses (Esser et al., 2021), allowing
downstream models like latent diffusion models (LDMs) (Rombach et al., 2022a) to operate efficiently
on compact image patch embeddings; e.g. represent every 8×8 pixel patch as an 8-dimensional
vector. For autoregressive language modeling approaches (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022),
images must be discretized. Discrete autoencoders, such as vector-quantized VAEs (VQ-VAE) (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017), achieve this by introducing a quantization layer (and related regularization
losses) that maps continuous latent embeddings to discrete tokens.

3     T RANSFUSION
Transfusion is a method for training a single unified model to understand and generate both discrete
and continuous modalities. Our main innovation is demonstrating that we can use separate losses
for different modalities – language modeling for text, diffusion for images – over shared data and
parameters. Figure 1 illustrates Transfusion.

Data Representation We experiment with data spanning two modalities: discrete text and continu-
ous images. Each text string is tokenized into a sequence of discrete tokens from a fixed vocabulary,
where each token is represented as an integer. Each image is encoded as latent patches using a
VAE (see §2.3), where each patch is represented as a continuous vector; the patches are sequenced
left-to-right top-to-bottom to create a sequence of patch vectors from each image. For mixed-modal
examples, we surround each image sequence with special beginning of image (BOI) and end of image
(EOI) tokens before inserting it to the text sequence; thus, we arrive at a single sequence potentially
containing both discrete elements (integers representing text tokens) and continuous elements (vectors
representing image patches).

                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Model Architecture The vast majority of the model’s parameters belong to a single transformer,
which processes every sequence, regardless of modality. The transformer takes a sequence of high-
dimensional vectors in Rd as input, and produces similar vectors as output. To convert our data into
this space, we use lightweight modality-specific components with unshared parameters. For text,
these are the embedding matrices, converting each input integer to vector space and each output vector
into a discrete distribution over the vocabulary. For images, we experiment with two alternatives for
compressing local windows of k × k patch vectors into a single transformer vector (and vice versa):
(1) a simple linear layer, and (2) up and down blocks of a U-Net (Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Saharia
et al., 2022). Figure 3 illustrates the overall architecture.
Transfusion Attention Language models typically use causal masking to efficiently compute
the loss and gradients over an entire sequence in a single forward-backward pass without leaking
information from future tokens. While text is naturally sequential, images are not, and are usually
modeled with unrestricted (bidirectional) attention. Transfusion combines both attention patterns
by applying causal attention to every element in the sequence, and bidirectional attention within the
elements of each individual image. This allows every image patch to attend to every other patch
within the same image, but only attend to text or patches of other images that appeared previously in
the sequence. We find that enabling intra-image attention significantly boosts model performance
(see §4.3). Figure 4 shows an example Transfusion attention mask.
Training Objective To train our model, we apply the language modeling objective LLM to pre-
dictions of text tokens and the diffusion objective LDDPM to predictions of image patches. LM
loss is computed per token, while diffusion loss is computed per image, which may span multiple
elements (image patches) in the sequence. Specifically, we add noise ϵ to each input latent image
x0 according to the diffusion process to produce xt before patchification, and then compute the
image-level diffusion loss.1 We combine the two losses by simply adding the losses computed over
each modality with a balancing coefficient λ:
                                        LTransfusion = LLM + λ · LDDPM                                        (4)

This formulation is a specific instantiation of a broader idea: combining a discrete distribution loss
with a continuous distribution loss to optimize the same model. We leave further exploration of this
space, such as replacing diffusion with flow matching (Lipman et al., 2022)), to future work.
Inference Reflecting the training objective, our decoding algorithm also switches between two
modes: LM and diffusion. In LM mode, we follow the standard practice of sampling token by token
from the predicted distribution. When we sample a BOI token, the decoding algorithm switches
to diffusion mode, where we follow the standard procedure of decoding from diffusion models.
Specifically, we append a pure noise xT in the form of n image patches to the input sequence
(depending on the desired image size), and denoise over T steps. At each step t, we take the noise
prediction and use it to produce xt−1 , which then overwrites xt in the sequence; i.e. the model
always conditions on the last timestep of the noised image and cannot attend to previous timesteps.
Once the diffusion process has ended, we append an EOI token to the predicted image, and switch
back to LM mode. This algorithm enables the generation of any mixture of text and image modalities.

4       E XPERIMENTS
We demonstrate in a series of controlled experiments that Transfusion is a viable, scalable method for
training a unified multi-modal model. The setup of our experiments is detailed in Appendix B.1.

4.1       S ETUP

Evaluation We evaluate model performance on a collection of standard uni-modal and cross-modal
benchmarks (Table 7 in Appendix). For text-to-text, we measure perplexity on 20M held-out tokens
from Wikipedia and the C4 corpus (Raffel et al., 2019), as well as accuracy on the pretraining
evaluation suite of Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b). For text-to-image, we use the MS-COCO
benchmark (Lin et al., 2014), where we generate images on randomly selected 30k prompts from
validation set and measure their photo-realism using zero-shot Frechet Inception Distance (FID)
    1
        Ergo, downstream tokens condition on noisy images during training. See §B.2 for further discussion.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Heusel et al., 2017) as well as their alignment with the prompts using CLIP score (Radford et al.,
2021).2 We also evaluate the model’s ability to generate image captions; we report CIDEr (Vedantam
et al., 2015) scores on the Karpathy test split of MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014). These evaluations
provide signal for investigation of scaling laws (§4.2) and ablations (§4.3). To compare with recent
work in diffusion models, we evaluate our largest scale model (§4.4) also on GenEval (Ghosh et al.,
2023), a benchmark that examines a model’s ability to generate an accurate depiction of the prompt.
Baseline At the time of writing, the prominent open-science method for training a single mixed-
modal model that can generate both text and images is to quantize images into discrete tokens, and
then model the entire token sequence with a standard language model (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2022; 2023). We follow the recipe of Chameleon (Chameleon Team, 2024) to train a family of
data- and compute-controlled baseline models, which we can directly compare to our Transfusion
models. The key difference between Chameleon and Transfusion is that while Chameleon discretizes
images and processes them as tokens, Transfusion keeps images in continuous space, removing the
quantization information bottleneck. To further minimize any confounding variables, we train the
VAEs for Chameleon and Transfusion using exactly the same data, compute, and architecture, with
the only differentiator being the quantization layer and codebook loss of Chameleon’s VQ-VAE (see
details below). Chameleon also deviates from the Llama transformer architecture, adding query-key
normalization, post-normalization, denominator loss, and a lower learning rate of 1e-4 to manage
training instability, which incur an efficiency cost (see §4.2).3
Data For almost all of our experiments, we sample 0.5T tokens (patches) from two datasets at a 1:1
token ratio. For text, we use the Llama 2 tokenizer and corpus (Touvron et al., 2023b) of 2T tokens.
For images, we use a collection of 380M licensed Shutterstock images and captions. Each image is
center-cropped and resized to produce a 256×256 pixel image. We randomly order the image and
captions, ordering the caption first 80% of the time.
In one experiment (4.4) we scale up the total training data to 2T tokens (1T text tokens and about
3.5B caption-image pairs at 256 patches per image). To diversify, we add 220M publicly available
images with captions, prefiltered to not contain people. To rebalance the distribution, we upsample
80M Shutterstock images containing people. We also add data from Conceptual 12M (CC12M)
(Changpinyo et al., 2021), reaching a total mixture of 692M image-caption pairs per epoch. Finally,
we upweight the portion of high-aesthetic images in the last 1% of the training schedule.
Latent Image Representation We train a 86M parameter VAE following Esser et al. (2021).
We use a CNN encoder and decoder, and latent dimension 8. The training objective is combines
reconstruction and regularization losses ( Appendix C) For VQ-VAE training, we follow the same
setup described for VAE training, except we replace LKL with the standard codebook commitment
loss with β = 0.25 (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). We use a codebook of 16,384 token types.
Model Configuration To investigate scaling trends, we train models at five different sizes – 0.16B,
0.37B, 0.76B, 1.4B, and 7B parameters – following the standard settings from Llama (Touvron et al.,
2023a) (Table 8 in Appendix). In configurations that use linear patch encoding (§4.2 and §4.3), the
number of additional parameters is insignificant, accounting for fewer than 0.5% of total parameters
in every configuration. When using U-Net patch encoding (§4.3 and §4.4), these parameters add
up to 0.27B additional parameters across all configurations; while this is a substantial addition of
parameters to smaller models, these layers amount to only a 3.8% increase of the 7B configuration,
almost identical to the number of parameters in the embedding layers.
Optimization We use AdamW (β1 =0.9, β2 =0.95, ϵ =1e-8) with a learning rate of 3e-4, warmed
up for 4000 steps and decaying to 1.5e-5 using a cosine scheduler. We train on sequences of 4096
tokens in batches of 2M tokens for 250k steps, reaching 0.5T tokens in total. In our large-scale
experiment (§4.4), we train with a batch size of 4M tokens over 500k steps, totalling 2T tokens. We
set the λ coefficient in the Transfusion objective (Equation 4) to 5 following preliminary experiments.
Inference In text mode, we use greedy decoding for generating text. Ranked classification is used
for the Llama evaluation suite. For image generation, we follow the standard of 250 diffusion steps
(the model is trained on 1,000 timesteps). We follow Chameleon and use CFG with a coefficient of 5
   2
       We follow common practice for ablations and use only 5k examples to compute FID and CLIP in §4.3.
   3
       Removing these deviations in preliminary experiments encountered optimization instabilities in Chameleon.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            16                                                      64
                                      Transfusion                                             Transfusion
         16                           Chameleon                                               Chameleon


 PPL


                                                      PPL


                                                                                                             Acc
                                                             8


                                                                                                                                                   Transfusion
         8                                                                                                                                         Chameleon
          1e+20           1e+21          1e+22               4                                                      32
                                                              1e+20              1e+21            1e+22               1e+20           1e+21            1e+22
                            FLOPs                                                  FLOPs                                                FLOPs


                      C4 Perplexity                                   Wikipedia Perplexity                           Llama 2 Eval Suite Accuracy

         32
                                                            128
                                                                                              Transfusion           24
         16                                                                                   Chameleon
                                                            64
 CIDEr


                                                                                                             CLIP
                                                      FID
         8
                                                            32
         4                            Transfusion                                                                                                  Transfusion
                                      Chameleon             16                                                                                     Chameleon
         2                                                                                                          12
                  1e+20      1e+21       1e+22                   1e+20           1e+21            1e+22               1e+20           1e+21            1e+22
                            FLOPs                                                  FLOPs                                                FLOPs


               MS-COCO 5k CIDEr                                       MS-COCO 30k FID                                     MS-COCO 30k CLIP

Figure 5: Performance of Transfusion and Chameleon models at different scales, controlled for
parameters, data, and compute. All axes are logarithmic.


in the controlled comparison experiments (§4.2). This value is suboptimal for Transfusion, and so
we use a CFG coefficient of 3 throughout the ablation experiments (§4.3), and follow the standard
practice of tuning the coefficient for each benchmark in our large scale experiment (§4.4).
4.2           C ONTROLLED C OMPARISON WITH C HAMELEON
We run a series of controlled experiments to compare Transfusion with Chameleon at different model
sizes (N ) and token counts (D), using the combination of both as a proxy for FLOPs (6N D). For
simplicity and parameter control, the Transfusion variant in these experiments uses simple linear
image encoder/decoder with patch size 2×2, as well as bidirectional attention. For each benchmark,
we plot all results on a log-metric over log-FLOPs curve and regress linear trendlines. We also
estimate relative compute efficiency by measuring the parity FLOP ratio: the ratio between the
number of FLOPs required by Transfusion and Chameleon to reach the same level of performance.
Figure 5 visualizes the scaling trends, and Table 1 shows the results of the largest models in this
controlled setting and their estimated parity FLOP ratio. In every benchmark, Transfusion consistently
exhibits better scaling laws than Chameleon. While the lines are close to parallel, there is a significant
gap in Transfusion’s favor. The difference in compute efficiency is particularly striking in image
generation, where FID Transfusion achieves parity with Chameleon using 34× less compute.
Surprisingly, text-only benchmarks also reveal better performance with Transfusion, even though
both Transfusion and Chameleon model text in the same way. We investigate this phenomenon by
ablating the various changes leading up to Transfusion and Chameleon from the original Llama 2
recipe. Table 2 shows that while Transfusion does come at a non-zero cost to text performance, the
Chameleon recipe suffers from both the stability modifications made to the architecture and from
the introduction of image tokens. Training on quantized image tokens degrades text performance


                                               C4                    Wiki             Llama                          MS-COCO
                    Model
                                             PPL (↓)                PPL (↓)           Acc (↑)      CDr (↑)            FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
                    Transfusion                      7.72                 4.28             61.5            27.2                16.8             25.5
                    Chameleon                        8.41                 4.69             59.1            18.0                29.6             24.3
                    Parity FLOP Ratio               0.489                0.526         0.600              0.218               0.029        0.319

Table 1: Performance of the largest (7B) Transfusion and Chameleon models in a controlled setting.
Both models were trained on 0.5T tokens. Parity FLOP Ratio is the relative amount of Transfusion
FLOPs needed to match the results of Chameleon 7B.


                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         C4           Wiki          Llama
Model                                          Batch
                                                                        PPL (↓)       PPL (↓)       Acc (↑)
Llama 2                                        1M Text Tokens               10.1           5.8          53.7
Transfusion      + Diffusion                   + 1M Image Patches     (+0.3) 10.4   (+0.2) 6.0   (-1.0) 52.7
Chameleon        + Stability Modifications     1M Text Tokens         (+0.9) 11.0   (+0.5) 6.3   (-1.8) 51.9
                 + LM Loss on Image Tokens     + 1M Image Tokens      (+0.8) 11.8   (+0.5) 6.8   (-3.0) 48.9

Table 2: Performance of the 0.76B Transfusion and Chameleon models on text-only benchmarks,
compared to the original Llama 2 recipe.

                                       C4       Wiki       Llama               MS-COCO
        Enc/Dec      Attention
                                     PPL (↓)   PPL (↓)     Acc (↓)   CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
                     Causal             10.4       6.0       51.4       12.7        61.3         23.0
        Linear
                     Bidirectional      10.4       6.0       51.7       16.0        20.3         24.0
                     Causal             10.3       5.9       52.0       23.3        16.8         25.3
        U-Net
                     Bidirectional      10.3       5.9       51.9       25.4        16.7         25.4

Table 3: Performance of 0.76B Transfusion models with and without intra-image bidirectional
attention. Patch size is set at 2×2 latent pixels.


more than diffusion on all three benchmarks. One hypothesis is that this stems from the competition
between text and image tokens in the output distribution; alternatively, it is possible that diffusion is
more efficient at image generation and requires fewer parameters, allowing Transfusion models to
use more capacity than Chameleon to model text. We leave further investigation of this phenomenon
to future research.

4.3   A RCHITECTURE A BLATIONS

We explore improvements and extensions that are applicable to Transfusion alone in this section.
4.3.1 ATTENTION M ASKING
We first examine the necessity of intra-image bidirectional attention. Table 3 shows that enabling this
attention pattern beyond the standard causal attention is advantageous throughout all benchmarks, and
using both image encoding/decoding architectures. In particular, we notice a significant improvement
in FID when using linear encoding layers (61.3→20.3). In the causal-only version of this architecture,
there is no flow of information from patches that appear later in the sequence to those before; since
U-Net blocks contain bidirectional attention within, independent of the transformer’s attention mask,
this gap is less pronounced when they are applied.
4.3.2 PATCH S IZE
Transfusion models can be defined over different sizes of latent pixel patches. Larger patch sizes allow
the model to pack more images in each training batch and dramatically reduce inference compute, but
may come at a performance cost. Table 4 and Table 9 in Appendix sheds light on these performance
trade-offs. While performance does decrease consistently as each image is represented by fewer
patches with linear encoding, models with U-Net encoding benefit from larger patches on tasks
involving the image modality. We posit that this is due to the greater amount of total images (and
diffusion noise) seen during training. We also observe that text performance deteriorates with larger
patches, perhaps because transfusion needs to exert more resources (i.e. parameters) to learn how to
process images with fewer patches and thus less inference compute.
4.3.3 PATCH E NCODING /D ECODING A RCHITECTURE
Our experiments so far indicate an advantage to using the U-Net up and down blocks instead of a
simple linear layer. One possible reason is that the model benefits from the inductive biases of the
U-Net architecure; an alternative hypothesis is that this advantage stems from the significant increase
in overall model parameters introduced by the U-Net layers. To decouple these two confounders,
we scale up the core transformer to 7B parameters, while keeping the amount of U-Net parameters


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Latent/    Pixel/     Patch/         C4         Wiki        Llama                 MS-COCO
Enc/Dec
             Patch     Patch      Image        PPL (↓)     PPL (↓)      Acc (↓)     CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
None         1×1       8×8         1024           10.3          5.9        52.2        12.0       21.0     24.0
             2×2       16×16           256        10.3          5.9        51.9        25.4       16.7     25.4
U-Net        4×4       32×32            64        10.7          6.2        50.7        29.9       16.0     25.7
             8×8       64×64            16        11.4          6.6        49.2        29.5       16.1     25.2

Table 4: Performance of 0.76B Transfusion models with different patch sizes. Bolded figures indicate
global best, underlines indicate best within architecture.

  Model                   ∆ Enc/Dec            C4         Wiki        Llama                 MS-COCO
             Enc/Dec
  Params                   Params            PPL (↓)     PPL (↓)      Acc (↑)     CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
             Linear           0.4%              12.0          7.0       47.9         11.1       21.5     22.4
  0.37B
             U-Net           71.3%              11.8          6.9       48.8         21.1       18.1     24.9
             Linear           0.4%               9.5          5.4       53.8         19.1       19.4     24.3
  1.4B
             U-Net           19.3%               9.4          5.4       53.4         28.1       16.6     25.7
             Linear             0.3%             7.7          4.3       61.5         27.2       18.6     25.9
  7B
             U-Net              3.8%             7.8          4.3       61.1         33.7       16.0     26.5

Table 5: Performance of linear and U-Net variants of Transfusion across different model sizes. Patch
size is set at 2×2 latent pixels. Model parameters refers to the transformer alone.

(almost) constant; in this setting, the additional encoder/decoder parameters account for only a 3.8%
increase of total model parameters, equivalent to the amount of token embedding parameters.
Table 5 Table 10 (Appendix) shows that even though the relative benefit of U-Net layers shrinks as the
transformer grows, it does not diminish. In image generation, for example, the U-Net encoder/decoder
allows much smaller models to obtain better FID scores than the 7B model with linear patchification
layers. We observe a similar trend in image captioning, where adding U-Net layers boosts the CIDEr
score of a 1.4B transformer (1.67B combined) beyond the performance of the linear 7B model.
Overall, it appears that there are indeed inductive bias benefits to U-Net encoding and decoding of
images beyond the mere addition of parameters.

4.4     C OMPARISON WITH I MAGE G ENERATION L ITERATURE
Our experiments thus far have covered controlled comparisons with Chameleon and Llama, but we
have yet to compare Transfusion’s image generation capabilities to those of state-of-the-art image
generation models. To that end, we train a 7B parameter model with U-Net encoding/decoding
layers (2×2 latent pixel patches) over the equivalent of 2T tokens, comprising of 1T text corpus
tokens and 3.5B images and their captions. While the Transfusion variant in §4.2 favored simplicity
and experimental control, the design choices and data mixture (§4.1) of this variant lean a bit more
towards image generation. Figure 7 and Appendix D showcase generated images from this model.
We compare the performance of our model to reported results of other similar scale image generation
models, as well as some publicly available text generating models for reference. Table 6 shows
that Transfusion achieves similar performance to high-performing image generation models such
as DeepFloyd (Stability AI, 2024), while surpassing previously published models including SDXL
(Podell et al., 2023). While Transfusion does lag behind SD 3 (Esser et al., 2024a), this model
leveraged synthetic image captions through backtranslation (Betker et al., 2023), which enhances
its GenEval performance by 6.5% absolute (0.433→0.498) at smaller scale; for simplicity, our
experimental setup only included natural data. Finally, we note that our Transfusion model can also
generate text, and performs on par with the Llama models, which were trained on the same text data
distribution (§4.1).

4.5     I MAGE E DITING

Our Transfusion models, which have been pretrained on text-text, image-text, and text-image data,
perform well across these modality pairings. Can these models extend their capabilities to generate


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Model           Text               Llama      COCO         Gen
Model                                                              Images
                                           Params         Tokens              Acc (↑)    FID (↓)     Eval (↑)
Llama 1 (Touvron et al., 2023a)               7.1B         1.4T      —          66.1        —          —
Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b)               7.1B         2.0T      —          66.3        —          —
Chameleon (Chameleon Team, 2024)              7.1B         6.0T     5.0B        67.1      26.74       0.39
Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022)          2.6B + 4.7B∗         —        5.0B        —         7.27        —
                                                                                          r
Parti (Yu et al., 2022)                    20B              —        4.8B        —         7.23        —
SD 2.1 (Rombach et al., 2022b)         0.9B + 0.1B∗         —        2.3B        —          —         0.50
DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)          4.2B + 1B∗          —        2.6B        —        10.39       0.52
SDXL (Podell et al., 2023)             2.6B + 0.8B∗         —        1.6B        —          —         0.55
DeepFloyd (Stability AI, 2024)         5.5B + 4.7B∗         —        7.5B        —         6.66       0.61
SD 3 (Esser et al., 2024b)              8B + 4.7B∗          —      s
                                                                     2.0B        —          —         0.68
Transfusion (Ours)                            7.3B         1.0T     3.5B        66.1          6.78    0.63

Table 6: Performance of a 7B Transfusion model (U-Net encoder/decoder layers, 2×2 latent pixel
patches) trained on the equivalent of 2T tokens, compared to similar scale models in the literature.
Except Chameleon, all the other models are restricted to generating one modality (either text or
image). ∗ Frozen text encoder parameters. r Parti samples 16 images for every prompt and then
reranks with an auxiliary scoring model. s SD 3 trains with synthetic caption data, which provides
boosts GenEval performance.


        Remove the cupcake on the plate.                    Change the tomato on the right to a green olive.


      Write the word "Zebra" in Arial bold.                          Change this to cartoon style.
                 Figure 6: Edited images from a fine-tuned 7B Transfusion model.
images based on other images? To investigate, we fine-tuned our 7B model (§4.4) using a dataset of
only 8k publicly available image editing examples, where each example consists of an input image,
an edit prompt, and an output image. This approach, inspired by LIMA (Zhou et al., 2024), allows us
to assess how well the model can generalize to image-to-image generation, a scenario not covered
during pretraining. Manual examination of random examples from the EmuEdit test set (Sheynin
et al., 2024), shown in Figure 6 and Appendix 4.5, reveals that our fine-tuned Transfusion model
performs image edits as instructed. Despite the limitations of this experiment, the findings suggest
that Transfusion models can indeed adapt to and generalize across new modality combinations. We
leave further exploration of this promising direction to future research.
5 C ONCLUSION
This work explores how to bridge the gap between the state of the art in discrete sequence modeling
(next token prediction) and continuous media generation (diffusion). We propose a simple, yet
previously unexplored solution: train a single joint model on two objectives, tying each modality to
its preferred objective. Our experiments show that Transfusion scales efficiently, incurring little to no
parameter sharing cost, while enabling the generation of any modality.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:23716–23736,
  2022.
Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Herrmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat,
 Junhwa Hur, Yuanzhen Li, Tomer Michaeli, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffusion model for
 video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12945, 2024.
Rohan Bavishi, Erich Elsen, Curtis Hawthorne, Maxwell Nye, Augustus Odena, Arushi Somani, and
  Sağnak Taşırlar. Introducing our multimodal models, 2023. URL https://www.adept.ai/
  blog/fuyu-8b.
James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
  Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, Wesam Manassra, Prafulla Dhariwal, Casey Chu, Yunxin Jiao,
  and Aditya Ramesh. Improving image generation with better captions, 2023. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264403242.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical
  commonsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  pp. 7432–7439, 2020.
Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.
Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12m: Pushing web-
  scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. CoRR, abs/2102.08981, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.08981.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. Boolq: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.10044, 2019.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Xiaoliang Dai, Ji Hou, Chih-Yao Ma, Sam Tsai, Jialiang Wang, Rui Wang, Peizhao Zhang, Simon
  Vandenhende, Xiaofang Wang, Abhimanyu Dubey, et al. Emu: Enhancing image generation
  models using photogenic needles in a haystack. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15807, 2023.
Runpei Dong, Chunrui Han, Yuang Peng, Zekun Qi, Zheng Ge, Jinrong Yang, Liang Zhao, Jianjian
  Sun, Hongyu Zhou, Haoran Wei, et al. Dreamllm: Synergistic multimodal comprehension and
  creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11499, 2023.
Runpei Dong, Chunrui Han, Yuang Peng, Zekun Qi, Zheng Ge, Jinrong Yang, Liang Zhao, Jianjian
  Sun, Hongyu Zhou, Haoran Wei, et al. Dreamllm: Synergistic multimodal comprehension and
  creation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
 Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston
  Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron,
  Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris
  McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton
  Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David
  Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
  Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme
  Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu,
  Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov,
  Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah,
  Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu
  Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph
  Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani,
  Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz
  Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
  Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
  Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri,
  Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis,
  Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov,
  Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy,
  Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit
  Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou,
  Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia
  Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan,
  Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla,
  Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek
  Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao,
  Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent
  Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu,
  Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia,
  Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen
  Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe
  Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya
  Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex
  Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei
  Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew
  Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley
  Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin
  Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu,
  Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt
  Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon
  Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix
  Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank
  Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern,
  Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid
  Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen
  Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat,
  Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff
  Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin,
  Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh
  Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal,
  Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun
  Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender
  A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca
  Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus,
  Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi,
  Meghan Keneally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov,
  Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat,
  Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning
  Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru
  Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng
  Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang,
  Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen,
  Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho, Sunny
  Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best,
  Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
  Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar,
  Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li,
  Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang,
  Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi,
  Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian,
  Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei
  Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 12873–12883, 2021.

Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for
  high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024a.

Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English,
  Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin, Yannik Marek, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow trans-
  formers for high-resolution image synthesis, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
  03206.

Itai Gat, Tal Remez, Neta Shaul, Felix Kreuk, Ricky TQ Chen, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and
   Yaron Lipman. Discrete flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15595, 2024.

Dhruba Ghosh, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Geneval: An object-focused framework
  for evaluating text-to-image alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
  2023.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Generating images with multimodal language
   models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Diffusion-lm
  improves controllable text generation. ArXiv, abs/2205.14217, 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.

Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching
  for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.

Shilong Liu, Hao Cheng, Haotian Liu, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Tianhe Ren, Xueyan Zou, Jianwei Yang,
  Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Llava-plus: Learning to use tools for creating multimodal agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.05437, 2023.

Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8162–8171. PMLR, 2021.

OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
  Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor
  Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mohammad Bavarian,
  Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny
  Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks,
  Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea
  Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen,
  Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung,
  Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch,
  Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty
  Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte,
  Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel
  Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua
  Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike
  Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon
  Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne
  Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo
  Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
  Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik
  Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich,
  Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy
  Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie
  Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini,
  Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne,
  Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David
  Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie
  Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély,
  Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo
  Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano,
  Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng,
  Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
  Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power,
  Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis
  Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted
  Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel
  Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon
  Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
 Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie
  Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng,
  Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun
  Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang,
  Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian
  Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe
  Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. CoRR, abs/1910.10683, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 8821–8831. Pmlr, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.
  06125.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022a.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022b.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
  Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic
  text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An
  adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106,
  2021.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan LeBras, and Yejin Choi. Socialiqa: Commonsense
 reasoning about social interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09728, 2019.
Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Yuval Kirstain, Amit Zohar, Oron Ashual, Devi Parikh,
  and Yaniv Taigman. Emu edit: Precise image editing via recognition and generation tasks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8871–8879, 2024.
Stability AI. If by deepfloyd lab at stabilityai, 2024. URL https://stability.ai/news/
  deepfloyd-if-text-to-image-model.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image
  description evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4566–4575, 2015.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-rich text-to-image generation.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.
Lili Yu, Bowen Shi, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Benjamin Muller, Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Arun
  Babu, Binh Tang, Brian Karrer, Shelly Sheynin, et al. Scaling autoregressive multi-modal models:
  Pretraining and instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02591, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a machine
  really finish your sentence? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL-2019). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srinivasan Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia
  Efrat, Ping Yu, Lili Yu, et al. Lima: Less is more for alignment. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Input     Output     Benchmark              Metric
                     Wikipedia              Perplexity (↓)
                                                                  Size      Layers     Emb Dim       Att Heads
Text      Text       C4                     Perplexity (↓)
                     Llama 2 Eval Suite     Accuracy (↑)          0.16B          16          768             12
                                                                  0.37B          24         1024             16
Image     Text       MS-COCO 5k             CIDEr (↑)
                                                                  0.76B          24         1536             24
                     MS-COCO 30k            FID (↓), CLIP (↑)     1.4B           24         2048             16
Text      Image
                     GenEval                GenEval score (↑)     7B             32         4096             32


Table 7: An overview of the evaluation suite used in this         Table 8: Model sizes and configurations
work.                                                             for both Transfusion and baselines.


A       R ELATED W ORK
Most existing multi-modal models are built on the idea of attaching two or more modality-specific
architectures together, often pretraining each component separately in advance. State-of-the-art
image and video generation models, for instance, use large pretrained text encoders to represent their
input prompts in latent space, which can then be used to condition diffusion models (Saharia et al.,
2022). In fact, recent work fuses representations from multiple off-the-shelf encoders to enhance
performance (Podell et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2024b). A similar pattern can be observed in the
vision language model literature, where typically a pretrained language model is complemented
by pretrained modality-specific encoders/decoders via projection layers to/from the pretrained text
space. Examples include Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) and LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024) for visual
understanding, GILL (Koh et al., 2024) for visual generation, and DreamLLM (Dong et al., 2024)
for both visual comprehension and generation. In contrast, Transfusion has one unified architecture
learned end-to-end to generate both text and images.
Prior work on end-to-end multi-modal models includes examples such as Fuyu (Bavishi et al., 2023),
which uses image patches as inputs for visual understanding, and Chameleon (Chameleon Team,
2024), which converts each image to a sequence of discretized tokens and then trains over the
combined text-image token sequences. However, these approaches are either restricted to input-
level multi-modal tasks, or lag behind state-of-the-art models (i.e. diffusion models) in continuous
data generation. Transfusion provides a simple, end-to-end solution to multi-modal learning that
understands and generates high-quality multi-modal data.
An interesting area of recent acrive research is the application diffusion models and their generaliza-
tions to discrete text generation (Li et al., 2022; Gat et al., 2024). However, this approach has yet to
achieve the performance and scale of standard autoregressive language models. Future research in
this direction may unlock new ways to fuse discrete and continuous modalities in a single model.

B       E XPERIMENTS
B.1     S ETUP

Evaluation We evaluate model performance on a collection of standard uni-modal and cross-
modal benchmarks (Table 7). For text-to-text, we measure perplexity on 20M held-out tokens from
Wikipedia and the C4 corpus (Raffel et al., 2019), as well as accuracy on the pretraining evaluation
suite of Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023b).4 For text-to-image, we use the MS-COCO benchmark
(Lin et al., 2014), where we generate images on randomly selected 30k prompts from validation set
and measure their photo-realism using zero-shot Frechet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al.,
2017) as well as their alignment with the prompts using CLIP score (Radford et al., 2021).5 We also
evaluate the model’s ability to generate image captions; we report CIDEr (Vedantam et al., 2015)
scores on the Karpathy test split of MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014). These evaluations provide signal for
    4
      The Llama 2 evaluation suite includes HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), PIQA (Bisk et al., 2020), SIQA (Sap
et al., 2019), WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021), ARC-e and -c (Clark et al., 2018), and BoolQ (Clark et al.,
2019). We report the average 0-shot task accuracy on these benchmarks.
    5
      We follow common practice for ablations and use only 5k examples to compute FID and CLIP in §4.3.


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


investigation scaling laws (§4.2) and ablations (§4.3). To compare with recent literature in diffusion
models, we evaluate our largest scale model (§4.4) also on GenEval (Ghosh et al., 2023), a benchmark
that examines a model’s ability to generate an accurate depiction of the prompt.

Baseline At the time of writing, the prominent open-science method for training a single mixed-
modal model that can generate both text and images is to quantize images into discrete tokens, and
then model the entire token sequence with a standard language model (Ramesh et al., 2021; Yu
et al., 2022; 2023). We follow the recipe of Chameleon (Chameleon Team, 2024) to train a family of
data- and compute-controlled baseline models, which we can directly compare to our Transfusion
models. The key difference between Chameleon and Transfusion is that while Chameleon discretizes
images and processes them as tokens, Transfusion keeps images in continuous space, removing the
quantization information bottleneck. To further minimize any confounding variables, we train the
VAEs for Chameleon and Transfusion using exactly the same data, compute, and architecture, with
the only differentiator being the quantization layer and codebook loss of Chameleon’s VQ-VAE (see
details below). Chameleon also deviates from the Llama transformer architecture, adding query-key
normalization, post-normalization, denominator loss, and a lower learning rate of 1e-4 to manage
training instability, which incur an efficiency cost (see §4.2).6

Data For almost all of our experiments, we sample 0.5T tokens (patches) from two datasets at a 1:1
token ratio. For text, we use the Llama 2 tokenizer and corpus (Touvron et al., 2023b), containing 2T
tokens across a diverse distribution of domains. For images, we use a collection of 380M licensed
Shutterstock images and captions. Each image is center-cropped and resized to produce a 256×256
pixel image.7 We randomly order the image and captions, ordering the caption first 80% of the time.
In one experiment (4.4) we scale up the total training data to 2T tokens (1T text tokens and about
3.5B caption-image pairs at 256 patches per image). To diversify, we add 220M publicly available
images with captions, prefiltered to not contain people. To rebalance the distribution, we upsample
80M Shutterstock images containing people. We also add data from Conceptual 12M (CC12M)
(Changpinyo et al., 2021), reaching a total mixture of 692M image-caption pairs per epoch. Finally,
we upweight the portion of high-aesthetic images in the last 1% of the training schedule.

Latent Image Representation We train a 86M parameter VAE following Esser et al. (2021).
We use a CNN encoder and decoder, and latent dimension 8. The training objective is combines
reconstruction and regularization losses.8 Our implementation reduces an image of 256×256 pixels
to a 32×32×8 tensor, where each latent 8-dimensional latent pixel represents (conceptually) an 8×8
pixel patch in the original image, and trains for 1M steps. For VQ-VAE training, we follow the same
setup described for VAE training, except we replace LKL with the standard codebook commitment
loss with β = 0.25 (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). We use a codebook of 16,384 token types.

Model Configuration To investigate scaling trends, we train models at five different sizes – 0.16B,
0.37B, 0.76B, 1.4B, and 7B parameters – following the standard settings from Llama (Touvron et al.,
2023a). Table 8 describes each setting in detail. In configurations that use linear patch encoding (§4.2
and §4.3), the number of additional parameters is insignificant, accounting for fewer than 0.5% of
total parameters in every configuration. When using U-Net patch encoding (§4.3 and §4.4), these
parameters add up to 0.27B additional parameters across all configurations; while this is a substantial
addition of parameters to smaller models, these layers amount to only a 3.8% increase of the 7B
configuration, almost identical to the number of parameters in the embedding layers.

Optimization We randomly initialize all model parameters, and optimize them using AdamW
(β1 =0.9, β2 =0.95, ϵ =1e-8) with a learning rate of 3e-4, warmed up for 4000 steps and decaying
to 1.5e-5 using a cosine scheduler. We train on sequences of 4096 tokens in batches of 2M tokens for
250k steps, reaching 0.5T tokens in total. In our large-scale experiment (§4.4), we train with a batch
size of 4M tokens over 500k steps, totalling 2T tokens. We regularize with weight decay of 0.1 and
   6
      Removing these deviations in preliminary experiments encountered optimization instabilities in Chameleon.
   7
      Depending on the compression rate of the patch encoder (see Model Architecture in §3), each image will be
represented by either 1024, 256, 64, or 16 elements in the sequence. Since the text/image ratio is constant during
training, higher compression rates enable training on more images in total, at the cost of less compute per image.
    8
      See Appendix C for details.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Latent/     Pixel/     Patch/       C4         Wiki        Llama                 MS-COCO
Enc/Dec
             Patch      Patch      Image      PPL (↓)     PPL (↓)      Acc (↓)     CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
None          1×1       8×8        1024          10.3          5.9        52.2        12.0       21.0     24.0
              2×2       16×16       256          10.4          6.0        51.7        16.0       20.3     24.0
Linear        4×4       32×32        64          10.9          6.3        49.8        14.3       25.6     22.6
              8×8       64×64        16          11.7          6.9        47.7        11.3       43.5     18.9
              2×2       16×16       256          10.3          5.9        51.9        25.4       16.7     25.4
U-Net         4×4       32×32        64          10.7          6.2        50.7        29.9       16.0     25.7
              8×8       64×64        16          11.4          6.6        49.2        29.5       16.1     25.2


Table 9: Performance of 0.76B Transfusion models with different patch sizes. Bolded figures indicate
global best, underlines indicate best within architecture.


  Model                   ∆ Enc/Dec           C4         Wiki        Llama                 MS-COCO
              Enc/Dec
  Params                   Params           PPL (↓)     PPL (↓)      Acc (↑)     CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
              Linear          0.5%             14.8          8.8       44.2          6.2       37.6     20.0
  0.16B
              U-Net         106.1%             14.4          8.5       45.7         15.3       18.8     23.9
              Linear           0.4%            12.0          7.0       47.9         11.1       21.5     22.4
  0.37B
              U-Net           71.3%            11.8          6.9       48.8         21.1       18.1     24.9
              Linear           0.4%            10.4          6.0       51.7         16.0       20.3     24.0
  0.76B
              U-Net           35.5%            10.3          5.9       51.9         25.4       16.7     25.4
              Linear           0.4%             9.5          5.4       53.8         19.1       19.4     24.3
  1.4B
              U-Net           19.3%             9.4          5.4       53.4         28.1       16.6     25.7
              Linear             0.3%           7.7          4.3       61.5         27.2       18.6     25.9
  7B
              U-Net              3.8%           7.8          4.3       61.1         33.7       16.0     26.5


Table 10: Performance of linear and U-Net variants of Transfusion across different model sizes. Patch
size is set at 2×2 latent pixels. Model parameters refers to the transformer alone.



clip gradients by norm (1.0). We set the λ coefficient in the Transfusion objective (Equation 4) to 5
following preliminary experiments; we leave further tuning of λ to future work.


Inference In text mode, we use greedy decoding for generating text. Ranked classification is used
for the Llama evaluation suite. For image generation, we follow the standard of 250 diffusion steps
(the model is trained on 1,000 timesteps). We follow Chameleon and use CFG with a coefficient of 5
in the controlled comparison experiments (§4.2). This value is suboptimal for Transfusion, and so
we use a CFG coefficient of 3 throughout the ablation experiments (§4.3), and follow the standard
practice of tuning the coefficient for each benchmark in our large scale experiment (§4.4).


B.2      I MAGE N OISING

Our experiments order 80% of image-caption pairs with the caption first, and the image conditioning
on the caption, following the intuition that image generation may be a more data-hungry task than
image understanding. The remaining 20% of the pairs condition the caption on the image. However,
these images are noised as part of the diffusion objective. We thus measure the effect of limiting the
diffusion noise to a maximum of t = 500 (half of the noise schedule) in the 20% of cases where
images appear before their captions. Table 11 shows that noise limiting significantly improves image
captioning, as measure by CIDEr, while having a relatively small effect (less than 1%) on other
benchmarks.


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Model      Noise      C4        Wiki       Llama                MS-COCO
           Params     Limit    PPL (↓)    PPL (↓)     Acc (↑)    CDr (↑)    FID (↓) CLIP (↑)
                                   10.3        5.9        51.9      25.4       16.7        25.4
           0.76B
                        ✓          10.3        5.9        52.1      29.4       16.5        25.4
                                    7.8        4.3        61.1      33.7       16.0        26.5
           7B
                        ✓           7.7        4.3        60.9      35.2       15.7        26.3


Table 11: Performance of Transfusion with and without limiting the amount of sampled diffusion
noise to a maximum of t = 500 when images appear before the caption. The models are U-Net
variants encoding 2×2 latent pixel patches. Metrics that change by over 1% are bolded.


C    AUTOENCODER D ETAILS
The training objective for our VAE closely follows that of Esser et al. (2021):
                     LVAE = L1 + LLPIPS + 0.5LGAN + 0.2LID + 0.000001LKL
where L1 is L1 loss in pixel space, LLPIPS is perceptual loss based on LPIPS similarity Zhang
et al. (2018), LGAN is a patch-based discriminator loss, LID is a perceptual loss based on internal
features of the Moco v2 model Chen et al. (2020), and LKL is the standard KL-regularization term to
encourage encoder outputs towards a normal distribution. We delay the beginning of GAN training
(i.e. including the adversarial loss in the loss function) to 50,000 steps, in order to let the VAE achieve
sufficiently good reconstruction performance. We use a latent dimension of 8.
The training objective for the VQ-GAN matches that of the VAE, with one notable exception:
we replace the LKL loss with the standard codebook commitment loss Lcodebook (Van Den Oord
et al., 2017), which encourages encoder outputs and codebook vectors to be close together. We use
β = 0.25, and use loss weighting 1.0. The final loss function for the VQ-VAE is therefore:
                      LVQ-VAE = L1 + LLPIPS + 0.5LGAN + 0.2LID + Lcodebook
The vector quantization layer is applied after projecting the encoder outputs to 8-dimensional space.
Outside of the loss function change and the quantization layer, the training setup for the VAE (for
Transfusion) and VQ-VAE (for Chameleon) are the same (e.g. same amount of training compute,
same training data, and same encoder/decoder architecture).

D    E XAMPLES : I MAGE G ENERATION
Figure 8 and Figure 9 show examples of images generated from a 7B Transfusion model trained on
2T multi-modal tokens (§4.4).

E    E XAMPLES : I MAGE E DITING
Figure 10 show random examples of image editing by a fine-tuned 7B Transfusion model.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


An armchair in the shape     A bread, an apple, and a                A corgi.            human life depicted en-
of an avocado                knife on a table                                            tirely out of fractals


A blue jay standing on a     “Transfusion" is written        A close up photo of a hu-   A cloud in the shape of
large basket of rainbow      on the blackboard.              man hand, hand model.       two bunnies playing with
macarons.                                                    High quality                a ball. The ball is made of
                                                                                         clouds too.


the word ‘START’ on a        A Dutch still life of an A wall in a royal castle. Three spheres made of
blue t-shirt                 arrangement of tulips in There are two paintings glass falling into ocean.
                             a fluted vase. The light- on the wall. The one on Water is splashing. Sun
                             ing is subtle, casting gen- the left a detailed oil paint- is setting.
                             tle highlights on the flow- ing of the royal raccoon
                             ers and emphasizing their king. The one on the right
                             delicate details and natu- a detailed oil painting of
                             ral beauty.                 the royal raccoon queen.


A transparent sculpture of   A chromeplated cat sculp-       A kangaroo holding a        an egg and a bird made of
a duck made out of glass.    ture placed on a Persian        beer, wearing ski goggles   wheat bread
                             rug.                            and passionately singing
                                                             silly songs.


       Figure 7: Generated images from a 7B Transfusion trained on 2T multi-modal tokens.



                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Downtown Seattle at sun-      A car made out of vegeta-          A sign that says “Diffu- A black basketball shoe
rise. detailed ink wash.      bles.                              sion".                   with a lightning bolt on it.


an espresso machine that      Intricate origami of a fox         a yellow wall with two        A crab made of cheese on
makes coffee from human       and a unicorn in a snowy           framed sketches               a plate.
souls, high-contrast paint-   forest.
ing.


A single beam of light en- White Cycladic houses                 The saying “BE EX-            dark high contrast render
ter the room from the ceil- with blue accents and vi-            CELLENT TO EACH               of a psychedelic tree of
ing. The beam of light is brant magenta bougainvil-              OTHER" written in a           life illuminating dust in a
illuminating an easel. On lea in a serene Greek is-              stained glass window.         mystical cave.
the easel there is a Rem- land setting.
brandt painting of a rac-
coon.


A photo of a person with      Photo of a lychee-inspired         An old rusted robot wear-     Film still of a long-legged
the head of a cow, wear-      spherical chair, with a            ing pants and a jacket rid-   cute big-eye anthropomor-
ing a tuxedo and black        bumpy white exterior and           ing skis in a supermarket.    phic cheeseburger wear-
bowtie. Beach wallpaper       plush interior, set against                                      ing sneakers relaxing on
in the background.            a tropical wallpaper.                                            the couch in a sparsely
                                                                                               decorated living room.


       Figure 8: Generated images from a 7B Transfusion trained on 2T multi-modal tokens.


                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A woman on a bed under-    A small blue book sitting        A horse reading a book.       A light bulb containing a
neath a blanket.           on a large red book.                                           sailboat floats through the
                                                                                          galaxy.


  a monarch butterfly.     A rowboat on a lake with         An expressive oil painting    An angry duck doing
                           a bike on it.                    of a chocolate chip cookie    heavy weightlifting at the
                                                            being dipped in a glass of    gym.
                                                            milk, depicted as an ex-
                                                            plosion of flavors.


An emoji of a baby panda   A tranquil, anime-style          a massive alien space ship    graffiti of a funny dog on
wearing a red hat, green   koi pond in a serene             that is shaped like a pret-   a street wall.
gloves, red shirt, and     Japanese garden, featur-         zel.
green pants.               ing blossoming cherry
                           trees.


A spacious, serene room A raccoon wearing cow-              A relaxed garlic with a       photo of a bear wearing a
influenced by modern boy hat and black leather              blindfold reading a news-     suit and tophat in a river
Japanese aesthetics with jacket is behind the back-         paper while floating in a     in the middle of a forest
a view of a cityscape out- yard window.        Rain         pool of tomato soup.          holding a sign that says “I
side of the window.        droplets on the window.                                        cant bear it".


       Figure 9: Generated images from a 7B Transfusion trained on 2T multi-modal tokens.



                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Change the closest keyboard to be all black.           Change the graffiti on the truck into calligraphy
                                                         writing.


  Can we have mountains on the background?               Replace the airplane with a blackhawk helicopter.


           Add a blue rug to the floor.                    Delete the overhead lights on top of the sink.


   Change the roll of thread into a roll of wire.              Change the baseball bat to all brown.


                  Figure 10: Edited images from a fine-tuned 7B Transfusion model.


                                                    24
