Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L OGICAL C ONSISTENCY OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS IN FACT-C HECKING
 Bishwamittra Ghosh1, ˚ , Sarah Hasan2, ˚ , Naheed Anjum Arafat3 , Arijit Khan2
 1
   Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Germany
 2
   Aalborg University, Denmark
 3
   Independent Researcher, USA
    1
        bghosh@mpi-sws.org, 2 {sarahh, arijitk}@cs.aau.dk, 3 naheed anjum@u.nus.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

               In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant suc-
               cess in performing varied natural language tasks such as language translation,
               question-answering, summarizing, fact-checking, etc. Despite LLMs’ impressive
               ability to generate human-like texts, LLMs are infamous for their inconsistent re-
               sponses – a meaning-preserving change in the input query results in an inconsis-
               tent response and attributes to vulnerabilities of LLMs such as hallucination. Con-
               sequently, existing research focuses on simple paraphrasing-based consistency as-
               sessment of LLMs, and ignores complex queries that necessitate an even better
               understanding of logical reasoning by an LLM. Our work therefore addresses the
               logical inconsistency of LLMs under complex logical queries with primitive log-
               ical operators, e.g., negation, conjunction, and disjunction. As a test bed, we
               consider retrieval-augmented LLMs on a fact-checking task involving proposi-
               tional logic queries from knowledge graphs (KGs). Our contributions are three-
               fold. Benchmark: We introduce three logical fact-checking datasets over KGs
               for community development towards logically consistent LLMs. Assessment:
               We propose consistency measures of LLMs on propositional logic queries and
               demonstrate that existing LLMs lack logical consistency, especially on complex
               queries. Improvement: We employ supervised fine-tuning to improve the logical
               consistency of LLMs on the complex fact-checking task with KG contexts. We
               have made our source code and benchmarks available1 .


1           I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs), e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023),
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) permeate natural language processing with their remarkable capacity
to comprehend and generate human-like texts (Min et al., 2023; Kamalloo et al., 2023). As such,
there is a host of applications of LLMs in high-stake domains such as healthcare (Singhal et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b; Dash et al., 2023), finance (Wu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023a), law (Xiao et al.,
2021), and education (Kasneci et al., 2023). For instance, by implicitly storing pre-trained/fine-
tuned knowledge, LLMs are increasingly being applied in fact-checking and question-answering
tasks (Saeed et al., 2023; Quelle & Bovet, 2024).
Consistency of LLM Response. Despite the success story, a notable challenge in LLMs is the
inconsistency of generated responses. Consistency of an LLM – the invariance of its output under
meaning-preserving alternations in its input – is a highly desirable property (Elazar et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2023c). Existing works mostly focus on semantically similar sentences (paraphrases) for
consistency assessment. For example, Kuhn et al. (2023) measures the consistency of LLMs by
computing semantic uncertainty of output responses under paraphrased inputs. Elazar et al. (2021)
consider quasi-paraphrases in a cloze-style input format and assess masked language models (Devlin
et al., 2018) for consistency (additional related works are discussed in the Appendix B).
    ˚
            Jointly first authors.
        1
            https://github.com/bishwamittra/llm_logical_consistency


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                      Knowledge graph (relevant sub-graph)
                                                                   T.S.                                         Aldous
                                                                            award                      award
                      Fact                                         Eliot    winner    Nobel Prize     nominee
                                                                                                                Huxley      Leo
                                                                                      in Literature                        Tolstoy
  Thomas Mann | award winner | Nobel Prize        Find relevant
                                                                             award                award
               in Literature                         context                 winner               winner
                                                                                                                influenced by
                                                                   Henri
                                                                  Bergson            Franz   influenced
                                                                                                           Thomas
                                                                                     Kafka                  Mann


                                                                  T.S. Eliot | award winner | Nobel Prize in Literature
  Consider the context: $Context.                                 Thomas Mann | influenced | Franz Kafka
                                                                  ...
                                                                  Thomas Mann | award winner | Nobel prize in Literature
  Is the fact correct given the context? $Fact.                   ...
              LLMQuery (Prompt)                                                              Context


Figure 1: Our LLM-based fact-checking framework on a simple fact with context from a knowledge
graph. A representative LLMQuery is in Figure 3, and the extension to complex facts is in Figure 4.



Existing works focus on the consistency of an LLM on simple queries and do not assess consistency
on complex queries requiring improved logical reasoning by LLMs. Therefore, an unexplored re-
search question is to systematically assess and improve the logical consistency of LLMs in complex
logic queries with primitive logical operators: negation (␣), conjunction (^), and disjunction (_).
Informally, an LLM is logically consistent with a query under the negation operator if the LLM re-
sponse to the base query and the negated query are semantically opposite. Subsequently, an LLM is
consistent on a conjunction query with (at least) two sub-queries if the individual responses to each
sub-queries are logically consistent with the conjunction query. Building on logical semantics, we
naturally extend the consistency assessment of LLMs to propositional logic queries and rules such as
commutative, distributive, associative, syllogism, and to first-order logic queries (Boole, 1847). Our
hypothesis is that logically consistent LLMs are essential in trustworthy systems (Sun et al., 2024b):
When an LLM is consistent, it is easier to verify whether the LLM is right or wrong, without a
sophisticated benchmark – being logically consistent provides the end users additional confidence
in applying LLMs in their own workload.
Logical Consistency in Fact-Checking via Retrieval-Augmented Generation. In this paper, we
assess and improve the logical consistency of LLMs in propositional logic queries and logic rules,
particularly in the context of fact-checking. Automated fact-checking is the task of deploying an
intelligent system such as an LLM to verify a queried fact with respect to a baseline knowledge (Guo
et al., 2022). Since LLMs might be inconsistent on unknown facts, we consider a controlled setup of
LLMs in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) that references an authoritative knowledge base to
an LLM beyond training data while generating a response (Lewis et al., 2020). As a RAG context,
we resort to real-world knowledge graphs (KGs) (Agrawal et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b; Suchanek
& Luu, 2023; Huang et al., 2024b), which store large-scale facts in a structured format of xsubject,
relation, objecty triples. Indeed, a KG is a rich source of highly-curated facts on entities connected
by relationships, and provides a test bed for logical consistency assessment. Therefore in our setup,
we aim to provide a KG context and a propositional fact-checking query to an LLM and assess the
consistency of responses under logical manipulation. However, such a logical fact-checking dataset
is absent in the literature.
Contributions: We have three-fold contributions in the paper.
1. Benchmark. We address the lack of a logical fact-checking dataset (LFC) over KGs by introduc-
ing three datasets: FreebaseLFC, NELLLFC, and WikiLFC (§5). They are derived from their KG
counterparts, Freebase (Bordes et al., 2013), NELL (Carlson et al., 2010), and WikiKG90Mv2 (Hu
et al., 2021b), respectively. Existing KG datasets, while being widely used, are not suitable for
testing an LLM’s logical consistency in their native format. Therefore, we transform a xsubject,
relation, objecty triplet from the KG into a suitable input format for an LLM as a (Fact, Context)
pair, referred to as LLMQuery – Figure 1 shows an example of a fact, its corresponding KG context,
and the LLMQuery from the FreebaseLFC dataset.
2. Assessment of Logical Consistency. We propose logical consistency measures of LLMs on
propositional logic-based queries, which cover fact-checking queries over KGs using retrieval-
augmented LLMs (§3). The queried facts involve one or more triplets connected by logical operators


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


such as negation (␣), conjunction (^), and disjunction (_). For consistency assessment, we con-
sider a variety of scenarios, such as both simple and complex facts, diverse logic rules, first-order
logic, and LLMQuery with and without KG contexts (§5). We demonstrate that existing LLMs such
as Llama2-7B, Llama2-13B, and Gemma-2B, while being more accurate with KG contexts, are not
consistent when considering logical equivalents or variants of these facts.
3. Improvement of Logical Consistency. We demonstrate how existing LLMs can be fine-tuned to
improve their consistency via supervised fine-tuning (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018) (§4).
We showcase that pre-train, prompt, and predict paradigm is often insufficient to improve the con-
sistency of LLMs for complex fact-checking with KG contexts, thus we resort to pre-train, fine-tune,
and predict approach. Although supervised fine-tuning is shown to be effective in other downstream
tasks (Wei et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021), it has not yet been conducted for logical fact-checking
queries over KGs. Furthermore, fine-tuning is feasible in our case due to the availability of abundant
training data with ground-truth labels from the KG (§4.2). Additionally, we leverage parameter-
efficient fine-tuning based on QLoRA (Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation) (Dettmers et al., 2024),
thus improving the fine-tuning efficiency.
Experimental results show that the fine-tuned LLMs improve the consistency by 14% on average,
while our optimization techniques scale both fine-tuning and inferencing to large KGs and complex
fact-checking tasks. Our experiments also show that models fine-tuned on simple facts generalize
well to more complex, unseen facts and rules (§5). This is possible due to complex facts and rules
being decomposable into a collection of simple facts (Proposition 1)2 .

2    BACKGROUND
We provide preliminaries on knowledge graphs and propositional logic, which constitute the back-
ground for assessing logical consistency in LLMs.
Knowledge Graph (KG). A knowledge graph stores large-scale and real-world facts as a graph,
denoted by G “ pV, Rq, where v P V is an entity and r P R is a relation. r is a binary function
r : V ˆ V P t0, 1u indicating whether the relation r holds between a pair of entities or not. In the
                                                                                                   r
KG, such a binary relation indicates a directed edge between the pair of entities, formally u Ý   Ñv
indicates rpu, vq “ 1. A KG G can be represented by a set of facts or triplets T Ď V ˆ R ˆ V: For
a triplet T “ pu, r, vq P T with u, v P V, we refer to u as a subject entity and v as an object entity.
Propositional Logic Facts. At the core of a KG, propositional logic facts constitute one or multiple
triplets connected by logical operators, including conjunction (^), disjunction (_), and negation
(␣). As per the DNF theorem (Davey & Priestley, 2002; Halbeisen & Krapf, 2020), any proposi-
tional logic fact q can be expressed in the disjunctive normal form (DNF), which is a disjunction of
conjunctive facts, wherein each conjunctive fact is a conjunction of atomic relation facts. Formally,
                       q “ c1 _ c2 _ ¨ ¨ ¨ _ cn where ci “ ei1 ^ ei2 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ eim

tci |1 ď i ď nu are conjunction facts. A conjunction fact ci comprises one or more atomic relation
facts ci “ ^ij“1
              m
                 eij . An atomic relation fact eij is a relation projection between a pair of entities.
Formally,
                                  eij “ rpu, vq or eij “ ␣rpu, vq
where u P V is a subject entity, v P V is an object entity, and r P R is a relation. We refer to an
atomic relation fact as the simple fact, while a propositional logic fact involving multiple triplets
connected by logical operators is called a complex fact.
    2
      We analyze the impact of considering KG contexts (Appendix G.2), context length (Appendix G.3), dif-
ferent KG retrieval methods to build the KG context in LLMQuery (Appendix G.4), different prompting strate-
gies (Appendix G.5), and the impact of learning rate (Appendix G.6) and epochs (Appendix G.7) on logical
consistency and accuracy in fact-checking. We discuss the generalization of logical consistency to complex
queries (Appendix H). We extend consistency assessment beyond structured format to natural text queries in
Appendix I. Also, we demonstrate the superiority of our fact-checking framework over existing fact-checker
in Appendix J. We experiment with Llama2-70B and GPT-4o, where instruction prompting tends to be suf-
ficient to improve logical consistency since fine-tuning is often infeasible in large and closed-source models
(Appendix K). Finally, we empirically verify whether LLMs fine-tuned to be logically consistent retain their
performance on general language benchmarks in Appendix L.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given a propositional logic fact q, let us denote its truth value as Tpqq P t0, 1u. The focus of this
work is to find the truth value of a propositional logic fact, also referred to as the fact-checking,
using an LLM and a KG context.
Example 1. q1 = participantCountryp2008 Olympics, Vatican Cityq is a simple fact. The truth
value of q1 , denoted as Tpq1 q = 0, as Vatican City did not participate in the 2008 Olympics.
Let us consider a complex fact q2 = participantAthletep2020 Olympics, Nelly Kordaq ^
awardedTopOlympics Gold Medal, Nelly Kordaq. In this case, the truth value Tpq2 q “ 1, since
both of the constituent simple facts are true.

3     M EASURING L OGICAL C ONSISTENCY ON P ROPOSITIONAL L OGIC FACTS
In this section, we motivate and define the quantitative measure of logical consistency of an LLM
response on propositional logic facts, presented as LLMQuery (Figure 1). When prompted the LLM
with a fact q, the LLM either accepts q as a valid fact or rejects it, that is, LLMpqq P t0, 1u, which
is a binary function that either validates q with response 1, or invalidates q with response 0. In this
paper, we guide the LLM to be a binary classifier by auto-regressively generating binary responses
such as yes/no, accept/reject, etc., via prompt instructions. Next, we discuss the correctness criteria
of LLMpqq followed by consistency measures.
Definition 1 (Correctness of fact-checking via LLM response). Given a fact q, an LLM response
is correct if LLMpqq “ Tpqq. In other words, a correct LLM response produces 1 for a true fact
(Tpqq “ 1) and 0 for a false fact (Tpqq “ 0). The correctness can be extended to measure the
average fact-checking accuracy of the LLM on a batch Q “ tqk : 1 ď k ď N u of N facts as
                            řN
AccuracypLLM, Qq “ N1 k“1 1LLMpqk q“Tpqk q , where 1 is an indicator function taking value 1 if
the LLM is correct for the fact qk , and 0 otherwise.

Note that an LLM response being correct (or incorrect) says nothing about whether the response is
consistent or not. We clarify this point with an example, where the LLM is correct in one out of two
fact-checking queries, yet inconsistent as a whole.
Example 2. Consider a true fact q “ honoredFor(Golden Globe Award for Best Director, Born
on the Fourth of July) from Freebase KG and a false fact ␣q “ honoredFor(Golden Globe Award
for Best Director, Chamada a Cobrar). In both q and ␣q, the subject entity is an award category
and the object entity is a film. Next, we formulate an LLMQuery as a (Fact q, Context)-pair as in
Figure 1 – we defer the construction of KG context to § 3.4, where the context intuitively contains
the necessary knowledge for the LLM in validating q or ␣q. Upon prompting Llama2-7B model
with (Fact q, Context), we obtain the response LLMpqq “ 1. On the contrary, when we prompt
Llama2-7B with a negative LLMQuery (Fact ␣q, Context) with the same context but a negated fact,
we receive an identical response LLMp␣qq “ 1. Therefore, the LLM responses are inconsistent as
it returns 1 to both true and false facts and fails to distinguish between logically opposing facts.

It is well-known that the set of operators t␣, ^, _u is functionally complete (Howson, 2005), im-
plying that any propositional logic statement can be expressed using these three operators. Hence,
we start with defining an LLM response’s consistency for these three operators.
Definition 2 (Logical Consistency on Primitive Operators). Let us consider p and q as proposi-
tional logic facts. An LLM response is logically consistent if the following conditions are satisfied.
                                     LLMp␣qq “ ␣LLMpqq                                               (1)
                                   LLMpp _ qq “ LLMppq _ LLMpqq                                      (2)
                                   LLMpp ^ qq “ LLMppq ^ LLMpqq                                      (3)
Informally, the consistency criteria states that LLM responses on constituent sub-queries must com-
ply with the semantics of the logical operators connecting those sub-queries.

Below, we discuss the LLM’s consistency w.r.t. these three operators in detail with KG contexts.

3.1   C ONSISTENCY OF S IMPLE FACTS

A simple fact is an atomic relation; therefore, consistency on negation is applicable (Equation 1). As
stated in §2.1, a simple fact in a KG is either a relation rpu, vq or its negation ␣rpu, vq. The negation


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


␣rpu, vq can be computed in two ways: (1) by replacing r in the triplet pu, r, vq with an alternative
falsified relation r1 s.t. r1 pu, vq “ 0; or (2) via negating entities, e.g., by finding an alternate object
entity v 1 such that rpu, v 1 q “ 0. We adopt the second approach for practical purposes since the
notion of consistency does not depend on how the negation of a triplet is computed.
Given a simple fact q “ rpu, vq, we check consistency with respect to the negation operator. First,
we compute the negation of this fact, ␣q “ rpu, v 1 q by finding an alternate object entity v 1 , and
finally, we check the consistency of LLM responses based on whether the following holds (equa-
tion 1).
                                   LLMprpu, v 1 qq “ ␣LLMprpu, vqq
Example 2 showed an example of logical inconsistency. In the following, we show an example of
logical consistency of a simple fact.
Example 3. Consider a true fact q “ capital(Vietnam, Hanoi) from Freebase and a false fact
␣q “ capital(Vietnam, Sorkh Qaleh - North Khorasan). We formulate an LLMQuery as a (Fact
q, Context)-pair similar to that in Figure 1. Upon prompting Llama2-7B, we obtain the response
LLMpqq “ 1. On a similarly constructed negation LLMQuery = (Fact ␣q, Context), we find the
response LLMp␣qq “ 0. Since LLMp␣qq “ 0 “ ␣1 “ ␣LLMpqq, Llama2-7B is logically consistent.
Similar to accuracy, we measure the average consistency of LLM responses on a given batch
containing N pairs of simple facts and negations, Q “ tpqk , ␣qk q : 1 ď k ď N u:
                          řN
ConsistencypLLM, Qq “ N1 k“1 1LLMpqk q“␣LLMp␣qk q .

3.2   C ONSISTENCY OF C OMPLEX FACTS

The canonical example of a complex fact is a DNF fact since a DNF fact consists of functionally
complete logical operators t␣, ^, _u. Indeed, one can construct complex facts using other opera-
tors, such as implication (ñ) and biconditional (ô), however, such facts can be transformed into
DNF (Davey & Priestley, 2002). Therefore, we define the consistency of a complex fact as the
consistency of a DNF fact and apply similar constraints as in Definition 2: Informally, an LLM is
consistent to a DNF fact if the LLM response on the DNF fact is equal to applying a hierarchy of
disjunctions followed by conjunctions on the LLM responses over the lowest level atomic facts.
Proposition 1. An LLM is consistent on a DNF fact q “ _ni“1 ci , where ci “ ^ij“1m
                                                                                   eij , if LLMpqq “
Žn ´Źim               ¯
  i“1    j“1 LLMpeij q . Here, eij is an atomic relation fact for any 1 ď i ď n and 1 ď j ď im .

The proof is given in the Appendix C. Since any propositional logic fact can be ex-
pressed in the DNF form, Proposition 1 encompasses the consistency criteria of any propo-
sitional logic fact.    In addition,    we` measure˘ the average( consistency given a batch of
N DNF queries Q “ qk “ _ni“1 ^ij“1
                           ␣                 m
                                               ekij : 1 ď k ď N as ConsistencypLLM, Qq “
 1
    ř N
N     k“1 1LLMpqk q“_n p^im LLMpek qq .
                     i“1   j“1      ij

The choice of DNF in Proposition 1 is not the only design choice, since the proposed method for
assessing logical consistency is not reliant on any specific normal form. In fact, the definition of
consistency is flexible enough to be adapted to other canonical forms such as CNF (Proposition 3).
In the following, as a basic example of complex facts, we show an LLM’s consistency assessment
using conjunction with two atomic relation facts from Freebase.
Example 4. Consider two true facts from Freebase: p “ filmProduction(Universal Studios,
The Family Man) and q “ filmProduction(Relativity Media, Valentine’s Day). By prompting
Llama2-7B with an LLMQuery constituting a complex fact with ^ operator, i.e., the (Fact p ^ Fact
q, Context)-pair, we obtain the response LLMpp ^ qq “ 1. Similarly, by prompting the (Fact p,
Context)-pair, we receive the response LLMppq “ 1. We obtain the same for q, LLMpqq “ 1. In this
case, the LLM is consistent because LLMpp ^ qq “ LLMppq ^ LLMpqq.
Consider the true fact p “ countryReverse(Brazil, Artistic gymnastics) implying that Artistic
Gymnastic is played in Brazil and another true fact q “ sport(2012 Summer Olympics, Artistic
gymnastics). Upon prompting Llama2-7B with an LLMQuery with (Fact p ^ Fact q , Context)-pair,
we obtain the response LLMpp ^ qq “ 1. However, upon prompting Llama2-7B with the constituent
simple facts individually, we receive the response LLMppq “ 0 and LLMpqq “ 1. In this case, the
LLM is inconsistent because LLMpp ^ qq “ 1 ‰ 0 “ LLMppq ^ LLMpqq.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 LLM fact-checking with KG contexts (for simple facts)
    Input: A language model LLM, a knowledge graph G, a simple fact rpu, vq, maximum hop λ
    Output: A binary value t0, 1u
 1: Gsub Ð BoundedBFSpG, u, λq                Ź Find the λ hop subgraph of the subject u in G
 2: φ Ð BuildContextpGsub , rq                Ź Get the relevant context for relation r in Gsub
 3: return LLMQueryprpu, vq, φq Ź Get a binary response on concatenated context and target fact



3.3   C ONSISTENCY FOR L OGIC RULES

An important family of true facts comes from various logical rules of inference, such as the commu-
tative, associative, and distributive properties. One critical question is: Do LLMs respond such that
these laws of inference are respected? Let p, q, s be propositional logic facts. An LLM is consistent
w.r.t. the commutative law if reordering logic facts results in an identical response.
                     LLMpp _ qq “ LLMpq _ pq and LLMpp ^ qq “ LLMpq ^ pq
An LLM is consistent w.r.t. the associative law if the following holds.
        LLMppp _ qq _ sq “ LLMpp _ pq _ sqq and LLMppp ^ qq ^ sq “ LLMppp ^ pq ^ sqq
An LLM is consistent w.r.t. the distributive law if the following holds.
  LLMpp ^ pq _ sqq “ LLMppp ^ qq _ pp _ sqq and LLMpp _ pq ^ sqq “ LLMppp _ qq ^ pp _ sqq

Given a batch of N logic rules L “ tlk : 1 ď k ď N u, we measure the average consistency of LLM
                                           řN
responses as ConsistencypLLM, Lq “ N1 k“1 1ConsistencypLLM, lk q , where 1ConsistencypLLM, lk q is an
indicator function taking value 1 if the LLM is consistent for the logic rule lk , and 0 otherwise.

3.4   C ONSTRUCTING LLMQuery WITH FACTS AND KG C ONTEXTS

Our goal is to assess the logical consistency of LLMs on fact-checking queries from KGs, as
discussed above. It is plausible that LLMs lack the necessary knowledge to answer the fact-
checking query accurately, let alone being consistent, especially on recent facts never seen during
pre-training/fine-tuning. As such, motivated by the RAG-based framework, we intend to provide
necessary knowledge or context from the KG in LLMQuery before assessing for consistency. Algo-
rithm 1 provides a template pipeline for LLMQuery, where a key step is to find the relevant context
for the target fact. Among different choices, we first discuss a graph traversal-based method for
context retrieval, followed by alternate methods such as vector-embedding-based retrieval.
Graph Traversal. Given a target fact, we apply breadth-first search (BFS) to get a relevant sub-
graph from the KG. For simplicity, let us consider a simple fact either in the form rpu, vq, or in
the negation form ␣rpu, vq. The relevant information of an entity is generally expected to be in
the local neighbourhood in the KG (Dettmers et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020b). Hence, we conduct
BFS from the subject entity u up to a certain number of hops (e.g., λ = 2 or 3) in the KG, and get
a connected subgraph (line 1). To analyse the complexity of BFS, let the λ-hop neighbourhood of
u contain |Vλ puq| nodes and |Eλ puq| edges in the KG. The time complexity of BFS-based context
building is Op|Vλ puq| ` |Eλ puq|q. Thereafter, we provide the list of triplets in the subgraph as a
context to LLMQuery (line 2). Our hypothesis is that the context contains the necessary information
for the LLM to validate the target fact: If the fact is implied by the context, the LLM is expected to
return the binary response 1 (validating the fact), and 0 otherwise (invalidating it).
Optimizing Context Generation. LLMs are restricted to processing a finite-length context. Be-
sides, LLMs’ performance often deteriorates with long contexts (Liu et al., 2023a). Therefore, we
further prune the context/subgraph from BFS, especially when the subject entity u is connected to
many other entities within a few hops. We adopt three potential approaches: (1) We prioritize triplets
having semantically similar relations as the target fact’s relation r. We identify such semantically
similar relations by utilizing the ontology and relation hierarchy, often available with KG (Chah,
2018; Chen et al., 2023). For a complex fact, we split the context size equally for each simple
fact involved in it. (2) We apply vector-embedding-based methods to project triplets in the sub-
graph to a high-dimensional embedding space (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) and find relevant triplets


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Consider the context: $Context.
          Is the fact correct given the context? Answer Yes when the fact is in the context and No otherwise. $Fact.

Figure 2: The adaptation of LLMQuery from Figure 1 for instruction prompting. The prompt
contains a clear instruction (in blue) to guide the LLM towards outputting a correct response.


close to the embedded target fact using approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms (Malkov &
Yashunin, 2020). (3) As the last approach, we bypass applying BFS, embed the entire KG triplets,
and retrieve relevant triplets to the target fact. Thus, we provide the most relevant context to the
LLM so that we can precisely assess its logical consistency. Furthermore, our framework for as-
sessing consistency is modular and can benefit from future development in graph-based retrieval of
related contexts such as graphRAG (Liu et al., 2024; Sanmartin, 2024).

4     I MPROVING THE LLM C ONSISTENCY BY S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING
Supervised fine-tuning is the process of fine-tuning LLMs on a specific task by providing them with
explicit instructions or prompts along with examples of inputs (training data) and outputs (ground-
truth labels) relevant to that task. These prompts guide the model’s learning process and help it
specialize in that task. The task considered in this paper is logically consistent fact-checking. Fine-
tuning is feasible for this task because there are abundant facts available in the KG for fine-tuning.
We first discuss the reasons behind adopting supervised fine-tuning rather than zero-shot instruction
prompting for this task. Afterwards, we discuss the steps involved in the fine-tuning.

4.1   M OTIVATION : I NSTRUCTION P ROMPTING VS . S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING

Supervised fine-tuning requires time and computational resources, and in some cases, it is not needed
at all (Radford et al., 2019; Ziegler et al., 2019). Hence, it is important to verify if our task necessi-
tates fine-tuning. We first consider zero-shot instruction prompting – shown in Figure 2, as a compu-
tationally cheaper alternative. Our goal is to instruct the LLM to output yes when the fact triplets are
inside the context, and no otherwise. The context length is limited to 1000 tokens. We empirically
find that even for simple facts checking, such zero-shot instruction prompting does not improve the
logical consistency, while supervised fine-tuning outperforms zero-shot instruction prompting; the
consistency improves by up to 46% (see Tables 3 and 11).
The reasons for inferior performance of zero-shot instruction prompting compared to supervised
fine-tuning are two-fold: (1) Nuances and intricacies of logical facts. It is well known that su-
pervised fine-tuning of pre-trained LLMs is preferable for tasks that require precise and nuanced
predictions, especially when the task involves multiple classes or fine-grained distinctions (Wei
et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021). In such cases, providing explicit supervision through labeled data
allows the LLM to adjust its behaviour based on the nuances and intricacies of the task domain and
learn to make accurate predictions based on the task-specific examples (Sainz et al., 2024). For a
simple fact-checking task, the intricacies arise from understanding the differences between a true
fact and its corresponding false fact. (2) Limited knowledge. Fine-tuning a pre-trained LLM with
task-specific labeled examples enables it to directly optimize its parameters for the target task, lead-
ing to potentially better performance compared to zero-shot instruction prompting (Ziegler et al.,
2019; Xu et al., 2023), which relies on generalization from instructions given in the prompt. For
instance, supervised fine-tuning has shown better performance than zero-shot prompting on tasks
such as named entity recognition, relation extraction, and relation classification (Sainz et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2023), while Ziegler et al. (2019) showed that supervised fine-tuning with explicit task-
specific instructions or preferences performs better than zero-shot prompting on text summarization
task. In the case of our simple fact-checking task, without sufficient data, the LLM fails to learn
significantly different representations of a false fact from a true fact.

4.2   M ETHODOLOGY FOR S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING

We consider supervised fine-tuning to align LLM responses to be logically consistent. We consider
a two-step procedure: dataset creation and supervised fine-tuning. Here, we discuss dataset creation
and refer to Appendix D for details on fine-tuning and the two-step Algorithm 2.


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Instruction Dataset Creation. We construct a binary instruction dataset from primitive logic facts
containing negation, conjunction, and disjunction operators – the goal is to help the LLM correctly
classify logic facts as true/false. More specifically, we construct a dataset with four facts: p, ␣p, p _
q, and p ^ q preceded by a context φ. For simple facts, the ground truth response of p is true when
p P φ and false otherwise – the LLM is expected to learn a function where if the target fact is in the
context, it should recognize this and outputs 1, and 0 otherwise. For complex facts, the ground truth
response for p _ q is true when p P φ or q P φ, and false otherwise. Similarly, the response for p ^ q
is true when both p P φ and q P φ. Assume a simple fact p having subject node u, and the λ-hop
neighbourhood of u contains |Vλ puq| nodes and |Eλ puq| edges in the KG. Following §3.4, the time
complexity of creating instruction data for the simple fact p is Op|Vλ puq|`|Eλ puq|q. In addition, we
prioritize keeping both positive and negative training examples in the same batch so that the LLM
learns to distinguish between them and subsequently becomes more consistent. Below, we formalize
the sufficient condition to achieve logical consistency by achieving accuracy in fact-checking.
Proposition 2. (I) An LLM is consistent on a simple atomic fact if it is accurate both on the fact and
its negation. (II) For a complex DNF fact, the LLM is consistent if it is accurate on the DNF fact as
well as on all constituent atomic facts.

We explain Proposition 2 using examples and defer the proof to the Appendix C. Consider a simple
fact p, where p P φ. Let the LLM accurately classify p as 1 and ␣p as 0. Then, the LLM is consistent
on p. Further, consider a conjunction fact p ^ q, where p P φ and q R φ. Let the LLM accurately
classify p ^ q as 0, and constituent atomic facts p as 1 and q as 0. Therefore, the LLM is consistent
on p ^ q. Notice that Proposition 2 provides a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for the LLM’s
logical consistency on both simple and complex facts. Therefore, we expect that fine-tuning to
enhance the accuracy following Proposition 2 would lead to the LLM’s logical consistency.
Generalization to Complex Facts and Logic Rules. Our instruction dataset focuses on accu-
rately classifying single logic operators such as negation, conjunction, and disjunction. Recognizing
primitive operators is the building block for classifying facts and rules with multiple heterogeneous
operators. Our hypothesis therefore is that fine-tuning to recognize single operators should gener-
alize to complex logic facts and rules with multiple operators, which we informally attribute as the
emergent abilities of LLMs (Lu et al., 2023; Schaeffer et al., 2024). In this work, we empirically
showcase the generalization to out-of-distribution complex facts and logic rules in § 5.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We conduct experiments to evaluate the logical consistency of LLMs and the impact of supervised
fine-tuning on improving consistency. Additional details on experiments, results, and code are in the
supplementary materials. Specifically, we investigate the following research questions empirically.
• Logical Consistency via Improved Accuracy. Does the logical consistency of LLMs improve
  via a fine-tuning task of correctly classifying primitive logical operators?
• Generalizability. Does the fine-tuned models generalize to in-distribution facts from different
  datasets, and more generally, to out-of-distribution logic facts containing more operators?
• Efficiency. How is the efficiency of PEFT vs. full fine-tuning and LLM inference on logic facts?
• Ablation Study. Does instruction prompting improve logical consistency compared to fine-tuning
  across different model-sizes? What is the impact of different KG retrieval methods on the consis-
  tency of the LLM? Does adding KG contexts help LLMs in improving accuracy and consistency,
  and how does the length of context play a role? What is the impact of hyperparameters, e.g.,
  learning rate in fine-tuning?

5.1   DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

KG Datasets and Facts. We consider three KG benchmarks: Freebase (FB15K), NELL, and a
large-scale dataset from OGB: WikiKG90Mv2 (Wiki) (Hu et al., 2021b). We obtain FB15K and
NELL from the codebase of Query2Box (Ren et al., 2020). We create logical fact-checking datasets
FreebaseLFC, NELLLFC, and WikiLFC using the FB15K, NELL, and Wiki KGs, respectively.
Statistics of these KGs and fact-checking datasets are in Tables 4-5 in the Appendix G. In all exper-
iments, we resort to our proposed fact-checking datasets, since – to our best knowledge – none of
the earlier works focus on assessing and improving LLM’s logical consistency in fact-checking.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Accuracy and logical consistency of LLMs before and after fine-tuning (FT). Bold numbers
denote an improved result in accuracy and consistency for fine-tuning. Training is performed on
FreebaseLFC dataset only (marked with ‘˚’), while performance improved in all datasets.

                                                     Accuracy           Logical Consistency
       Model         Dataset          Fact    Before FT     After FT   Before FT    After FT
                                      p, ␣p          0.90       0.93         0.81       0.86
                     FreebaseLFC˚     p^q            0.61       0.93         0.67       0.83
                                      p_q            0.73       0.76         0.73       0.97
       Llama2-13B
                                      p, ␣p          0.88       0.97         0.76       0.93
                     NELLLFC          p^q            0.38       0.89         0.69       0.88
                                      p_q            0.73       0.76         0.73       0.94
                     WikiLFC          p, ␣p          0.96       0.96         0.92       0.93
                                      p, ␣p          0.87       0.97         0.76       0.94
                     FreebaseLFC˚     p^q            0.39       0.87         0.47       0.86
                                      p_q            0.78       0.81         0.83       0.77
       Llama2-7B
                                      p, ␣p          0.71       0.94         0.44       0.88
                     NELLLFC          p^q            0.26       0.81         0.71       0.91
                                      p_q            0.75       0.73         0.95       0.78
                     WikiLFC          p, ␣p          0.90       0.90         0.80       0.81
                                      p, ␣p          0.82       0.98         0.66       0.96
                     FreebaseLFC˚     p^q            0.45       0.83         0.70       0.84
                                      p_q            0.73       0.94         0.91       0.90
       Gemma-2B
                                      p, ␣p          0.81       0.94         0.62       0.89
                     NELLLFC          p^q            0.33       0.83         0.78       0.83
                                      p_q            0.75       0.88         0.98       0.87
                     WikiLFC          p, ␣p          0.76       0.90         0.52       0.80
       Average                                       0.69       0.88         0.74       0.88



LLMs. We evaluate the logical consistency of three open-source LLMs: the chat version of Llama2-
7B (Touvron et al., 2023) and Llama2-13B (Touvron et al., 2023) with 7B and 13B parameters,
respectively, and instruction tuned Gemma-2B with 2B parameters (Team et al., 2024). We fine-
tune 20 epochs and save the intermediate models. In order to select the best model for each dataset
and fact type, we consider the following principle: we compute the sum of accuracy and consistency
on both evaluation and test set (to prioritize both accuracy and consistency), find the optimal epoch
having the maximum sum on the evaluation set, and report results on respective test set.


5.2   E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Improved Logical Consistency via Improved Accuracy. Table 1 shows the result for simple facts
pp, ␣pq and facts with one logical operator. In all LLMs and FreebaseLFC dataset, fine-tuning
results in higher accuracy and consistency in most fact types – the exception is for disjunctive fact
p _ q where fine-tuning demonstrates a higher accuracy yet a slight decrease in consistency (further
explanation in Appendix G.3). We observe a similar trend in NELL and Wiki datasets – which are
not included in fine-tuning – revealing the generalization effect of fine-tuning on similar facts in
different datasets. Within Llama2 base models (before fine-tuning), the 13B model has, in general,
higher accuracy and consistency on logic facts than the 7B model – thus, more model parameters
achieve improved accuracy and consistency, which is further improved via fine-tuning. Therefore,
fine-tuning logic facts for increasing accuracy in one dataset increases accuracy (on average 19%)
and logical consistency (on average 14%) across all datasets.
Generalizability of Fine-tuned Models. Table 2 shows the generalizability of fine-tuned models,
i.e., increase in accuracy and consistency across facts with more operators and commutative rules.
In particular, while accuracy is always higher on out-of-distribution facts, there is an occasional


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Generalization of fine-tuning to complex facts and rules in Llama2-13B. For results on
Llama2-7B and Gemma-2B, refer to Table 13 in the Appendix G

                                                         Accuracy             Logical Consistency
    Model         Dataset        Fact              Before FT    After FT     Before FT     After FT
                                 p _ pq ^ rq            0.74        0.85           0.78       0.81
                                 p ^ pq _ rq            0.53        0.82           0.63       0.79
                  FreebaseLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p               0.73        0.76           0.85       0.98
                                 p^q Øq^p               0.61        0.93           0.84       0.91
    Llama2-13B
                                 p _ pq ^ rq            0.67        0.77           0.72       0.80
                                 p ^ pq _ rq            0.42        0.38           0.75       0.85
                  NELLLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p               0.73        0.76           0.80       0.98
                                 p^q Øq^p               0.38        0.70           0.90       0.85

Table 3: Impact of instruction prompting (Prompt) vs. fine-tuning (FT) on simple facts. Fine-tuning
results in higher accuracy and consistency than instruction prompting. Extended result is in Table 11.

                                            Accuracy                       Logical Consistency
 Model           Dataset        Before FT    Prompt    After FT     Before FT     Prompt    After FT
                 FreebaseLFC         0.90       0.89       0.93            0.81     0.79         0.86
 Llama2-13B      NELLLFC             0.88       0.85       0.97            0.76     0.72         0.93
                 WikiLFC             0.96       0.94       0.96            0.92     0.90         0.93


decrease in consistency, specially in facts containing a disjunctive operator. Therefore, nudging the
LLMs to recognize primitive operators can generalize to complex facts and rules.
Efficiency. Our empirical results demonstrate that PEFT is 3X more efficient than full fine-tuning
for logical consistency. The end-to-end fact-checking time is also efficient (less than 0.63 seconds
per sample) in our datasets. For details, we refer to Tables 6-7 in the Appendix G.
Ablation Study: Supervised Fine-tuning vs. Zero-shot Instruction Prompting. Table 3 shows
the effect of zero-shot instruction prompting (an example in Figure 2) vs. fine-tuning on the accuracy
and logical consistency of simple facts. First, instruction prompting negatively impacts the LLM
reasoning on Llama2 base models (before fine-tuning), where both accuracy and consistency is lower
compared to not considering any instruction. In contrast, fine-tuning results in higher accuracy and
logical consistency than instruction prompting in all datasets and fact types, thereby validating the
need for fine-tuning to improve accuracy and logical consistency of logic facts.

6    C ONCLUSIONS
We propose a methodology to assess and improve the logical consistency of LLMs in fact-checking
from KGs. We formalize the definition of logical consistency of LLMs on propositional logic queries
comprising multiple logical operators. LLMs are usually less consistent in answering logic facts. A
supervised fine-tuning for recognizing primitive logic operators (negation, conjunction, and disjunc-
tion) improves their logical consistency – we show a 14% increase in consistency via fine-tuning.
Our work has potential impacts on trustworthy language modeling. A logically consistent LLM is
less likely to hallucinate since its response is unlikely to change due to the logical manipulation
of the prompt. Future works can be in several directions. Beyond binary responses, we aim to
assess consistency when LLM responses are not trivially classified into finite categories. We will
extend consistency assessment to natural language queries containing logical relations. We will
consider unstructured context unlike this paper, which further complicates LLM’s ability to accu-
rately and consistently answer fact-checking queries. On the KG front, we investigate the efficacy
of knowledge injection methods, or graph-to-text conversion, to input more relevant contexts in the
LLMQuery. Finally, incorporating link prediction and reasoning capabilities into LLMs to conduct
logic fact-checking over incomplete KGs is an interesting problem.



                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Garima Agrawal, Tharindu Kumarage, Zeyad Alghami, and Huan Liu. Can knowledge graphs
  reduce hallucinations in LLMs? : A survey. CoRR, abs/2311.07914, 2023.

Ammar Ammar and Remzi Celebi. Fact validation with knowledge graph embeddings. In ISWC,
 pp. 125–128, 2019.

Akari Asai and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Logic-guided data augmentation and regularization for con-
  sistent question answering. In ACL, pp. 5642–5650, 2020.

Jinheon Baek, Alham Fikri Aji, and Amir Saffari. Knowledge-augmented language model prompt-
   ing for zero-shot knowledge graph question answering. In NLRSE@ACL, 2023.

George Boole. The mathematical analysis of logic. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform,
  1847.

Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcı́a-Durán, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
  Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In NeurIPS, pp. 2787–2795, 2013.

Agustı́n Borrego, Daniel Ayala, Inma Hernández, Carlos R. Rivero, and David Ruiz. CAFE: Knowl-
  edge graph completion using neighborhood-aware features. Engineering Applications of Artificial
  Intelligence, 103:104302, 2021.

Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr Settles, Estevam Hruschka, and Tom
  Mitchell. Toward an architecture for never-ending language learning. In AAAI, pp. 1306–1313,
  2010.

Niel Chah. OK Google, what is your ontology? or: Exploring freebase classification to understand
  Google’s knowledge graph. CoRR, abs/1805.03885, 2018.

Lihu Chen, Gael Varoquaux, and Fabian M. Suchanek. GLADIS: A general and large acronym
  disambiguation benchmark. In EACL, pp. 2073–2088, 2023.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 24:240:1–240:113, 2023.

Dev Dash, Eric Horvitz, and Nigam Shah. How well do large language models support clinician
  information needs. Stanford University Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, 2023.

Brian A Davey and Hilary A Priestley. Introduction to lattices and order. Cambridge university
  press, 2002.

Tim Dettmers, Pasquale Minervini, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel. Convolutional 2D
  knowledge graph embeddings. In AAAI, pp. 1811–1818, 2018.

Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. QLoRA: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized LLMs. In NeurIPS, 2024.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
  and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summariza-
  tion. CoRR, abs/2404.16130, 2024.

Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich
  Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained language mod-
  els. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021.

Allyson Ettinger. What BERT is not: Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
  language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:34–48, 2020.

Luis Galárraga, Christina Teflioudi, Katja Hose, and Fabian M. Suchanek. Fast rule mining in
  ontological knowledge bases with AMIE+. VLDB J., 24(6):707–730, 2015.

Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. A survey on automated fact-checking.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:178–206, 2022.

Lorenz Halbeisen and Regula Krapf. Gödel’s Theorems and Zermelo’s Axioms: A Firm Foundation
  of Mathematics. Springer Nature, 2020.

Ahmed Abdeen Hamed, Alessandro Crimi, Magdalena M. Misiak, and Byung Suk Lee. Establishing
  trust in ChatGPT biomedical generated text: An ontology-based knowledge graph to validate
  disease-symptom links. CoRR, abs/2308.03929, 2023.

Shibo Hao, Bowen Tan, Kaiwen Tang, Bin Ni, Xiyan Shao, Hengzhe Zhang, Eric P. Xing, and Zhit-
  ing Hu. BertNet: Harvesting knowledge graphs with arbitrary relations from pretrained language
  models. In ACL, pp. 5000–5015, 2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.

Colin Howson. Logic with trees: an introduction to symbolic logic. Routledge, 2005.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021a.

Nan Hu, Jiaoyan Chen, Yike Wu, Guilin Qi, Sheng Bi, Tongtong Wu, and Jeff Z. Pan. Benchmarking
  large language models in complex question answering attribution using knowledge graphs. CoRR,
  abs/2401.14640, 2024a.

Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Hongyu Ren, Maho Nakata, Yuxiao Dong, and Jure Leskovec. OGB-
 LSC: A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09430,
 2021b.

Xiangkun Hu, Dongyu Ru, Lin Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Tianhang Zhang, Yang Xu, Yun Luo, Pengfei Liu,
  Yue Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Refchecker: Reference-based fine-grained hallucination checker
  and benchmark for large language models. 2024b.

Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
  2024a.

Wenyu Huang, Guancheng Zhou, Mirella Lapata, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Sebastien Montella, and
 Jeff Z. Pan. Prompting large language models with knowledge graphs for question answering
 involving long-tail facts. CoRR, abs/2405.06524, 2024b.

Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Os-
  trow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Viet-Phi Huynh and Paolo Papotti. Towards a benchmark for fact checking with knowledge bases.
  In Reasoning on Data Workshop@WWW, pp. 1595–1598, 2018.
Myeongjun Jang, Frank Mtumbuka, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Beyond distributional hypothesis:
 Let language models learn meaning-text correspondence. In NAACL, pp. 2030–2042, 2022.
Myeongjun Erik Jang and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Improving language models’ meaning understand-
 ing and consistency by learning conceptual roles from dictionary. In EMNLP, pp. 8496–8510,
 2023.
Ehsan Kamalloo, Nouha Dziri, Charles L. A. Clarke, and Davood Rafiei. Evaluating open-domain
  question answering in the era of large language models. In ACL, pp. 5591–5606, 2023.
Enkelejda Kasneci, Kathrin Seßler, Stefan Küchemann, Maria Bannert, Daryna Dementieva, Frank
  Fischer, Urs Gasser, Georg Groh, Stephan Günnemann, Eyke Hüllermeier, et al. ChatGPT for
  good? On opportunities and challenges of large language models for education. Learning and
  individual differences, 103:102274, 2023.
Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. Negated and misprimed probes for pretrained language models:
  Birds can talk, but cannot fly. In ACL, pp. 7811–7818, 2020.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
  uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664, 2023.
Ashutosh Kumar and Aditya Joshi. Striking a balance: Alleviating inconsistency in pre-trained
  models for symmetric classification tasks. In ACL, pp. 1887–1895, 2022.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
 ciples, pp. 611–626, 2023.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and
  Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Tao Li, Vivek Gupta, Maitrey Mehta, and Vivek Srikumar. A logic-driven framework for consistency
  of neural models. In EMNLP-IJCNLP, pp. 3922–3933, 2019.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
  ACL-IJCNLP, pp. 4582–4597, 2021.
Xingxuan Li, Ruochen Zhao, Yew Ken Chia, Bosheng Ding, Shafiq Joty, Soujanya Poria, and Li-
  dong Bing. Chain-of-knowledge: Grounding large language models via dynamic knowledge
  adapting over heterogeneous sources. In ICLR, 2023.
Peng Lin, Qi Song, Yinghui Wu, and Jiaxing Pi. Discovering patterns for fact checking in knowledge
  graphs. ACM J. Data Inf. Qual., 11(3):13:1–13:27, 2019.
Ruixi Lin and Hwee Tou Ng. Does BERT know that the IS-A relation is transitive? In ACL, pp.
  94–99, 2022.
Guangyi Liu, Yongqi Zhang, Yong Li, and Quanming Yao. Explore then determine: A GNN-LLM
  synergy framework for reasoning over knowledge graph. CoRR, abs/2406.01145, 2024.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. CoRR, abs/2307.03172,
  2023a.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(9):195:1–195:35, 2023b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weijie Liu, Peng Zhou, Zhe Zhao, Zhiruo Wang, Qi Ju, Haotang Deng, and Ping Wang. K-BERT:
 Enabling language representation with knowledge graph. In AAAI, pp. 2901–2908, 2020.
Yang Liu, Yuanshun Yao, Jean-Francois Ton, Xiaoying Zhang, Ruocheng Guo Hao Cheng, Yegor
  Klochkov, Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq, and Hang Li. Trustworthy LLMs: A survey and guideline
  for evaluating large language models’ alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05374, 2023c.
Sheng Lu, Irina Bigoulaeva, Rachneet Sachdeva, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, and Iryna Gurevych.
  Are emergent abilities in large language models just in-context learning?   arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.01809, 2023.
Weichen Luo and Cheng Long. Fact Checking on Knowledge Graphs, pp. 149–168. Springer
 International Publishing, 2021.
Qitan Lv, Jie Wang, Hanzhu Chen, Bin Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Coarse-to-fine high-
  lighting: reducing knowledge hallucination in large language models. In ICML, 2024.
Yu A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using
  hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 42(4):824–836, 2020.
Ggaliwango Marvin, Nakayiza Hellen, Daudi Jjingo, and Joyce Nakatumba-Nabende. Prompt engi-
  neering in large language models. In International Conference on Data Intelligence and Cognitive
  Informatics, pp. 387–402. Springer, 2023.
Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz,
  Eneko Agirre, Ilana Heintz, and Dan Roth. Recent advances in natural language processing via
  large pre-trained language models: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 56(2), 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing ChatGPT. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
  Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel Fernández. The LAMBADA dataset:
  Word prediction requiring a broad discourse context. In ACL, 2016.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick S. H. Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang
  Wu, and Alexander H. Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In EMNLP-IJCNLP, pp.
  2463–2473, 2019.
Dorian Quelle and Alexandre Bovet. The perils and promises of fact-checking with large language
  models. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 7, 2024.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Harsh Raj, Vipul Gupta, Domenic Rosati, and Subhabrata Majumdar. Semantic consistency for
  assuring reliability of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09138, 2023.
Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard H. Hovy, Kaheer Suleman, Adam Trischler, and Jackie Chi Kit Che-
  ung. On the systematicity of probing contextualized word representations: The case of hypernymy
  in BERT. In SEM@COLING, pp. 88–102, 2020.
Arijit Ray, Karan Sikka, Ajay Divakaran, Stefan Lee, and Giedrius Burachas. Sunny and dark out-
  side?! improving answer consistency in VQA through entailed question generation. In EMNLP-
  IJCNLP, pp. 5859–5864, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1908.10084.

                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hongyu Ren, Weihua Hu, and Jure Leskovec. Query2box: Reasoning over knowledge graphs in
  vector space using box embeddings. In ICLR, 2020.
Mohammed Saeed, Nicola De Cao, and Paolo Papotti. A DB-first approach to query factual infor-
 mation in llms. In Table Representation Learning Workshop at NeurIPS, 2023.
Oscar Sainz, Iker Garcı́a-Ferrero, Rodrigo Agerri, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, German Rigau, and Eneko
  Agirre. GoLLIE: Annotation guidelines improve zero-shot information-extraction. In ICLR, 2024.
Diego Sanmartin. KG-RAG: Bridging the gap between knowledge and creativity.                CoRR,
  abs/2405.12035, 2024.
Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage? In NeurIPS, 2024.
Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger. Discriminative predicate path mining for fact checking in knowledge
  graphs. Knowl. Based Syst., 104:123–133, 2016.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
  Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
  clinical knowledge. Nature, 620(7972), 2023.
Fabian M. Suchanek and Anh Tuan Luu. Knowledge bases and language models: Complementing
  forces. In RuleML+RR, 2023.
Kai Sun, Yifan Ethan Xu, Hanwen Zha, Yue Liu, and Xin Luna Dong. Head-to-tail: How knowl-
  edgeable are large language models (LLM)? a.k.a. will LLMs replace knowledge graphs? In
  NAACL-HLT, pp. 311–325, 2024a.
Lichao Sun, Yue Huang, Haoran Wang, Siyuan Wu, Qihui Zhang, Chujie Gao, Yixin Huang, Wen-
  han Lyu, Yixuan Zhang, Xiner Li, et al. TrustLLM: Trustworthiness in large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05561, 2024b.
Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. Minicheck: Efficient fact-checking of llms on
  grounding documents. In EMNLP, 2024.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya
  Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette Love, et al. Gemma: Open
  models based on gemini research and technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295, 2024.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. Fever: a large-
  scale dataset for fact extraction and verification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 809–819, 2018.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023.
Chenguang Wang, Xiao Liu, and Dawn Song. Language models are open knowledge graphs. CoRR,
  abs/2010.11967, 2020a.
Haohan Wang, Da Sun, and Eric P. Xing. What if we simply swap the two text fragments? A
  straightforward yet effective way to test the robustness of methods to confounding signals in
  nature language inference tasks. In AAAI, pp. 7136–7143, 2019.
Liang Wang, Nan Yang, and Furu Wei. Learning to retrieve in-context examples for large language
  models. In EACL, pp. 1752–1767, 2024a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In ICLR, 2023a.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuqing Wang, Yun Zhao, and Linda Petzold. Are large language models ready for healthcare?
  A comparative study on clinical language understanding. In Machine Learning for Healthcare
  Conference, 2023b.
Yuxiang Wang, Arijit Khan, Tianxing Wu, Jiahui Jin, and Haijiang Yan. Semantic guided and
  response times bounded top-k similarity search over knowledge graphs. In ICDE, pp. 445–456,
  2020b.
Zeyuan Wang, Qiang Zhang, Keyan Ding, Ming Qin, Xiang Zhuang, Xiaotong Li, and Huajun
  Chen. InstructProtein: Aligning human and protein language via knowledge instruction. In ACL,
  pp. 1114–1136, 2024b.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Yanbin Wei, Qiushi Huang, Yu Zhang, and James T. Kwok. KICGPT: Large language model with
  knowledge in context for knowledge graph completion. In EMNLP, pp. 8667–8683, 2023.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
  In NUT@EMNLP, 2017.
Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
  hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. BloombergGPT: A large language model
  for finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564, 2023.
Chaojun Xiao, Xueyu Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Cunchao Tu, and Maosong Sun. Lawformer: A pre-trained
  language model for Chinese legal long documents. AI Open, 2:79–84, 2021.
Derong Xu, Wei Chen, Wenjun Peng, Chao Zhang, Tong Xu, Xiangyu Zhao, Xian Wu, Yefeng
  Zheng, and Enhong Chen. Large language models for generative information extraction: A sur-
  vey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17617, 2023.
Zhentao Xu, Mark Jerome Cruz, Matthew Guevara, Tie Wang, Manasi Deshpande, Xiaofeng Wang,
  and Zheng Li. Retrieval-augmented generation with knowledge graphs for customer service ques-
  tion answering. In SIGIR, pp. 2905–2909, 2024.
Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. FinGPT: Open-source financial large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031, 2023a.
Linyao Yang, Hongyang Chen, Zhao Li, Xiao Ding, and Xindong Wu. ChatGPT is not enough: En-
  hancing large language models with knowledge graphs for fact-aware language modeling. CoRR,
  abs/2306.11489, 2023b.
Donghan Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Yiming Yang, and Michael Zeng. Jaket: Joint pre-training of knowl-
  edge graph and language understanding. In AAAI, pp. 11630–11638, 2022.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. HellaSwag: Can a
  machine really finish your sentence? In ACL, 2019.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In ICML, pp. 12697–12706, 2021.
Ce Zheng, Lei Li, Qingxiu Dong, Yuxuan Fan, Zhiyong Wu, Jingjing Xu, and Baobao Chang. Can
  we edit factual knowledge by in-context learning? In EMNLP, pp. 4862–4876, 2023.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     L IMITATIONS AND B ROADER I MPACTS

Our accuracy and consistency measures are given over logic facts for which ground-truths are avail-
able from the input KG and LLM responses are binary. In this work, we do not consider link pre-
diction and multi-hop reasoning capabilities of LLM models to validate facts over incomplete KGs.
It is vital for both researchers and investigators to exercise prudent judgment and validate findings
through additional comparative methods before arriving at any definitive conclusions or undertaking
consequential actions.
LLM’s general reasoning ability has been under much scrutiny in recent years, and experiments
suggest that there is still a gap between LLMs and human-like logical reasoning ability. Given such
a state of affairs, one limitation of our current study is that we do not evaluate how much logical
consistency improves the general reasoning ability of LLMs. Another limitation is that our paper
mainly focuses on binary responses, and does not consider extensions to multi-class logic and non-
binary answer consistency. We will consider such extensions in the future.


B     R ELATED W ORKS

B.1   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH KG C ONTEXTS

Large language models (LLMs), pre-trained on large-scale web and enterprises corpus, encode sig-
nificant knowledge implicitly in its parameters without human supervision, which can be probed
for various question-answering and querying tasks, thus LLMs act as knowledge bases (Petroni
et al., 2019; Hao et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2020a). LLMs have also shown tremendous promise in
new tasks for which they have not been pre-trained. Users can interact with state-of-the-art LLMs
through prompting. They simply specify instructions for new tasks as text prompts to guide an LLM
for the desired outputs (Liu et al., 2023b). However, LLMs are proficient at learning probabilistic
language patterns and may not explicitly store consistent representations of knowledge, hence they
can output unreliable and incoherent responses and often experience hallucinations by generating
factually incorrect statements (Elazar et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023c; Sun et al., 2024a).
Knowledge graphs (KGs) can enhance pre-training (Yu et al., 2022), fine-tuning (Wang et al.,
2024b), inference (Wei et al., 2023), prompting (Baek et al., 2023), retrieval/ knowledge augmented
generation (Xu et al., 2024), knowledge editing (Zheng et al., 2023), and knowledge validation
(Hu et al., 2024a) of LLMs. In particular, KGs can assist in the inference phase of LLMs through
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), e.g., to provide KG context within prompts for reducing
hallucinations, thus improving accuracy and consistency. For instance, Liu et al. (2020) inject KG
triplets into LLMs to enhance the domain knowledge, meanwhile Li et al. (2023) uses external data
sources to improve the factual correctness of large language models. GraphRAG is the latest tech-
nology that models an external knowledge base as a knowledge graph to improve retrieval methods
with a more comprehensive contextual understanding and thereby assists in obtaining more precise
search results via LLMs (Xu et al., 2024; Edge et al., 2024; Sanmartin, 2024; Liu et al., 2024).
Since we consider a RAG paradigm for LLM’s consistency assessment, a good retrieval technique
(e.g., future developments on graphRAG) can be leveraged in our framework to further improve the
LLM’s accuracy and consistency in fact-checking.

B.2   M EASURING AND I MPROVING THE C ONSISTENCY OF LLM S

With the prevalence of large language models, measuring their consistency has become criti-
cal. LLMs can generate logically contradicting outputs, e.g., different predictions for meaning-
preserving text alternations (Ravichander et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2021). They may violate im-
portant relational properties such as negation (Kassner & Schütze, 2020; Ettinger, 2020; Asai &
Hajishirzi, 2020; Jang et al., 2022), symmetry (Wang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Kumar & Joshi,
2022), and transitivity (Asai & Hajishirzi, 2020; Lin & Ng, 2022). Raj et al. (2023) measures the
semantic similarity of LLM outputs in response to paraphrased versions of a question.
To improve the consistency of an LLM, several techniques are developed, e.g., adding a special
consistency loss function to the original loss that penalizes inconsistent answers and continuing the
pre-training step (Elazar et al., 2021). Others achieve this through data augmentation (Ray et al.,


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2019; Asai & Hajishirzi, 2020). Some other works learn inter-relationships between concepts using
external dictionaries (Jang & Lukasiewicz, 2023). There are also general approaches to improve an
LLM’s accuracy, but the same methods could be applied to enhance consistency, such as reinforce-
ment learning from human feedback (Ouyang et al., 2022), prompt design optimization (Marvin
et al., 2023), as well as model fine-tuning.
First, unlike the bulk of the literature that measures an LLM’s consistency on natural language pro-
cessing tasks, we develop systematic consistency measurement techniques of retrieval-augmented
LLMs for propositional logic facts and logic rules, with knowledge graph contexts. Second, existing
approaches generally update all model parameters and are inefficient. We avoid full fine-tuning by
using parameter-efficient supervised fine-tuning through low-rank adaption. We have experimen-
tally demonstrated that our approach is effective, efficient, and generalizes to complex facts and
logic rules, can handle large-scale KGs, and LLMs having billions of parameters.

B.3   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS H ALLUCINATIONS

LLMs may not explicitly store a consistent representation of knowledge. Hence, they can halluci-
nate by generating unreliable and incoherent responses, and often plausible yet factually incorrect
statements. There are several types of LLM hallucinations. In this work, our focus is faithfulness
hallucination (Huang et al., 2024a), resulting in divergence of LLM-generated contents from user
inputs (e.g., KG contexts, instructions, examples, etc.), as well as the lack of consistency within the
generated contents when the input queries are logically perturbed. Subsequently, various strategies
have been developed to detect and reduce LLMs’ hallucinations. For instance, retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) enhances models with up-to-date knowledge from external sources. More ad-
vanced approaches (Wang et al., 2024a) retrieve high-quality candidates to avoid the context poi-
soning issue, e.g., LLM-Embedder (Lv et al., 2024) is a general-purpose retrieval technique that
learns vector embedding by rewarding high-quality retrieval candidates, contrastive learning, and
knowledge distillation. In fact, we have already shown that vector embedding methods improve
logical consistency over traversal-based context retrieval (Appendix E, Table 11). In the future, it
would be interesting to replace the Sentence Transformer in our vector embedding method via LLM-
Embedder to construct more relevant contexts. Another approach to reduce LLMs’ hallucinations is
the chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022), which encourages LLMs to generate rea-
soning steps before responding. We have also conducted experiments with CoT (Appendix § G.5.3),
but it does not demonstrate any improvement over fine-tuning. As such, we hypothesize that achiev-
ing logical consistency requires an update in the internal weights of the LLMs, e.g., via supervised
fine-tuning. Moreover, self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023a) employs a post-processing approach
that does not improve the internal weights of the model and instead addresses the decoding module
of the model – it samples multiple responses of the LLM and chooses a response with the major-
ity vote that is denoted as consistent. In contrast, our fine-tuning procedure improves the internal
weights of the LLM to be a consistent responder under logical perturbation of input queries, thereby
reducing faithfulness hallucination.

B.4   FACT- CHECKING WITH KG S AND LLM S

Knowledge graphs that store high-quality facts are reliable and valuable sources for fact-checking.
We refer to Luo & Long (2021); Huynh & Papotti (2018) for surveys and experimental benchmarks.
In particular, KG approaches for fact-checking can be broadly classified into paths (Shi & Weninger,
2016), rules and patterns (Lin et al., 2019; Galárraga et al., 2015), and embedding-based (Ammar
& Celebi, 2019; Borrego et al., 2021). Recent embedding methods determine whether a given fact,
currently missing in an incomplete knowledge graph, should appear in it. In contrast, our focus is to
validate logic facts from the input KG.
LLMs like GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 have also been exploited for automated fact-checking with and with-
out access to external contexts, e.g., Google search results (Quelle & Bovet, 2024). Hamed et al.
(2023) studied fact-checking in biological graphs constructed from ChatGPT contents. Recently,
MiniCheck (Tang et al., 2024) and RefChecker (Hu et al., 2024b) perform fact-checking of LLM
outputs, primarily simple facts or claim-triplets, on grounding documents. To the best of our knowl-
edge, ours is the first work on measuring and improving the consistency of LLMs for propositional
logic-based fact-checking with KG contexts.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    F ORMAL P ROOFS
Proposition 1. An LLM is consistent with respect to a DNF fact q “ _ni“1 ci , where ci “ ^ij“1
                                                                                            m
                                                                                               eij ,
if                                           ˜               ¸
                                          łn   ľim
                               LLMpqq “             LLMpeij q .
                                                      i“1      j“1

Here, eij is an atomic relation fact for any 1 ď i ď n and 1 ď j ď im .

Proof. Applying the definition of consistency (Definition 2) on the LLM response to q, we obtain
                LLMpqq “ LLMpc1 q _ LLMpc2 q _ . . . _ LLMpcn q
                                 1m
                                 ľ                      2m
                                                        ľ                            nm
                                                                                     ľ
                       “ LLMp          e1j q _ LLMp           e2j q _ . . . _ LLMp         enj q
                                 j“1                    j“1                          j“1
                           ˜1                 ¸       ˜2                   ¸             ˜n                    ¸
                            ľ m                        ľ m                                ľ m

                       “          LLMpe1j q       _            LLMpe2j q       _ ... _             LLMpenj q
                            j“1                         j“1                                 j“1
                             ˜i                     ¸
                           n
                           ł  ľ m

                       “                LLMpeij q
                           i“1    j“1


Proposition 2. (I) An LLM is consistent on a simple atomic fact if it is accurate both on the fact
and its negation. (II) For a complex DNF fact, the LLM is consistent if it is accurate on the DNF
fact as well as on all constituent atomic facts.

Proof. (I) Given a fact q and its truth value Tpqq P t0, 1u, an LLM response LLMpqq is correct if
LLMpqq “ Tpqq (Definition 1). Similarly, for the negation fact ␣q, an LLM response LLMp␣qq is
correct if LLMp␣qq “ Tp␣qq. Since ␣q is the negation of q,
                                       Tpqq “ ␣Tp␣qq
                                    ùñ LLMpqq “ ␣LLMp␣qq
                                    ùñ ␣LLMpqq “ LLMp␣qq
                                    ùñ LLM is consistent on pq, ␣qq
The last line follows from the definition of consistency (Definition 2)
                          Žn ´Źim           ¯
(II) For a DNF fact q “ i“1         j“1 eij , we similarly assume that the LLM accurately classifies
q and its constituent atomic fact eij . ´That is, LLMpqq
                                                    ¯    “ Tpqq and LLMpeij q “ Tpeij q. Relating q
                                Žn        Źim
with its constituents eij as q “ i“1        j“1 eij , we derive the following.
                                                          ˜                     ¸
                                                        n
                                                        ł   im
                                                            ľ
                                          Tpqq “                      Tpeij q
                                                        i“1     j“1
                                                           ˜                         ¸
                                                         n
                                                         ł   im
                                                             ľ
                                  ùñ LLMpqq “                            LLMpeij q .
                                                          i“1      j“1

Therefore, the LLM is consistent to the DNF fact according to Proposition 1.


Proposition 3. An LLM is consistent with respect to a CNF fact q “ ^ni“1 ci , where ci “ _ij“1
                                                                                            m
                                                                                               eij ,
if                                           ˜               ¸
                                          ľn   łim
                               LLMpqq “             LLMpeij q .
                                                      i“1      j“1

Here, eij is an atomic relation fact for any 1 ď i ď n and 1 ď j ď im .


                                                              19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Applying the definition of consistency to the LLM response to q, we obtain
            LLMpqq “ LLMpc1 q ^ LLMpc2 q ^ . . . ^ LLMpcn q
                              1m
                              ł                      2m
                                                     ł                            nm
                                                                                  ł
                    “ LLMp          e1j q ^ LLMp           e2j q ^ . . . ^ LLMp        enj q
                              j“1                    j“1                       j“1
                        ˜                    ¸       ˜                 ¸             ˜                 ¸
                            1m
                            ł                            2m
                                                         ł                               nm
                                                                                         ł
                    “            LLMpe1j q       ^             LLMpe2j q   ^ ... ^             LLMpenj q
                         j“1                             j“1                            j“1
                          ˜                      ¸
                        n
                        ľ   im
                            ł
                    “                  LLMpeij q
                        i“1      j“1


D     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS ON M ETHODOLOGY

Algorithm 2 Supervised fine-tuning for logical consistency
    Input: A language model LLM, facts R
    Output: fine-tuned model LLM˚
 1: Dinstruct Ð BuildDatasetpRq          Ź Create an instruction dataset from knowledge queries
 2: LLM˚ Ð SupervisedFinetuningpLLM, Dinstruct q



D.1   S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING

We adopted a parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) method based on QLoRA (Quantized Low-
Rank Adaptation) (Dettmers et al., 2024), which is a more memory-efficient adaptation of LoRA (Hu
et al., 2021a). The main idea behind LoRA is to freeze the pre-trained model weight-matrix W0 of
size d ˆ d and represent the trainable update-matrix (∆W ) as two low-rank matrices A and B of
dimensions d ˆ r and r ˆ d, respectively. Here, r ăă d, e.g., r “ 64 and d « 16K for Llama2-7B
and d « 8K for Gemma-2B in our experiments. Given an input vector x, during forward-pass,
instead of computing pW0 ` ∆W qx, LoRA computes pW0 x ` BAxq. The benefit of storing two
low-rank matrices instead of ∆W is that the model needs to update only 2rd parameters, which
is more efficient than updating d2 parameters. QLoRA quantizes the precision of the weights to 4
bits. Due to quantization, QLoRA is more memory efficient; for instance, it has been reported that
one can fine-tune a 65B parameter Llama model on a single 48GB GPU while preserving full 16-bit
finetuning task performance (Dettmers et al., 2024).

E     DATASETS
E.1   DATA S OURCES

We consider existing KGs, such as Freebase, NELL, and WikiKG90Mv2, and convert to logical
fact-checking datasets. Freebase contains real-world entities such as people, places, institutions,
and their relations from the Freebase KG. NELL is a dataset built from the Web via an intelligent
agent called Never-Ending Language Learner. This agent attempts to learn over time to read the
web. NELL has accumulated over 100 million candidate triplets by reading the web (April 2018)
with different levels of confidence. WikiKG90Mv2 is a KG extracted from the entire Wikidata
knowledge base.

E.2   O UR CURATED DATASETS

Our curated datasets contain the following logical facts: simple facts p and ␣p, facts with one
operators p ^ q and p _ q, complex facts with two operators p ^ pq _ rq and p _ pq ^ rq, and
commutative rules p _ q Ø q _ p and p ^ q Ø q ^ p. In fine-tuning, we split each fact type
into training, evaluation, and test sets having 1K, 5K, and 5K samples, respectively (Table 5). For


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 4: Statistics of KGs (left) and simple facts obtained from them (right)

                      KG           #Entities    #Relations     #Triplets (simple facts)
                    FB15K             14, 951         1, 345                   592, 213
                    NELL              63, 361            200                   142, 804
                     Wiki      9, 12, 30, 610         1, 387             60, 10, 62, 811

        LLMQuery

        xxSYSyy You are a helpful assistant. Always follow the instructions precisely and output
        the response exactly in the requested format. xx{SYSyy

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’ symbol.
        Answer question according to the context.

        T.S. Eliot | award winner | Nobel Prize in Literature
        Thomas Mann | influenced | Franz Kafka
        ...
        Thomas Mann | award winner | Nobel prize in Literature
        ...

        Do not add additional text. Is the following triplet factually correct? Answer with Yes or No.

        Thomas Mann | award winner | Nobel prize in Literature

        {Yes or No}


Figure 3: (Continuing Figure 1) A representative LLMQuery on a simple fact used in our experi-
ments. The expected LLM response is in blue color.


instance, FreebaseLFC contains 1K facts from each of the 4 fact-types: p, ␣p, p^q, p_q resulting
in 1K ˆ 4 “ 4K facts. In fine-tuning, we only consider training facts from FreebaseLFC, hence the
other datasets do not have any additional training facts. In Wiki dataset, we randomly sample 10
million triplets to prepare subgraph creation via BFS and training/evaluation/test split.

E.3   M ORE COMPLEX AND HIGHER - ORDER LOGIC DATASETS

We have curated two more datasets from Freebase containing more complex logical expressions,
especially the law of Syllogism (LoS) and the first-order logic (FoL). In the LoS dataset, there are
100 queries of the form r1 pp, qq ^ r2 pq, sq encapsulating the logic pp ñ qq ^ pq ñ sq, which,
according to the law of Syllogism should be equivalent to p ñ s.


                      Consider the context: $Context.

                      Is the fact correct given the context? $Fact-1 and $Fact-2.
                             LLMQuery on ($Fact-1 ^ $Fact-2, $Context)


                      Consider the context: $Context.

                      Is the fact correct given the context? $Fact-1 or $Fact-2.
                             LLMQuery on ($Fact-1 _ $Fact-2, $Context)

Figure 4: (Continuing Figure 1) LLMQuery when considering conjunctive and disjunctive facts. We
replace logical operators with their natural language description, such as ^ with ‘and’ and _ with
‘or’, when constructing LLMQuery.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    Table 5: Fact-checking datasets

    Datasets                   Fact types and Rules                     Training   Evaluation    Test
                                 p, ␣p, p ^ q, p _ q                    1K pˆ4q     5K pˆ4q     5K pˆ4q
FreebaseLFC
               p ^ pq _ rq, p _ pq ^ rq, p _ q Ø q _ p, p ^ q Ø q ^ p     —         5K pˆ4q     5K pˆ4)
 NELLLFC                    All above fact types and rules                —         5K pˆ8q     5K pˆ8q
    WikiLFC                             p, ␣p                             —         5K pˆ2q     5K pˆ2q



Example: ContainspOceania, New Zealandq ^ CountrypNew Zealand, Aucklandq is logically
equivalent to ContainspOceania, Aucklandq.
In the FoL dataset, there are 500 queries of the form Dx r1 pp, xq ^ r2 px, qq and their negations in
the form of @x ␣r1 pp, xq _ ␣r2 px, qq. The negation of the former should be logically equivalent to
the latter. In LLMQuery, we consider the natural language description ‘There exists an entity x such
that’ and ‘For all entity x such that’ to express existential D and for-all @ quantifiers, respectively.

F     PARAMETER SETTINGS AND S YSTEM CONFIGURATIONS

F.1    PARAMETER SETTINGS

For an efficient fine-tuning, we adopted QLoRA implementation from Huggingface (Dettmers et al.,
2024). In Llama2-7B and 13B, the hyperparameter choices of QLoRA are the following: learning
rate 2 ˆ 10´5 , weight decay 0.001, warm-up ratio 0.03, batch size 8, r “ 16, α “ 16, and dropout
0.1. In Gemma-2B, we consider learning rate 2 ˆ 10´6 and keep other hyper-parameters similar
to Llama. For high-throughput and memory-efficient inference, we adopt the vLLM library (Kwon
et al., 2023), and set temperature to 0 for a deterministic output. We limit the context length in the
LLMQuery by selecting relevant triplets of around 1000 tokens.

F.2    S YSTEM S ETUP

All experiments are conducted in Python version 3.8.0. Fine-tuning is conducted on a cluster with
two NVIDIA A40 45 GB GPUs having Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5317 CPU @ 3.00 GHz, 48 core and
1007 GB RAM. Inference is conducted on a cluster with two Tesla V100-PCIE 32 GB GPUs having
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6134M CPU @ 3.20 GHz, 32 core, and 755 GB RAM.

G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

G.1     E FFICIENCY

We compare the per-epoch running time of PEFT vs. full fine-tuning of Llama2-7B (Table 6). PEFT
requires on average 4.43 hours to complete an epoch including the computation of evaluation loss,
whereas full fine-tuning requires 12.52 hours. Therefore, PEFT is more efficient than full fine-tuning
in improving the efficiency of supervised fine-tuning for logical consistency.

                 Table 6: Running time of PEFT vs. Full Fine-tuning of Llama2-7B

                                                  PEFT       Full fine-tuning
                          Time per epoch        4.43 hours     12.52 hours


Table 7 shows the end-to-end inference time for facts with different number of operators. Increasing
the number of operators results in a higher time for BFS and subsequent context creation time. In
particular, the BFS time for FreebaseLFC is higher than that in NELLLFC, and WikiLFC has the
lowest BFS time. BFS time is correlated with the sparsity of the KG and can be approximated by
how many edges are extracted in the BFS subgraph – for simple facts, the median number of edges


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Table 7: Per-sample end-to-end fact-checking time in seconds using Llama2-7B

      Dataset         Fact            BFS          Context Creation    LLM Inference        Total
                      p, ␣p       0.04 ˘ 0.10        0.06 ˘ 0.10         0.21 ˘ 0.00     0.30 ˘ 0.14
  FreebaseLFC         p^q         0.07 ˘ 0.15        0.15 ˘ 0.18         0.22 ˘ 0.00     0.44 ˘ 0.25
                   p _ pq ^ rq    0.09 ˘ 0.20        0.32 ˘ 0.34         0.22 ˘ 0.01     0.63 ˘ 0.39
                      p, ␣p       0.02 ˘ 0.08        0.04 ˘ 0.05         0.19 ˘ 0.00     0.24 ˘ 0.10
   NELLLFC            p^q         0.04 ˘ 0.07        0.08 ˘ 0.13         0.21 ˘ 0.00     0.32 ˘ 0.16
                   p _ pq ^ rq    0.05 ˘ 0.15        0.09 ˘ 0.09         0.22 ˘ 0.00     0.36 ˘ 0.18
   WikiLFC            p, ␣p       0.01 ˘ 0.05        0.01 ˘ 0.01         0.08 ˘ 0.00     0.09 ˘ 0.06


in the BFS subgraph is 9773, 763.5, and 7 for FreebaseLFC, NELLLFC, and WikiLFC, respectively.
Further, since WikiLFC is the sparsest among all KGs in our experiments, the context creation time
and subsequent LLM inference time is lower in WikiLFC compared to other two datasets – for ex-
ample, the LLM inference time is the lowest in WikiLFC (0.08 seconds) compared to FreebaseLFC
and NELLLFC („ 0.20 seconds). In summary, the end-to-end fact-checking time is efficient (less
than 0.63 seconds per sample) in our implementation.

G.2    I MPACT OF KG C ONTEXTS

Table 8: Impact of using context in the LLMQuery on the accuracy and logical consistency of simple
facts in FreebaseLFC dataset. Results are for the base model without fine-tuning.

                                            Accuracy                       Logical Consistency
 Model          Dataset          Without Context     With Context     Without Context   With Context
 Llama2-7B      FreebaseLFC                 0.51             0.88                0.03            0.77


Table 8 shows the effectiveness of using a context on the accuracy and logical consistency of
Llama2-7B for simple facts. Adding a context provides the LLM a premise to answer the subse-
quent fact. As such, Llama2-7B base model demonstrates a higher accuracy and logical consistency
in the presence of a context, and hence, in all our experiments we have provided a KG context to the
LLMQuery.

G.3    I MPACT OF C ONTEXT L ENGTH

The inference performance of LLMs is affected by the length of the context of the underlying
prompt. In our study, we vary the context length of the KG context using 1000 (default) and 200
tokens and report the performance of logical consistency and accuracy before and after fine-tuning
in the FreebaseLFC dataset (Table 9). Limited context results in an improved accuracy on the base
model (before fine-tuning). However, the consistency is in-general unaffected due to reduced con-
text length. Upon fine-tuning the model as proposed in the paper, both accuracy and consistency
improve with reduced context length. Therefore, context length provides a useful knob to improve
the accuracy of an LLM in answering fact-checking queries, whereas to improve logical consistency,
supervised fine-tuning is still needed.

G.4    I MPACT OF D IFFERENT C ONTEXT R ETRIEVAL M ETHODS

In addition to the BFS-based context retrieval method in §3.4, we consider two alternative retrieval
methods to compare their effectiveness in providing the best context to the LLM and the resultant
consistency of the LLM in answering fact-checking queries.

        • BFS+Vector embedding method. We compute 2-hop neighbours by BFS to extract rel-
          evant triplets to the query. The relevant triplets are first embedded using the Sentence
          Transformer (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). Finally, we prune the irrelevant triplets by ap-
          plying nearest neighbour search on the embeddings and selecting the top-k relevant triplets


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 9: Impact of reduced context length in FreebaseLFC dataset.

                                                      Accuracy               Logical Consistency
   Model          Context length     Fact      Before FT       After FT     Before FT     After FT
                                     p, ␣p            0.82         0.98          0.66         0.96
                      1000 tokens    p^q              0.45         0.83          0.70         0.84
                                     p_q              0.73         0.94          0.91         0.90
   Gemma-2B
                                     p, ␣p            0.92         1.00          0.84         0.99
                       200 tokens    p^q              0.50         0.98          0.63         0.97
                                     p_q              0.75         0.93          0.90         0.93



         with the highest relevance scores (w.r.t the query) to construct the KG Context. Here, rel-
         evance scores are computed based on the L2 norm of the embedding vector for the query
         subtracted by the embedding vector for the triplet.

      • Vector Embedding Method. We bypass the BFS step, rather compute and index the em-
        beddings of all the triplets in the KG, such as Freebase. Finally, we extract relevant triplets
        by applying nearest neighbour search on the embeddings and selecting top-k triplets with
        the highest relevance scores (w.r.t. the query) to construct the KG Context.



Table 10: Impact different retrieval methods. Experiments are performed on simple facts from the
FreebaseLFC dataset and on Llama2-7B model.

                                                   Accuracy               Logical Consistency
      Retrieval Method                       Before FT       After FT     Before FT     After FT
      BFS + Relation hierarchy (§3.4)             0.88          0.97           0.76        0.94
      BFS + Vector Embedding                      0.92          0.96           0.85        0.92
      Vector Embedding (without BFS)              0.89          0.98           0.78        0.96


We observe that before fine-tuning, accuracy and consistency of BFS + embedding based retrieval is
better than that of retrieving context from relation hierarchy and ontology applied to BFS subgraph
of 2-hop neighbours. In addition, bypassing BFS and only applying vector embedding results in a
similar performance as BFS + relation hierarchy. Thus, vector embedding appears as an effective
way to provide context to the LLM.
We further verify that the supervised fine-tuning can improve both accuracy and consistency in
all retrieval methods. Note that we reuse the fine-tuned model on context from BFS + relation
hierarchy and apply it on data from the vector-embedding based retrieval methods. In preprocessing,
embedding based retrieval has a higher preprocessing time (almost 100x than the retrieval time based
on relation hierarchy) to embed the subgraph than relation hierarchy based retrieval. However, such
vector embeddings can be performed offline.


Handling Dynamically Varying Contexts. Real-world applications may need context retrieval
to quickly adapt to new information, e.g., the knowledge graph evolving with time. In the case
of evolving KGs, the “BFS + Relation hierarchy” retrieval is a computationally better alternative
than embedding-based retrieval methods such as “BFS + Vector Embedding” or “Vector Embedding
(without BFS)” method. Although the embedding-based methods slightly improve the accuracy
and consistency (as shown in Table 10), due to their higher pre-processing overhead, they must be
conducted offline repeatedly as the KG changes to obtain better entity embeddings.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.5     R ESULTS WITH Z ERO -S HOT, 2- SHOT AND C HAIN - OF - THOUGHT P ROMPTING

G.5.1      S UPERVISED F INE - TUNING VS Z ERO - SHOT P ROMPTING

We demonstrate the extended results on comparing instruction prompting with fine-tuning in Ta-
ble 11. We find that fine-tuning is superior to instruction prompting on simple facts, across datasets
and models.

Table 11: Impact of instruction prompting (Prompt) vs. fine-tuning (FT) on simple facts. Fine-tuning
results in higher accuracy and consistency than instruction prompting.

                                                  Accuracy                        Logical Consistency
  Model          Dataset             Before FT      Prompt      After FT    Before FT      Prompt          After FT
                 FreebaseLFC              0.90          0.89       0.93           0.81            0.79        0.86
  Llama2-13B     NELLLFC                  0.88          0.85       0.97           0.76            0.72        0.93
                 WikiLFC                  0.96          0.94       0.96           0.92            0.90        0.93
                 FreebaseLFC              0.87          0.82       0.97           0.76            0.64        0.94
  Llama2-7B      NELLLFC                  0.71          0.61       0.94           0.44            0.23        0.88
                 WikiLFC                  0.90          0.82       0.90           0.80            0.64        0.81
                 FreebaseLFC              0.82          0.88       0.98           0.66            0.77        0.96
  Gemma-2B       NELLLFC                  0.81          0.81       0.94           0.62            0.63        0.89
                 WikiLFC                  0.76          0.69       0.90           0.52            0.43        0.80



G.5.2      2- SHOT PROMPTING

Table 12: Zero-shot, 2-shot and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting results on Llama2-7B model.

                                   Accuracy                                    Logical Consistency
 Dataset        Before FT   0-shot    2-shot   CoT      After FT   Before FT   0-shot    2-shot    CoT      After FT
 FreebaseLFC    0.87        0.89       0.78      0.93    0.97        0.76      0.79      0.58       0.86     0.94


In Table 3, we showed that for our task, supervised fine-tuning produces better consistency and ac-
curacy compared to zero-shot prompts. We have also tested 2-shot prompts to understand whether
providing examples (one positive and one negative example) to the LLM can improve its perfor-
mance on fact-checking consistency (see Figure 5). The prompt is shown in the following text
box along with the accompanying result in Table 12. In the 2-shot prompt, we denote the example
contexts in red color and the example facts in blue color.
We observe that 2-shot prompting performs worse than zero-shot prompting. This is due to the rea-
son we mentioned in §4.1: There are nuances and intricacies in logical facts, and providing examples
only adds to the complexity rather than helping the LLM understand the differences between true
and false facts. Such results are not unprecedented in the literature. For instance, Zhao et al. (2021)
showed that there are biases in GPT-3 and GPT-2, e.g., their tendency to output recent or common
tokens which caused these models to produce drastically different accuracy on various tasks, de-
pending on the prompt format and ordering of examples in the prompt. It was also shown that in
some of the text-classification task datasets, 2-shot prompting had worse performance than zero-shot
prompting (see Table 1 in Zhao et al. (2021)).

G.5.3      C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT (C OT) P ROMPTING .

We have created a chain-of-thought (CoT) prompt to test whether providing CoT to the LLM can
improve its performance on fact-checking consistency (see Figure 6). Similar to the 2-shot prompt,
the CoT prompt contains a positive example and a negative example. A positive example is one
where the context contains the triplets in the logic query, and a negative example is where the logic
query is absent from the context. In addition to the examples, we also provide a reasoning behind
the correct answer. Table 12 presents the result for CoT prompting.


                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        2-shot Prompt

        xxSYSyy You are a helpful assistant. Always follow the instructions precisely and output
        the response exactly in the requested format. xx{SYSyy

        # Example 1:

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’.   Answer
        the question according to the context.

        Context:
        County Durham | contains reverse | England
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham
        Hartlepool | administrative parent | County Durham
        ...

        Question:
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham

        Answer: Yes

        # Example 2:

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’.   Answer
        the question according to the context.

        Context:
        County Durham | contains reverse | England
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham
        Hartlepool | administrative parent | County Durham
        ...

        Question:
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | Cottam, East Riding of Yorkshire

        Answer: No

        Test Context & Fact

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’. Answer the
        question according to the context.

        Context: $Context
        Question: $Fact
        Answer: {Yes or No}


Figure 5: Example of 2-shot prompt, where representative positive and negative examples are pro-
vided to guide the LLM to answer the target fact.


As we compare the results of CoT with “After FT”, we conclude that CoT does not demonstrate any
improvement over fine-tuning in our specific case. We hypothesize that achieving logical consis-
tency requires an update in the internal weights of the LLM, such as via supervised fine-tuning, and
simply providing examples is insufficient.

G.6   I MPACT OF L EARNING R ATE

While fine-tuning Llama2-7B, we consider different learning rates (Figure 7). A higher learning
rate such as 2 ˆ 10´4 quickly decreases training loss and results in an over-fitting – as such, there
is an increase in evaluation loss over epochs. On the other hand, a lower learning rate 2 ˆ 10´7
neither decreases training loss nor evaluation loss. Finally, both learning rates 2ˆ10´5 and 2ˆ10´6
balance between train/evaluation loss; and we select 2ˆ10´5 as the final learning rate for subsequent


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Chain of Thought Prompt

        xxSYSyy You are a helpful assistant. Always follow the instructions precisely and output
        the response exactly in the requested format. xx{SYSyy

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’ symbol.
        Answer the question according to the context.

        Hartlepool |administrative children reverse | County Durham
        County Durham | contains reverse | England
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham
        County Durham | containedby reverse | Durham University
        ...

        Do not add additional text. Is the following triplet factually correct? Answer with Yes or No.

        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham

        The provided triplet ‘Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham’ appears in the context
        on the ninth line. The answer is Yes.

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’ symbol.
        Answer the question according to the context.

        Hartlepool | administrative children reverse | County Durham
        County Durham | contains reverse | England
        Hartlepool | contains reverse | County Durham
        County Durham | containedby reverse | Durham University
        ...

        Do not add additional text. Is the following triplet factually correct? Answer with Yes or No.

        Hartlepool | contains reverse | Cottam, East Riding of Yorkshire

        The provided triplet ‘Hartlepool | contains reverse | Cottam, East Riding of York-
        shire’ does not appear in any line of the context. The answer is No.

        Test Context & Fact

        Consider the context as a set of triplets where entries are separated by ‘|’ symbol. Answer
        the question according to the context.

        $Context

        Do not add additional text. Is the following triplet factually correct? Answer with Yes or No.

        $Fact

        {Reasoning followed by Yes or No answer}


Figure 6: Example of chain of thought (CoT) prompt, where representative positive and negative
examples are followed by CoT reasoning and answers.


experiments in Llama2-7B due to achieving lower evaluation loss. Therefore, learning rate provides
precise control over generalization performance in fine-tuning.

G.7   ACCURACY AND L OGICAL C ONSISTENCY ACROSS E POCHS IN F INE - TUNING .

We demonstrate how accuracy and logical consistency vary across fine-tuning epochs in Llama2-
13B (Figure 8), Llama2-7B (Figure 9), and Gemma-2B (Figure 10). We present results on Freeba-
seLFC dataset, which are used in training, and on NELLLFC dataset to understand the generalization
in fine-tuning. In general, both accuracy and consistency increase as we increase the epochs across


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   1.4                   Learning Rate                      1.4                                   Learning Rate
Evaluation Loss    1.3                     2e-07                            1.2                                     2e-07


                                                           Training Loss
                   1.2                     2e-06                             1                                      2e-06
                                           2e-05                                                                    2e-05
                   1.1                                                      0.8
                                           0.0002                                                                   0.0002
                    1                                                       0.6

                   0.9                                                      0.4

                   0.8                                                      0.2

                         2     4     6                                                2           4       6
                             Epoch                                                            Epoch


Figure 7: Impact of different learning rates in fine-tuning Llama2-7B model. Higher learning rate
results in over-fitting and a degraded performance on the evaluation data.


different fact types: simple fact p, ␣p, and complex facts p^q and p_q. In most cases, accuracy and
consistency surpass their initial values on the base models (shown in dashed horizontal lines). Fur-
ther, accuracy and consistency are often correlated across epochs. Exceptionally in LLama2 models,
accuracy and consistency occasionally decreases for p _ q fact, whereas Gemma-2B does not ex-
hibit this phenomenon. In summary, both accuracy and logical consistency improve over epochs in
fine-tuning across models and datasets.


                                                                             1
                   0.9                      Accuracy                                                                 Accuracy
                                            Logical                         0.9                                      Logical
                   0.8
                                            Consistency                     0.8                                      Consistency
                   0.7
                   0.6                                                      0.7

                   0.5                                                      0.6

                   0.4                                                      0.5
                   0.3                                                      0.4
                         2     4     6                                            1       2           3       4
                             Epoch                                                            Epoch



                                            Accuracy                        0.9                                      Accuracy
                   0.9
                                            Logical                         0.8                                      Logical
                   0.8
                                            Consistency                                                              Consistency
                                                                            0.7
                   0.7
                                                                            0.6
                   0.6
                                                                            0.5
                   0.5
                                                                            0.4
                   0.4
                                                                            0.3
                   0.3
                         2     4     6                                            1       2           3       4
                             Epoch                                                            Epoch


                                                                           0.95
                                            Accuracy                                                                 Accuracy
                  0.95
                                            Logical                                                                  Logical
                                                                            0.9
                   0.9                      Consistency                                                              Consistency

                  0.85                                                     0.85

                   0.8
                                                                            0.8
                  0.75
                                                                           0.75
                   0.7
                         2     4     6                                            1       2           3       4
                             Epoch                                                            Epoch


Figure 8: Accuracy and logical consistency of evaluation data across fine-tuning epochs in Llama2-
13B. The left row denotes results on FreebaseLFC (included in training), while the right row denotes
results on NELLLFC. Dashed line denotes accuracy and consistency before fine-tuning.


                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Accuracy                                         Accuracy
                                                           0.9
    0.9                                Logical                                          Logical
                                       Consistency         0.8                          Consistency
    0.8
                                                           0.7
    0.7
                                                           0.6
    0.6
                                                           0.5
    0.5
          2   4   6    8   10   12                               2     4      6
                  Epoch                                              Epoch



    0.9
                                       Accuracy            0.9                          Accuracy
    0.8                                Logical             0.8                          Logical
                                       Consistency                                      Consistency
                                                           0.7
    0.7
                                                           0.6
    0.6
                                                           0.5
    0.5                                                    0.4
                                                           0.3
    0.4
          2   4   6    8   10   12                               2     4      6
                  Epoch                                              Epoch


   0.85                                                   0.95
                                       Accuracy                                         Accuracy
                                                           0.9
    0.8                                Logical                                          Logical
                                       Consistency        0.85                          Consistency
   0.75                                                    0.8
                                                          0.75
    0.7
                                                           0.7
   0.65                                                   0.65

          2   4   6    8   10   12                               2     4      6
                  Epoch                                              Epoch


Figure 9: Accuracy and logical consistency of evaluation data across fine-tuning epochs in Llama2-
7B. The left row denotes results on FreebaseLFC (included in training), while the right row denotes
results on NELLLFC. Dashed line denotes accuracy and consistency before fine-tuning.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        Accuracy           0.95                                 Accuracy
   0.95
                                        Logical             0.9                                 Logical
    0.9                                 Consistency                                             Consistency
                                                           0.85
   0.85                                                     0.8
    0.8                                                    0.75
   0.75                                                     0.7

    0.7                                                    0.65
          2   4    6      8   10   12                             2   4   6       8   10   12
                  Epoch                                                   Epoch



                                        Accuracy                                                Accuracy
                                                            0.8
    0.8                                 Logical                                                 Logical
                                        Consistency         0.7                                 Consistency
    0.7
                                                            0.6

    0.6                                                     0.5

    0.5                                                     0.4

          2   4    6      8   10   12                             2   4   6       8   10   12
                  Epoch                                                   Epoch



                                        Accuracy           0.95                                 Accuracy
    0.9                                 Logical                                                 Logical
                                                            0.9
                                        Consistency                                             Consistency
   0.85
                                                           0.85
    0.8
                                                            0.8
   0.75                                                    0.75

    0.7                                                     0.7

          2   4    6      8   10   12                             2   4   6       8   10   12
                  Epoch                                                   Epoch


Figure 10: Accuracy and logical consistency of evaluation data across fine-tuning epochs in Gemma-
2B. The left row denotes results on FreebaseLFC (included in training), while the right row denotes
results on NELLLFC. Dashed line denotes accuracy and consistency before fine-tuning.


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     G ENERALIZABILITY TO COMPLEX FACTS AND RULES

      Table 13: Generalization of fine-tuning to complex facts and rules (Extended Table 2).

                                                          Accuracy             Logical Consistency
  Model          Dataset          Fact              Before FT     After FT    Before FT     After FT
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.74        0.85          0.78        0.81
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.53        0.82          0.63        0.79
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.73        0.76          0.85        0.98
                 FreebaseLFC
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.61        0.93          0.84        0.91
  Llama2-13B
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.67        0.77          0.72        0.80
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.42        0.38          0.75        0.85
                 NELLLFC
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.73        0.76          0.80        0.98
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.38        0.70          0.90        0.85
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.68        0.74          0.78        0.71
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.42        0.74          0.54        0.75
                 FreebaseLFC
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.78        0.84          0.87        0.85
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.39        0.89          0.91        0.92
  Llama2-7B
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.63        0.70          0.94         0.76
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.37        0.66          0.80         0.79
                 NELLLFC
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.75        0.78          0.98         0.82
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.26        0.81          0.99         0.95
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.62        0.83          0.91        0.77
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.38        0.74          0.77        0.81
                 FreebaseLFC
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.73        0.94          0.90        0.93
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.45        0.83          0.80        0.90
  Gemma-2B
                                  p _ pq ^ rq             0.62        0.81          0.97         0.80
                                  p ^ pq _ rq             0.37        0.66          0.82         0.80
                 NELLLFC
                                  p_q Øq_p                0.75        0.88          0.99         0.93
                                  p^q Øq^p                0.33        0.83          0.92         0.90


H.1   D E -M ORGAN ’ S L AWS

We have tested the generalizability of the fine-tuned models on more challenging logic rules such as
De-Morgan’s laws. In order to finetune Llama2-13B, we have incorporated in the training datasets
simple facts, conjunction, disjunction, first-order logic rules, law of syllogism, and a small number
of De Morgan’s law rules. The results are shown in Table 14.
We observe that before any fine-tuning, the accuracy of De-Morgan’s law on conjunctive (␣pp ^
qq Ø ␣p _ ␣q) and disjunctive (␣pp _ qq Ø ␣p ^ ␣q) facts is the same as a random guess
model while being highly consistent. This is because the base Llama2-13B model classifies each
fact (both sides of Ø) as true, resulting in a consistent yet inaccurate fact-checker. Upon fine-tuning,
the accuracy on both conjunctive and disjunctive fact-types improves significantly, while retaining a
similar performance in logical consistency. Therefore, our experiments demonstrate the generality
of applying supervised fine-tuning in improving both logical consistency and accuracy in logical
fact-checking across multiple fact types, including De Morgan’s law.

H.2   F IRST- ORDER L OGIC AND L AW OF S YLLOGISM

We demonstrate results on first-order logic (FoL) and law of syllogism (LoS) queries when con-
sidering only proposition logic queries for fine-tuning in Table 15 and all propositional logic, FoL,
and LoS queries for fine-tuning in Table 16. When all queries are considered, we observe higher
accuracy and logical consistency on unseen FoL and LoS queries.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 14: Evaluating Generalizability of fine-tuned Llama2-13B using De-Morgan’s law before and
after fine-tuning. Experiments are conducted on FreebaseLFC dataset.

                                               Accuracy              Logical Consistency
                 Fact                    Before FT      After FT     Before FT    After FT
                 ␣pp _ qq Ø ␣p ^ ␣q            0.25          0.99          1.00          0.98
                 ␣pp ^ qq Ø ␣p _ ␣q            0.75          0.97          0.99          0.95

Table 15: Performance on more complex logic settings: first-order logic (FoL) with an existential
quantifier (D) and the law of syllogism (LoS), curated from the FreebaseLFC benchmark. FT results
are on propositional logic benchmark.

                                                        Accuracy            Logical Consistency
         Model          Dataset         Fact   Before FT       After FT    Before FT      After FT
                                        FoL           0.57          0.66          0.13          0.37
         Llama2-13B     FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.68          0.95          0.73          0.91
                                        FoL           0.50          0.61          0.00          0.45
         Llama2-7B      FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.55          0.77          0.45          0.55
                                        FoL           0.50          0.57          0.00          0.80
         Gemma-2B       FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.55          0.91          0.76          0.82


I   P ERFORMANCE ON NATURAL T EXT FACT- CHECKING DATASET
It is important to assess how well the proposed method translates to real-world situations where
queries are of textual nature. In particular, does the supervised fine-tuning still generalize to textual
data as opposed to triple context and query? We experiment with a widely known real-world fact-
checking benchmark containing textual facts: FEVER (Fact Extraction and VERification) (Thorne
et al., 2018).
FEVER consists of 185,445 claims generated by altering sentences extracted from Wikipedia, which
are subsequently verified without knowledge of the sentence they were derived from. The claims
are classified as supported, refuted, or not-enough-info. We consider supported and refuted claims
as simple query p and manually create natural language negation of each claim (␣p) to assess for
logical consistency. Our augmented FEVER dataset contains 580 supported claims and 220 refuted
claims, totaling 580 + 220 = 800 simple claims. We split these 800 simple claims into 400-200-200
for training, validation, and test, respectively, to perform supervised fine-tuning.
We adopt the Gemma-2B-it model (Team et al., 2024) as a proof of concept. In order to create
the context, we retrieve 5 most relevant claims to the given query claim using vector embedding
retrieval method. Table 17 shows that our method of improving logical consistency also works well
in real-world situations where both queries and context to answer the queries are in natural text. In

Table 16: Performance on more complex logic settings: first-order logic (FoL) with an existential
quantifier (D) and the law of syllogism (LoS), curated from the FreebaseLFC benchmark. FT results
are on propositional logic, FoL, and LoS queries.

                                                        Accuracy            Logical Consistency
         Model          Dataset         Fact   Before FT       After FT    Before FT      After FT
                                        FoL           0.57          0.94          0.13          0.88
         Llama2-13B     FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.68          0.97          0.73          0.94
                                        FoL           0.50          0.91          0.00          0.86
         Llama2-7B      FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.55          0.98          0.45          0.97
                                        FoL           0.50          0.69          0.00          0.69
         Gemma-2B       FreebaseLFC
                                        LoS           0.55          0.83          0.76          0.67


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


summary, the LLM (prior to fine-tuning) still lacks logical consistency and accuracy on natural text
facts. Our supervised fine-tuning improves both the logical consistency and accuracy of the LLM
and hence also generalizes to textual data.

             Table 17: Improvement in accuracy and consistency on the FEVER dataset

                                     Accuracy                  Logical Consistency
              Model          Fact    Before FT     After FT    Before FT     After FT
              Gemma-2B       p, ␣p   0.73          0.95        0.95          0.96


J     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON A DDITIONAL BASELINE : M INI C HECK
We present the results by considering state-of-the-art fact-checking methods using KGs such as
MiniCheck (Tang et al., 2024) in Table 18. The key technique employed in MiniCheck is to use
GPT-4 and then construct synthetic training data having challenging instances and factual errors.
Training on this data teaches the model, MiniCheck-FT5, to recognize complex information across
the input claim and check each fact in it. When compared against our fine-tuned version of the
Llama2-7B model over the FreebaseLFC dataset, we find that Llama2-7B shows better accuracy and
consistency than MiniCheck-FT5. The reason behind MiniCheck’s underwhelming performance is
that it is designed for fact-checking on grounding documents, not for verifying propositional logic
queries unlike ours, neither to ensure whether the trained LLM is logically consistent in these facts
or not.
                            Table 18: Experimental results on MiniCheck

                          Accuracy                                     Consistency
    Facts   MiniCheck-FT5     Fine-tuned Llama2-7B      MiniCheck-FT5      Fine-tuned Llama2-7B
    p, ␣p        0.57                  0.97                   0.13                   0.94
    p^q          0.83                  0.87                   0.84                   0.86
    p_q          0.39                  0.81                   0.41                   0.77


K      E XPERIMENTS WITH L ARGER AND C LOSED - SOURCE M ODELS
K.1     L LAMA2-70B

In this section, we present experimental results on models with a larger number of parameters, such
as Llama2-70B . The experiments on Llama2-70B are presented in Table 19, Table 20 and Table 21.
From Table 19 and Table 20, we observe that despite having more parameters than the correspond-
ing 7B and 13B versions of LLaMA2, the Llama2-70B base model does not always demonstrate
an improved logical consistency in all query types: simple facts, complex facts, and logic rules,
demanding further supervised fine-tuning or instruction prompting. Fine-tuning of Llama2-70B is
incomplete due to its higher demand on computational resources.
Llama2-70B demonstrates higher effectiveness in understanding instruction prompts than the lower-
size models from the same family. For example, in Table 21, we observe that Llama2-70B improves
accuracy from 0.77 to 0.99 and consistency from 0.53 to 0.99 due to instruction prompting, which
is superior to Llama2-13B. As such, we hypothesize that fine-tuning may not be necessary on larger
models, which already demand high computational resources; instruction prompting may be as com-
petitive as fine-tuning.

K.2     GPT-4O

In this section, we present experimental results on GPT-4o. Table 22 presents the results on simple
facts and complex facts and logic rules on the Freebase dataset. In Table 23, we present the results
on more complex logic rules such as the law of syllogism and first-order logic.


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 19: Comparison among models of different sizes regarding accuracy and logical consistency
of LLMs before and after fine-tuning (FT). Bold numbers denote an improved result in accuracy and
consistency for fine-tuning. Training is performed on FreebaseLFC dataset only (marked with ‘˚’),
while performance improved in all datasets. ‘—’ denotes incomplete fine-tuning due to computa-
tional resources.

                                                       Accuracy                  Logical Consistency
       Model          Dataset           Fact    Before FT       After FT     Before FT      After FT
                                        p, ␣p          0.77              —           0.53         —
       Llama2-70B     FreebaseLFC˚      p^q            0.91              —           0.86         —
                                        p_q            0.32              —           0.62         —
                                        p, ␣p          0.90         0.93             0.81       0.86
       Llama2-13B     FreebaseLFC˚      p^q            0.61         0.93             0.67       0.83
                                        p_q            0.73         0.76             0.73       0.97
                                        p, ␣p          0.87         0.97             0.76       0.94
       Llama2-7B      FreebaseLFC˚      p^q            0.39         0.87             0.47       0.86
                                        p_q            0.78         0.81             0.83       0.77
                                        p, ␣p          0.82         0.98             0.66       0.96
       Gemma-2B       FreebaseLFC˚      p^q            0.45         0.83             0.70       0.84
                                        p_q            0.73         0.94             0.91       0.90


Table 20: Comparison among models of various sizes regarding their generalizability to complex
facts and rules.

                                                              Accuracy              Logical Consistency
   Model           Dataset       Fact              Before FT       After FT        Before FT    After FT
                                 p _ pq ^ rq              0.38               —           0.70            —
                                 p ^ pq _ rq              0.70               —           0.90            —
   Llama2-70B      FreebaseLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p                 0.32               —           0.94            —
                                 p^q Øq^p                 0.91               —           0.93            —
                                 p _ pq ^ rq              0.74           0.85            0.78          0.81
                                 p ^ pq _ rq              0.53           0.82            0.63          0.79
   Llama2-13B      FreebaseLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p                 0.73           0.76            0.85          0.98
                                 p^q Øq^p                 0.61           0.93            0.84          0.91
                                 p _ pq ^ rq              0.68           0.74            0.78          0.71
                                 p ^ pq _ rq              0.42           0.74            0.54          0.75
   Llama2-7B       FreebaseLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p                 0.78           0.84            0.87          0.85
                                 p^q Øq^p                 0.39           0.89            0.91          0.92
                                 p _ pq ^ rq              0.62           0.83            0.91          0.77
                                 p ^ pq _ rq              0.38           0.74            0.77          0.81
   Gemma-2B        FreebaseLFC
                                 p_q Øq_p                 0.73           0.94            0.90          0.93
                                 p^q Øq^p                 0.45           0.83            0.80          0.90



From table 22, we observe that GPT-4o demonstrates improved logical consistency on negation,
conjunction, and disjunction facts, but performs comparatively poorly when multiple logical opera-
tors are involved, such as p ^ pq _ rq and p _ pq ^ rq - the accuracy and consistency reduce to (0.84,
0.81) and (0.76, 0.87), respectively. Considering the API cost of running GPT-4o, we consider a
smaller number of queries (around 1000 queries per query type), resulting in a total cost of 45 US
dollars.
The results in Table 23 suggest that GPT-4o lacks logical consistency on complex logical expressions
or higher-order Horn rule settings, justifying the motivation of our work, that is, to measure and
improve the logic consistency of LLMs.
Finally, we proceeded to the instruction prompt for GPT-4o to improve its consistency on simple
facts. We find that the logical consistency improves to 0.98, as shown in table 24.


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 21: Impact of instruction prompting (Prompt) vs. fine-tuning (FT) on simple facts across
models of various sizes.

                                               Accuracy                    Logical Consistency
  Model           Dataset          Before FT    Prompt    After FT    Before FT   Prompt      After FT
  Llama2-70B      FreebaseLFC           0.77      0.99          —          0.53      0.99          —
  Llama2-13B      FreebaseLFC           0.90       0.89       0.93         0.81      0.79        0.86
  Llama2-7B       FreebaseLFC           0.87       0.82       0.97         0.76      0.64        0.94
  Gemma-2B        FreebaseLFC           0.82       0.88       0.98         0.66      0.77        0.96


Table 22: Logical consistency and accuracy of GPT-4o model (before fine-tuning) across different
facts and logic rules in FreebaseLFC benchmark.

                            Fact               Accuracy   Logical Consistency
                            p, ␣p                  0.91                 0.91
                            p^q                    0.97                 0.95
                            p_q                    0.97                 0.95
                            p^q Øq^p               0.96                 0.95
                            p _ pq ^ rq            0.76                 0.87
                            p ^ pq _ rq            0.84                 0.81


Comparing GPT-4o with smaller LLMs. We compare GPT-4o with smaller models such as
Gemma-2B, Llama2-7B, and Llama2-13B on FoL and LoS queries in Table 23. We observe that the
base 2B, 7B, and 13B models do not offer similar levels of accuracy and consistency on first-order
logic. This is not surprising, since GPT-4o has been exposed to structured logic (Hurst et al., 2024).
We also observe that Llama2-13B and Gemma-2B have better consistency than GPT-4o on the LoS
dataset, but their accuracy is lacking in comparison. It is plausible for a (base) model to demon-
strate higher consistency yet lower accuracy since consistency indicates the logical robustness of the
model on logically manipulated queries independent from the matter of accuracy. In our attempt to
further improve GPT-4o, we have conducted instruction prompting with simple facts. The results
are shown in Table 24. This result indicates that since fine-tuning is often infeasible in large closed-
source models like GPT-4o, instruction prompting becomes effective in improving both accuracy
and consistency to 98%.


Table 23: Performance of the LLMs on more complex logic settings: first-order logic with an exis-
tential quantifier (D) and the law of syllogism curated from the FreebaseLFC benchmark.

           Fact                                Models     Accuracy     Logical Consistency
                                             GPT-4o            0.91                    0.78
                                         Llama2-13B            0.57                    0.13
           First-order Logic (FoL)
                                          Llama2-7B            0.50                    0.00
                                          Gemma-2B             0.50                    0.00
                                             GPT-4o            0.94                    0.64
                                         Llama2-13B            0.68                    0.73
           Law of Syllogism (LoS)
                                          Llama2-7B            0.55                    0.45
                                          Gemma-2B             0.55                    0.76


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 24: Impact of instruction prompting (Prompt) on GPT-4o in improving the accuracy and
logical consistency of simple facts in FreebaseLFC benchmark.

                                                      Accuracy                            Logical Consistency
                                               Before FT          Prompt              Before FT                 Prompt
                                                      0.91          0.98                                0.91       0.98



                                0.945                                                            0.95
           SCIQ Accuracy


                                                                           SCIQ Accuracy
                                 0.94
                                                                                                0.945
                                0.935

                                 0.93                                                            0.94

                                0.925
                                                                                                0.935
                                 0.92
                                        0       5            10                                          0           5           10
                                                    Epoch                                                                Epoch
                                            (a) Gemma-2B                                                       (b) Llama2-7B

                                0.53
           Lambada Accuracy


                                                                           Lambada Accuracy     0.69
                                0.52
                                0.51                                                            0.68

                                 0.5
                                                                                                0.67
                                0.49
                                0.48
                                                                                                0.66
                                0.47
                                        0       5            10                                         0           5            10
                                                    Epoch                                                               Epoch
                                            (c) Gemma-2B                                                       (d) Llama2-7B

                                                                                                0.47
                                0.38
           MMLU Accuracy


                                                                           MMLU Accuracy


                                0.37                                                            0.46

                                0.36
                                                                                                0.45
                                0.35
                                0.34                                                            0.44
                                0.33

                                        0       5            10                                         0           5            10
                                                    Epoch                                                               Epoch
                                            (e) Gemma-2B                                                       (f) Llama2-7B
           Hellaswag Accuracy


                                                                           Hellaswag Accuracy


                                0.495
                                                                                                 0.58
                                 0.49
                                                                                                0.575
                                0.485
                                                                                                 0.57
                                 0.48
                                                                                                0.565
                                0.475
                                                                                                 0.56
                                 0.47
                                        0       5            10                                          0           5           10
                                                    Epoch                                                                Epoch
                                            (g) Gemma-2B                                                       (h) Llama2-7B

                                            Figure 11: Performance on Language benchmarks


L   P ERFORMANCE ON L ANGUAGE B ENCHMARKS

We conduct an evaluation of the fine-tuned SFT model on four general language benchmarks:
SCIQ (Welbl et al., 2017), Lambada (Paperno et al., 2016), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), and
Hellaswag (Zellers et al., 2019). Figure 11 shows the performance across epochs.


                                                                           36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We observe that the logical consistency-based fine-tuning improves the benchmark accuracy on
SCIQ (from 0.926 to 0.94 in Gemma-2B and 0.94 to 0.945 in Llama2-7B), which is a science exam
question-answer benchmark. In addition, on the Lambada benchmark, the performance increases in
the initial few epochs. In the rest of the benchmarks, MMLU and Hellaswag, increasing fine-tuning
epochs results in a monotonic decrease in benchmark accuracy with epochs.
Therefore, consistently across multiple models like Gemma and Llama, consistency-based fine-
tuning is helpful in the scientific domain benchmark. At the same time, performance degradation
may be observed in other multi-task abilities with excessive fine-tuning. Therefore, as evident from
our experiments, we suggest applying consistency-focused SFT for a few epochs before the model
overfits and loses its generalization performance on other benchmarks.

M    ACKNOWLEDGMENT
AK and SH acknowledge support from the Novo Nordisk Foundation grant NNF 22OC0072415.


                                                37
