Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS L EARNING H IGH -P RECISION L EAST
S QUARES A LGORITHMS WITH S EQUENCE M ODELS
 Jerry Liu∗†                                                      Jessica Grogan† , Atri Rudra
 Institute of Computational & Mathematical Engineering            Department of Computer Science & Engineering
 Stanford University                                              University at Buffalo
 Stanford, CA, USA                                                Buffalo, NY, USA

 Owen Dugan, Ashish Rao, Simran Arora, Chris Ré
 Department of Computer Science
 Stanford University
 Stanford, CA, USA



                                               A BSTRACT
            This paper investigates whether sequence models can learn to perform numerical
            algorithms, e.g. gradient descent, on the fundamental problem of least squares. Our
            goal is to inherit two properties of standard algorithms from numerical analysis: (1)
            machine precision, i.e. we want to obtain solutions that are accurate to near floating
            point error, and (2) numerical generality, i.e. we want them to apply broadly across
            problem instances. We find that prior approaches using Transformers fail to meet
            these criteria, and identify limitations present in existing architectures and training
            procedures. First, we show that softmax Transformers struggle to perform high-
            precision multiplications, which prevents them from precisely learning numerical
            algorithms. Second, we identify an alternate class of architectures, comprised en-
            tirely of polynomials, that can efficiently represent high-precision gradient descent
            iterates. Finally, we investigate precision bottlenecks during training and address
            them via a high-precision training recipe that reduces stochastic gradient noise.
            Our recipe enables us to train two polynomial architectures, gated convolutions
            and linear attention, to perform gradient descent iterates on least squares problems.
            For the first time, we demonstrate the ability to train to near machine precision.
            Applied iteratively, our models obtain 100, 000× lower MSE than standard Trans-
            formers trained end-to-end and they incur a 10, 000× smaller generalization gap
            on out-of-distribution problems. We make progress towards end-to-end learning of
            numerical algorithms for least squares.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Least squares is the workhorse of modern numerics: it is well understood theoretically (Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2004; Trefethen & Bau, 2022) and has important downstream applications in science
and engineering, including solving regression problems and differential equations (Orszag, 1972;
Trefethen, 2000). Thus, least squares has gained interest as a natural testbed for investigating how
well ML models can learn to implement algorithms (Garg et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023).
A surge of recent work suggests that Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) can learn to solve least
squares using optimization algorithms like gradient descent and Newton’s method (Akyürek et al.,
2022; Fu et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023b). These arguments rest
on two observations: (1) simplified Transformer architectures (e.g. non-causal linear attention) can
exactly implement such algorithms; (2) standard (softmax attention) Transformers learn solutions
with similar properties (e.g. convergence rates) as iterative algorithms. Crucially, these works focus
on statistical least squares: they evaluate Transformer solutions in underdetermined/noisy settings
and compare to Bayes-optimal estimators. However, scientific applications like climate or fluids
    ∗
        Corresponding author: jwl50@stanford.edu.
    †
        Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Prior work focuses on statistical least squares: Transformers approximate Bayes-optimal
estimators (left, adapted from Garg et al. (2022)). In this work, we focus on numerical least squares:
Transformers struggle to obtain precise solutions (inset). Using a high-precision training recipe,
we train two polynomial architectures, BASE C ONV and linear attention, to perform high-precision
gradient descent iterates on least squares (right): applied iteratively, they reach ≈ 10−13 MSE.

modeling require numerically precise solutions to least squares, e.g. to accurately model turbulence
or to maintain stable temporal rollouts (Frisch, 1995; Wilcox, 2006). Prior works do not engage with
the issue of high precision, so it is still unclear how well Transformers can solve least squares from
this perspective.
In this work, we thus study whether existing approaches can solve numerical least squares. Specif-
ically, numerical analysis requires that algorithms exhibit (1) machine precision, i.e. they should
obtain solutions that are accurate to near floating point error, and (2) numerical generality, i.e. they
are computational procedures that should apply broadly across problem instances. (See Section 2.1
for details.) Since traditional least squares algorithms (e.g. gradient descent and conjugate gradients)
provably meet these criteria (Trefethen & Bau, 2022), it is crucial to evaluate machine learning
methods against these same standards to determine their ability to learn numerical algorithms.
We focus on learning the gradient descent (GD) algorithm for least squares. Our study has three parts:
• We benchmark standard Transformers for precision/generality and identify an expressivity
  gap on least squares. When we replicate the standard end-to-end training setup for least squares
  with Transformers, we find that solutions do not exhibit machine precision and numerical generality
  (Figure 1a, 2). We identify high-precision multiplications as a fundamental challenge for softmax
  Transformers. Empirically, on a synthetic element-wise multiplication task, we find precision
  scales poorly with larger Transformers: an 8-layer model trains to an MSE that is still 10 million
  times worse than machine epsilon (Figure 3). Theoretically, we argue that a single layer of softmax
  attention is unable to exactly express element-wise multiplications. Since implementing GD
  involves high-precision multiplications, this observation suggests standard Transformers are unable
  to even precisely express GD, much less precisely learn the algorithm.
• We identify an alternate architecture class which does not suffer from expressivity problems.
  Motivated by the expressivity limitations of softmax attention, we investigate alternate sequence
  mixer architectures. Prior work notes that non-causal linear attention is able to exactly implement
  algorithms like GD and Newton’s method (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Giannou et al., 2024) because it
  consists entirely of polynomials. We provide a unified framework to understand existing expressivity
  results from the lens of arithmetic circuits. In our work, we focus on BASE C ONV, a gated
  convolutional architecture, as a case study, since it is provably equivalent to the entire class of
  polynomial architectures (Arora et al., 2023; 2024). We demonstrate that gated convolutions can
  express a high-precision GD algorithm (≈ 10−13 MSE when implemented in practice, Figure 4).
• We identify an optimization precision bottleneck and propose a high-precision training
  recipe. Although polynomial architectures can precisely express the GD algorithm, we find that
  standard training procedures struggle to find a solution with sufficiently high precision (10−5 MSE,
  Figure 9). Therefore, towards disentangling precision bottlenecks during training, we first focus on
  the intermediate task of explicitly learning GD iterates. We identify stochastic gradient noise from


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    minibatching as the main optimization bottleneck, and we find that a simple metric, cosine similarity
    of minibatch gradients (Liu et al., 2023b), is diagnostic of precision saturation. Towards reducing
    stochasticity, we propose (1) a learning rate (LR) scheduler that adaptively adjusts LR based on the
    cosine similarity metric, and (2) to apply EMA over optimizer updates to maintain strong gradient
    signal. Our high-precision training recipe allows us to train ML architectures to near machine
    precision for the first time. We successfully train two 3-layer models, with BASE C ONV and linear
    attention, that learn to perform a single high-precision iteration of GD (Figure 1b). Excitingly, we
    can also learn multiple GD iterates at once, scaling up to 4 iterations with 10−10 MSE.
Overall, our work makes the following contributions: (1) we specify the desiderata of learning
numerical algorithms, machine precision and numerical generality, and we demonstrate that standard
Transformers fall short because of expressivity limitations of softmax attention; (2) we provide a
unified framework using arithmetic circuits to investigate the expressivity of the class of polynomial
architectures; (3) we address additional precision bottlenecks that emerge during training, even when
using expressive polynomial architectures. Although we do not achieve end-to-end learning of GD,
we make significant headway: we propose a high-precision training recipe, which, for the first time,
allows us to learn iterates of the GD algorithm to near machine precision.

2     L EARNING NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR LEAST SQUARES
In this section, we distinguish between statistical vs. numerical least squares and discuss the two
properties we want our models to inherit from numerical algorithms: machine precision and numerical
generality. We then briefly discuss prior work and, in doing so, tease apart two increasingly end-to-
end notions of performing algorithms with ML: expressing an algorithm in-weights and learning
algorithm iterates.

2.1     P ROBLEM FORMULATION AND RELATED WORK

In this work, our goal is to train a model that solves least squares problems: find x ∈ RD given
A ∈ RN ×D and b ∈ RN such that Ax = b. Here, we briefly discuss two different perspectives on
least squares: statistical (in the form of in-context learning) and numerical.

Statistical least squares. Originally motivated by applications in language modeling, prior works
on solving least squares with Transformers typically take a statistical perspective. Transformers are
trained using an in-context learning setup (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022): problem instances
Ax = b are sampled from a pre-specified distribution Dtrain , and the model is trained to minimize
mean squared error (MSE) over Dtrain . Trained models are then evaluated on unseen problem
instances, both in and out-of-distribution, and their performance is compared to Bayes-optimal
estimators (Garg et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022). We define the in-context least squares training
setup in Appendix B and leave a more detailed discussion of related in-context learning work to
Appendix A.

Numerical least squares. In this work, we instead take a numerical perspective on least squares.
A prototypical numerical algorithm for least squares is GD. For a problem instance Ax = b, we
initialize x0 , an estimate of x, and iteratively improve our estimate via
                                         xi+1 = xi − η∇L(xi ),                                   (1)
                   1           2
where L(x̂) := 2 ||Ax̂ − b||2 is the squared residual error. GD exhibits two properties of numerical
algorithms that we want our models to inherit:
• Machine precision. Numerical algorithms provably obtain high-precision solutions. For GD,
  obtaining higher precision simply requires performing more iterations until convergence to ma-
  chine precision (i.e. the smallest achievable error with floating-point arithmetic) (see Chapter 11
  of Trefethen & Bau (2022)). In this work, we use float32 throughout, where machine precision
  is 2−23 ≈ 1.19 × 10−7 , so we hope for MSEs around 2−46 ≈ 1.42 × 10−14 .
• Numerical generality. Although the convergence rate of GD depends on the spectrum of A (see
  Chapter 9 of Boyd & Vandenberghe (2004)), the computational procedure comprising GD is
  general and can be applied broadly to problem instances. This is unlike statistical generalization
  and notions of in vs. out-of-distribution. In this work, we are interested to study how closely ML
  models can emulate the numerical generality of algorithms despite training on a data distribution.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.2   O UTLINE OF THIS WORK
A recent line of work probes the estimators learned by Transformers on in-context least squares,
and suggests that Transformers learn to solve least squares by mimicking iterative algorithms like
gradient descent and Newton’s method (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2023;
Giannou et al., 2024). These works typically analyze simplified models theoretically and extrapolate
to standard training regimes, backed by empirical observations:
• Theoretical results for simplified models, e.g. non-causal linear attention can implement GD
  using a specific choice of model weights.
• Empirical experiments training standard Transformers, e.g. decoder-only softmax attention
  Transformers trained end-to-end on in-context least squares display convergence rates reminiscent
  of iterative algorithms.
Although prior works suggest that trained Transformers learn to solve least squares with algorithms, it
is still unclear whether statements about learning algorithms in simplified settings transfer to standard
Transformers trained end-to-end. We note two significant gaps between previously-analyzed settings
and standard in-context least squares:
• Architectural differences. Standard Transformers use softmax instead of linear attention, causal
  instead of non-causal sequence mixers, and include MLPs and LayerNorms (Ba et al., 2016).
• Optimization. Even if a model can express a precise and general algorithm, it is unclear whether
  the model can learn the algorithm from data.
In this work, we tease apart bottlenecks caused by architecture expressivity limitations (Sections 3.3, 4)
and optimization difficulties (Section 5) by investigating two increasingly sophisticated notions of
performing GD for least squares with ML: expressing GD in-weights and learning GD iterates.

3     T RANSFORMERS DO NOT LEARN NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS IN - CONTEXT
In this section, we evaluate standard Transformers, trained end-to-end, on the criteria of machine
precision and numerical generality. Surprisingly, we demonstrate that existing approaches fail to
exhibit these properties: the precision of Transformer solutions (in MSE) saturates a million times
worse than machine precision (Section 3.1), and their performance further degrades as problem
instances deviate from the model’s training distribution (Section 3.2). These results suggest that
Transformers are not learning proper algorithms as numerical analysis defines them.
Towards identifying expressivity bottlenecks, we identify three linear algebra primitives that comprise
standard algorithms including GD and Newton’s method (Section 3.3). We find empirically that
Transformers struggle to implement high-precision multiplication, and theoretically we argue that
softmax attention faces an expressivity gap when trying to exactly express multiplications.
3.1   T RANSFORMERS STRUGGLE TO REACH MACHINE PRECISION
Recent work (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2023; Giannou et al., 2024)
studying in-context least squares suggests that Transformers learn to mimic iterative algorithms like
GD and Newton’s method. Note that if Transformers are able to implement iterative algorithms,
the depth of the model should correspond to the number of iterations performed. We thus focus on
the simplest case of fully determined least squares problems with fixed size design matrices and
investigate whether precision improves as we scale to larger and deeper models.
In Figure 1b, following prior work (Ahn et al., 2024), we fix the size of A ∈ R20×5 and train
Transformers end-to-end on least squares, scaling up to L = 64 layers. We compare their precision
to the convergence rate of the full-batch gradient descent algorithm on least squares. For more details
about the training setup, refer to Appendix B.3.1.
At first, Transformer precision scaling exceeds the convergence rate of gradient descent: this finding
mirrors similar results reported by Fu et al. (2023), who suggest Transformers may instead be learning
higher-order algorithms like Newton’s method. However, we further observe that the precision
gains for Transformers rapidly diminish, such that we observe very little difference in precision
between L = 32 and L = 64 layers. The deepest Transformer models we are able to train achieve
an MSE around 10−8 . In contrast, gradient descent converges linearly to machine precision, almost
1, 000, 000× better precision. The diminishing returns of the Transformer precision scaling imply
that Transformers are not learning standard numerical algorithms like GD.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   T RANSFORMERS DO NOT EXHIBIT THE GENERALITY OF GRADIENT DESCENT

We further investigate whether Transformers learn
solutions to least squares that exhibit numerical gen-
erality. Recall that models are trained on a predefined
distribution of least squares problems, Dtrain . If
Transformers learn to solve least squares using a stan-
dard numerical algorithm like GD, then we expect
the performance of the model should be robust to
out-of-distribution inputs.
For GD specifically, the convergence criterion
                  2
(0 < η < 2/σmax        ) depends on σmax , the maxi-
mum singular value of A, and the optimal rate of
convergence depends on the condition number of
A, κ = σmax /σmin (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004).
Thus we specify our training distribution Dtrain over
least squares problems (A ∈ R20×5 , b = Ax ∈ R20 )
as follows. First, as in prior work (Garg et al., 2022),
we sample the entries of A and x i.i.d from a stan-        Figure 2: Transformers generalize poorly to
dard Gaussian N (0, 1). We then shift and rescale          out-of-distribution regression targets. In con-
the singular values of A so that σmax = κ = 5.             trast, using our training recipe, we train a
After training a 12-layer Transformer model on the         BASE C ONV model to perform high-precision
in-context objective, we evaluate our model on out-        GD iterates. Applied iteratively, our BASE C-
of-distribution regression targets b.                      ONV model incurs 10, 000× less generaliza-
             b
                                                           tion error on out-of-distribution target vectors
We define DOOD    (σ) by sampling each entry of x          than the Transformer.
i.i.d. from N (0, σ) and computing b = Ax. Al-
though the distribution of b’s and x’s changes with σ, because the spectra of the A’s is consistent,
we know that GD with fixed choice of η will provably converge to high precision.
We find that compared to GD, the Transformer solutions are brittle to unseen regression target
distributions. Simply scaling the inputs by a factor of 10×, the MSE of the trained Transformer
degrades by a factor of 108 . In contrast, GD is robust: a fixed number of GD iterations consistently
converges to the same order of magnitude of precision (Figure 2). The brittleness of the learned
Transformer solution compared to GD again suggests that Transformers are not performing standard
numerical algorithms.

3.3   I DENTIFYING AN EXPRESSIVITY GAP WITH STANDARD T RANSFORMERS

Toward understanding the limitations of the Transformer architecture, we start with GD and Newton’s
method, two algorithms used to solve least squares, and look into primitives that comprise them.
Linear algebra primitives. We observe that GD and Newton’s method can be expressed as
compositions of three simple linear algebra operations: sequence-wise read/write (R EAD), affine
transformations (L INEAR), and element-wise multiplications (M ULTIPLY). For input u ∈ RN ×D :
                                            {︃
                                               u[k, a:b] k ̸= j
                     R EAD(i, j, a, b)(u) =                     ,
                                               u[i, a:b] k = j
                       L INEAR(H)(u) = uH, where H : RD → Rdout is linear,
               M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout )(u) = u[:, a:a+dout ] ⊙ u[:, b:b+dout ]

In Appendix D.2, we define these primitives formally and describe how GD and Newton’s method
iterates can each be expressed as a composition of these primitives. Intuitively, R EAD is required
to transfer information across the sequence dimension, L INEAR to transfer information across the
hidden dimension, and M ULTIPLY to compute high-degree interaction terms (like dot products or
element-wise squaring).
Empirical analysis: standard Transformers struggle with multiplication. We train Transformers
on synthetic formulations of these tasks to investigate how precision scales with model size. Details
about our training setups are in Appendix B.3.2.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Precision vs. Transformer depth, with and without LayerNorms (LN), on synthetic tasks.
While shallow Transformers are able to learn the R EAD and L INEAR tasks to high precision (< 10−8
with 2-layer models), precision on the M ULTIPLY task scales poorly with depth (only 10−6 with
8-layer models).
In Figure 3, we show that even 2-layer Transformers are able to achieve 10−8 MSE on the R EAD
and L INEAR tasks. However, we find that Transformers struggle with the M ULTIPLY task: precision
scales poorly with model depth, such that an 8-layer Transformer is only able to achieve 10−6 MSE.
In Appendix C.1, we further show that precision on the M ULTIPLY task also scales poorly with
increased attention dimension, number of attention heads, and MLP upscaling factor.
Theoretical analysis: softmax attention struggles to exactly express multiplication. In Ap-
pendix D.2.4, we provide a proof that a single layer of softmax attention cannot exactly express the
simple element-wise squaring function S QUARE(u)[i, j] = u[i, j]2 (intuitively, because softmax
cannot implement polynomials). Crucially, we note that element-wise squaring is a special case of
element-wise multiply, so softmax attention cannot exactly implement M ULTIPLY either:
Theorem 3.1 (Informal statement of Theorem D.31 and Corollary D.32). One-layer single-headed
(causal) softmax attention cannot exactly represent S QUARE and M ULTIPLY for all possible inputs.
Since precisely implementing numerical algorithms like GD hinges on performing high-precision
multiplications, this result suggests that the standard Transformer architecture struggles to precisely
implement these algorithms because of a fundamental expressivity gap.
We mention briefly that these findings do not conflict with prior results (Yun et al., 2020b) proving
universal approximation theorems for Transformers, because they typically require parameter count
to scale exponentially with dimension: see Appendix A.

4    A LTERNATE ARCHITECTURES CLOSE THE EXPRESSIVITY GAP
Motivated by the finding that softmax attention struggles to precisely express multiplications, we
next investigate alternate sequence mixer architectures. We are inspired by prior results (Von Oswald
et al., 2023; Giannou et al., 2024) that show non-causal linear attention is able to exactly implement
algorithms like GD and Newton’s method. Thus, we focus on the class of polynomial architectures,
i.e. sequence mixers comprised entirely of polynomial operations, in order to explicitly bake in
multiplications. In this section, we present a unified framework that integrates previous findings
through the perspective of arithmetic circuits. Specifically, we focus on BASE C ONV, a gated
convolutional model that combines element-wise multiplications (gating) with long convolutions. We
work with BASE C ONV for two reasons:
• Recent work (Arora et al., 2023; 2024) has shown that BASE C ONV is equivalent to general arith-
  metic circuits, including all polynomial architectures. Thus, existing results with other polynomial
  architectures, e.g. linear attention, transfer directly to BASE C ONV.
• Empirically, gated convolutional models have been shown to perform comparably to attention-based
  architectures on tasks like language, audio, and DNA modeling (Arora et al., 2024; Nguyen et al.,
  2024; Zhang et al., 2023a).
We emphasize that although we find gated convolutions are convenient to work with theoretically
and empirically, we believe that other sequence mixer architectures may also be able to alleviate the
expressivity issues we highlight in Section 3.3. In particular, we show promising empirical results for
non-causal linear attention in Section 5.2.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.1   G ATED CONVOLUTIONS ARE EQUIVALENT TO ARITHMETIC CIRCUITS

BASE C ONV definition. In this work, we focus on a variant of the BASE C ONV operator from Arora
et al. (2023). Given an input u ∈ RN ×D , BASE C ONV(u) is defined as:
                ((uWgate + bgate ) ⊙ (h ∗ (uWin + bin ) + bconv ))Wout + bout
                 ⏞     ⏟⏟       ⏞ ⏞             ⏟⏟             ⏞                                    (2)
                   Linear Projection              Convolution

where the layer is parameterized by learnable filters h ∈ RN ×D , linear projections
Win , Wgate , Wout ∈ RD×D , and bias matrices bconv , bin , bgate , bout ∈ RN ×D . Here, ⊙ rep-
resents the Hadamard product, and convolution of two matrices is computed as convolution of the
corresponding columns.

BASE C ONVs can exactly express linear algebra prim-
itives. In Appendix D.2.1, we provide explicit construc-
tions of single-layer BASE C ONV models that exactly im-
plement the R EAD, L INEAR, and M ULTIPLY primitives
from Section 3.3.
We note that this result is stronger than prior BASE C-
ONV expressivity results (e.g. Theorem H.21 from Arora
et al. (2023)), which imply a poly-log-factor increase in
parameters (specifically layers) translating from arbitrary
arithmetic circuits. Here, we show by construction that
these specific primitives, and any circuits that are compo-
sitions of them, incur only a constant factor loss.
BASE C ONVs can perfectly recover linear algebra prim-
itives from data. In Appendix D.5, for S QUARE and
                                                               Figure 4: BASE C ONV can express high-
L INEAR, we further show the following under mild as-
                                                               precision gradient descent: our imple-
sumptions, which our input distribution satisfies (see de-
                                                               mentation of the weight construction
tails in Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, D.49):
                                                               reaches 10−13 MSE in practice.
Theorem 4.1 (Informal statement of Theo-
rems D.62, D.60). BASE C ONV perfectly recovers S QUARE and L INEAR when it achieves
zero population gradient w.r.t. MSE loss.
We note that although results of the form “exact solution implies zero population gradient” exist in the
literature (Ahn et al., 2024; Mahankali et al., 2023), to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
show the converse (“zero population gradient implies recovery of exact solution”) for sequence model
architectures. In Appendix C.1, we show that BASE C ONV models can learn the R EAD, L INEAR, and
M ULTIPLY primitives to high precision in practice (Figure 6).

BASE C ONVs are universal approximators. Finally, we show in Appendix D.4 that BASE C-
ONV can efficiently approximate smooth functions by implementing polynomials:
Theorem 4.2 (Informal statement of Theorem D.39). Given a k-times differentiable function f̄ :
[−1, 1] → R, define f : [−1, 1]N →D → RN ×D , which applies f̄ element-wise to(︂ √︂
                                                                                 all inputs.
                                                                                      )︂     Then
                                                                                          L
∀ϵ > 0, there exists a BASE C ONV model approximates f to within error ϵ, with O      k
                                                                                          ϵ   + k depth
and O(N D) parameters, where ||f (k) ||∞ ≤ L.
We additionally prove a universal approximation theorem for general smooth multivariate functions
in Appendix D.4 (Theorem D.44).

4.2   BASE C ONV CAN PRECISELY EXPRESS GRADIENT DESCENT FOR LEAST SQUARES

We now focus on the gradient descent algorithm for least squares. Explicitly, given a least squares
problem instance Ax = b and an initial iterate x0 , a single iteration of gradient descent computes
                       x1 := x0 − η∇L(x0 ), where ∇x L = AT (Ax − b).                               (3)

We provide two explicit O(1)-layer weight constructions to express a GD iterate using BASE C ONV in
Appendix D.3.1. One requires a O(D) state size using a non-causal model (i.e. each entry can access


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


any other entry of the sequence) and one requires a O(D2 ) state size using a causal model (i.e. entries
cannot access later entries of the sequence). In Appendix D.3.2, we prove that both constructions are
asymptotically optimal with respect to state size.
In Figure 4, we implement our non-causal weight construction into a deep BASE C ONV model as
a proof of concept. We confirm that gated convolutions can empirically implement high-precision
gradient descent – notably, roundoff errors due to machine precision do not significantly accumulate
in practice, despite scaling up to a depth-100 BASE C ONV model.

5     T OWARDS TRAINING MODELS TO MACHINE PRECISION
Although BASE C ONVs are expressive enough to solve least squares precisely, we find that simply
swapping out softmax attention with BASE C ONV and training end-to-end is insufficient for high
precision: our BASE C ONV models perform as poorly as standard Transformers (Figure 9). This
suggests that additional precision bottlenecks are present during high-precision training. In this
section, we thus investigate what it takes to train polynomial architectures to machine precision.
Recent works (Rodionov & Prokhorenkova, 2023; 2024) on algorithm learning find that intermediate
supervision is crucial for learning long computation trajectories. We hypothesize that end-to-end least
squares faces a similar challenge. Thus, to study high-precision optimization, we first investigate a
simplified setting: learning to perform explicit GD updates for least squares.
Using this task as a benchmark, we identify a fundamental bottleneck in high-precision regimes,
gradient variance from minibatching, and we identify a metric based on cosine similarity of successive
gradients that is diagnostic of precision saturation during training. We then propose a high-precision
training recipe, which for the first time allows us to train ML models to near machine precision. Using
our training recipe, we learn to perform explicit GD updates to 10−13 average MSE (Figure 1b), and
we can also learn up to 4 iterates of GD at once with an MSE of 10−10 (Table 7).

Simplifying the training setup. We first define a sequence of k-th iterate tasks, where the goal is
to explicitly produce the k-th iterate of GD given a least squares problem instance (A, b), an initial
iterate x0 , and a step size η:
          {(a1 , b1 ), . . . , (aN , bN ), x0 } → xk , where xi+1 = xi − η∇L(xi ), i ∈ [k − 1].    (4)
We then define the explicit gradient task, where the goal is to produce the GD update vector:
                                   {(a1 , b1 ), . . . , (aN , bN ), x0 } → ∇L(x0 ).                (5)
Note that (up to a residual connection), the explicit gradient task is equivalent to 1-step GD, and
standard in-context least squares is equivalent to taking k → ∞. Thus, the explicit gradient task is
a natural simplification of standard in-context least squares, and the k-th iterate task allows us to
smoothly interpolate between the two extremes of difficulty. Refer to Appendix B for more details.

5.1   T OWARDS A HIGH - PRECISION TRAINING RECIPE

Our theoretical results in Section 4 imply that a 3-layer BASE C ONV is expressive enough to solve the
explicit gradient task, so we use training a 3-layer BASE C ONV on this task as our benchmark for
studying the challenges of high-precision learning.

Precision saturates with standard training procedures. Motivated by prior work (Garg et al.,
2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2024), we start by investigating two basic optimization
procedures: Adam with constant learning rate (LR) and with exponentially decaying LR.
In Appendix C.2 (Figure 10), we sweep initial LR and LR steprate across 2-3 orders of magnitude for
constant and decaying LR schedules. We find:
• Precision saturation occurs with both constant and decaying LR schedules. After a number of
  training iterations, the average loss saturates and is unable to improve. We note that this occurs
  even while gradients magnitudes and LR are non-zero.
• Slower-decaying LR schedules perform better but require exponentially more training iterations.
  In Figure 8, we further analyze this phenomenon in the simpler case of 1-layer Transform-
  ers/BASE C ONVs on the M ULTIPLY synthetic. We observe a power-law relation between precision


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Gradient metric is predictive of precision saturation (left). We propose a simple adaptive
LR scheduler that alleviates precision saturation (middle). Adaptive LR effectively boosts gradient
signal during training (right).

  and number of training iterations as we sweep steprate; although it may be possible to train to high
  precision in theory, this approach seems infeasible in practice.
• With aggressively-decaying LR schedules, higher initial LR is better. For a fixed scheduler step
  rate, increasing initial LR leads to significant improvements in final MSE, e.g. in Figure 10, an
  improvement of 1000× simply by increasing initial LR from 10−3 to 10−2 . Choosing a LR that is
  too large causes training instability, so in practice we set it to the largest value that trains stably.
Our analysis suggests that Adam with an exponentially decreasing LR scheduler gets us only part of
the way to a machine precision training recipe. We next address the issue of precision saturation.

Stochastic gradients bottleneck precision. We identify minibatch gradient variance as the main
source of precision saturation. Although our goal is to minimize the expected loss over problem
instances from Dtrain , in practice we minimize over finite minibatch samples instead. Minibatch
training is the standard in ML, but interestingly we find that the variance in minibatch gradients can
dominate the population gradient signal in high-precision regimes, causing the loss to stagnate.
To demonstrate this, we define a simple metric to assess the strength of the gradient signal during
training. At a given training step, we take the current model weights, sample n different minibatches
of least squares problems, and compute the minibatch model gradients {g1 , . . . , gn }. We then
compute the average cosine similarity between all pairs, as in Liu et al. (2023b):

                                              2     ∑︂      giT gj
                                   σg :=                                                               (6)
                                           n(n − 1)    ||gi ||2 ||gj ||2
                                                      i̸=j

We observe that this cosine similarity metric is predictive of precision saturation across MSE scales
and optimizer hyperparameters (Figure 5).

An adaptive LR scheduler boosts gradient signal beyond precision saturation. We thus propose
an adaptive LR scheduler based on the gradient variance. Our scheduler is motivated by two intuitions:
• Whenever the cosine similarity metric is high, gradient signal is strong. In order to refine the
  highest-precision bits of the model weights, we need to slowly decrease the LR.
• Whenever the cosine similarity metric is low, the model weights are stuck in a local region of the
  loss landscape. To allow the model to escape this region, we need to increase the LR.
The basic scheduler we use in this work simply decreases the LR exponentially while the metric is
above a threshold σth and increases the LR instead if the metric is below σth . In Figure 5, we show
that this simple approach alleviates the loss saturation phenomenon: we see a boost in population
loss across our LR settings, and we observe the models consistently improve as we continue training.
We note that proper choice of LR hyperparameters is still crucial for efficient convergence to machine
precision – we leave speeding up the convergence rate via better adaptive schedulers to future work.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Exponential Moving Average (EMA) over optimizer updates. Finally, motivated by our obser-
vation that gradient variance bottlenecks precision and inspired by recent works (Lee et al., 2024;
Pagliardini et al., 2024), we apply an additional EMA over Adam’s update vectors to help smooth
out minibatch noise. Empirically, we find this boosts the final MSE by as much as 100, 000× on the
explicit gradient task: see Appendix C.2 (Figure 11).
Our training recipe for efficient high-precision convergence thus involves two techniques: (1) an
adaptive LR scheduler that exponentially increases or decays LR according to the cosine similarity
metric; and (2) applying EMA over optimizer updates.

5.2   L EARNING HIGH - PRECISION GRADIENT DESCENT WITH POLYNOMIAL ARCHITECTURES

Using our training recipe, we successfully train two 3-layer models with polynomial architectures,
BASE C ONV and non-causal linear attention, on the explicit gradient task. For the first time, we are
able to train to near machine precision: we achieve an average loss of 10−13 MSE.
In Figure 1b, we slot our trained models into the standard GD algorithm, using their predictions
in place of the true least squares gradients ∇L. Specifically, for a least squares problem Ax = b
and initial iterate x0 , we repeatedly compute xi+1 := xi − η∆i , where ∆i := Tθ (A, b, xi ) is the
prediction of the model. We iteratively apply the model until convergence to a fixed point x∞ .
We find that both our models achieve high precision. In this setting, we reach an average MSE of
10−12 (Figure 1, right): this is 100, 000× better MSE than the biggest Transformers we are able
to train end-to-end. Moreover, our BASE C ONV model exhibits better numerical generality than
the Transformer, incurring a 10, 000× smaller generalization gap on problems outside its training
distribution (Figure 2). Interestingly, we find that our linear attention model exhibits markedly worse
generality: its out-of-distribution performance nearly matches the Transformer’s, and the model
iterates eventually diverge: see Figure 13.
Learning k-iterates of GD for larger k. We find that our training recipe also allows us to learn up
to k = 4 iterates of GD at once with 10−10 MSE: see Table 7 and Figure 14 for results. We are not
able to stably train deeper models without reintroducing non-polynomial normalization techniques
like LayerNorms, which causes precision bottlenecks. For small k, we observe that LayerNorms
worsen precision by over 1, 000×. See Appendix C.3 for details.
Experiments with in-context ODE solving. Finally, towards high-precision ML for more realistic
tasks, we provide preliminary results on in-context ODE solving. We find that our proposed techniques
outperform standard Transformers by up to 1, 000, 000× in MSE (up to ≈ 10−10 with iterative
BASE C ONVs vs. ≈ 10−4 with 12-layer Transformers). See Appendix C.4 for details.

6     D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this work, we investigate learning to solve least squares from a numerical perspective. We
find that Transformers fail to learn solutions that exhibit the properties of machine precision and
numerical generality. Disentangling effects from the model architecture and optimizer, we find
that standard design choices perform surprisingly poorly from the lens of numerics. We identify
expressivity limitations with softmax attention, and find surprisingly that even MLPs and LayerNorms
significantly affect precision (up to 1, 000, 000× worse MSE on the explicit gradients task). On the
optimization front, we find stochastic gradient noise from minibatch training becomes a precision
bottleneck in high-precision regimes. We propose an adaptive LR scheduler that alleviates this
issue on a simplified task, but we suspect that this issue remains a fundamental challenge on harder
problems. Crucially, although we make progress toward learning to solve numerical least squares
end-to-end, our techniques struggle to maintain stable and precise training with deep networks.
We note that the numerical criteria we consider in this work represent a fundamentally different type
of learning and generalization from statistical notions that are prevalent in ML. We believe these
numerical perspectives may be relevant to the wider scientific ML community. For example, existing
approaches to solving PDEs have shown promise but are known to be brittle outside their training
distributions (Wang & Lai, 2023; Rathore et al., 2024). This inhibits their usefulness in high-impact
applications like climate or fluids modeling, where high precision and robustness are crucial. We
believe learning to implement precise numerical algorithms directly from data is an exciting prospect
that has the potential to unlock new capabilities across science and engineering.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide all the code and configuration files necessary to reproduce our experiments at
https://github.com/HazyResearch/precision-ls. In this work, all experiments are
done using synthetic data and tasks. All experiments were conducted using PyTorch on NVIDIA
A100/H100 GPUs. Detailed hyperparameters (learning rate, batch size, and optimizer settings) and
proofs of all theoretical claims are provided in the supplementary materials.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Yasa Baig, Mayee Chen, Rajat Dwaraknath, Sabri Eyuboglu, Chris Fifty, Neel Guha,
Hermann Kumbong, Benjamin Spector, Aman Timalsina, Alyssa Unell, Ben Viggiano, Michael
Zhang, and Dylan Zinsley for their helpful feedback and discussion during this work.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NIH under No. U54EB020405 (Mobilize); NSF under
Nos. CCF2247015 (Hardware-Aware), CCF1763315 (Beyond Sparsity), CCF1563078 (Volume to
Velocity), 1937301 (RTML), DGE-2146755 (GRFP), and PHY-2019786 (IAIFI); US DEVCOM ARL
under Nos. W911NF-23-2-0184 (Long-context) and W911NF-21-2-0251 (Interactive Human-AI
Teaming); ONR under Nos. N000142312633 (Deep Signal Processing); Stanford HAI under No.
247183; NXP, Xilinx, LETI-CEA, Intel, IBM, Microsoft, NEC, Toshiba, TSMC, ARM, Hitachi,
BASF, Accenture, Ericsson, Qualcomm, Analog Devices, Google Cloud, Salesforce, Total, the HAI-
GCP Cloud Credits for Research program, the Stanford Data Science Initiative (SDSI), and members
of the Stanford DAWN project: Meta, Google, and VMWare. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
thereon. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views, policies, or endorsements, either
expressed or implied, of NIH, NSF, ONR, or the U.S. Government. JL is supported by the Department
of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship under Award Number DE-SC0023112. JG and
AR’s research is supported by NSF grant CCF#2247014. OD is supported by the Hertz Foundation
Fellowship, the Stanford Knight-Hennessy Scholarship, and the NSF GRFP.

R EFERENCES
Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to implement
 preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36, 2024.
Kabir Ahuja, Madhur Panwar, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the bayesian prism.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04891, 2023.
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning algo-
  rithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661,
  2022.
Ekin Akyürek, Bailin Wang, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas. In-context language learning: Arhitec-
  tures and algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12973, 2024.
Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Aman Timalsina, Isys Johnson, Michael Poli, James Zou, Atri Rudra,
  and Christopher Ré. Zoology: Measuring and Improving Recall in Efficient Language Models,
  2023.
Simran Arora, Sabri Eyuboglu, Michael Zhang, Aman Timalsina, Silas Alberti, Dylan Zinsley,
  James Zou, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Simple linear attention language models balance the
  recall-throughput tradeoff, 2024.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization, 2016. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians:
  Provable in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 36, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Wuyang Chen, Jialin Song, Pu Ren, Shashank Subramanian, Dmitriy Morozov, and Michael W
 Mahoney. Data-efficient operator learning via unsupervised pretraining and in-context learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15734, 2024.
Xiang Cheng, Yuxin Chen, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers implement functional gradient descent to
  learn non-linear functions in context, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06528.
David Chiang, Peter Cholak, and Anand Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity of transformer
  encoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5544–5562. PMLR, 2023.
Liam Collins, Advait Parulekar, Aryan Mokhtari, Sujay Sanghavi, and Sanjay Shakkottai. In-
  context learning with transformers: Softmax attention adapts to function lipschitzness, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11639.
D. Jackson. The theory of approximation. Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Publ., vol. 11, Amer. Math. Soc,
  Providence, R. I., 1930.
Tri Dao, Nimit S Sohoni, Albert Gu, Matthew Eichhorn, Amit Blonder, Megan Leszczynski, Atri
  Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Kaleidoscope: An efficient, learnable representation for all structured
  linear maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14966, 2020.
Ishita Dasgupta, Andrew K Lampinen, Stephanie CY Chan, Antonia Creswell, Dharshan Kumaran,
   James L McClelland, and Felix Hill. Language models show human-like content effects on
   reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07051, 2022.
Uriel Frisch. Turbulence: the legacy of AN Kolmogorov. Cambridge university press, 1995.
Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Khaled K Saab, Armin W Thomas, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
  Hungry hungry hippos: Towards language modeling with state space models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.14052, 2022.
Deqing Fu, Tian-Qi Chen, Robin Jia, and Vatsal Sharan. Transformers learn higher-order optimization
  methods for in-context learning: A study with linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17086,
  2023.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:30583–30598, 2022.
Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D Lee, and Dimitris
  Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 11398–11442. PMLR, 2023.
Angeliki Giannou, Liu Yang, Tianhao Wang, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Jason D Lee. How well
  can transformers emulate in-context newton’s method? arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03183, 2024.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00396, 2021.
Michael T Heideman and C Sidney Burrus. Multiplicative complexity, convolution, and the DFT.
 Springer, 1988.
Maximilian Herde, Bogdan Raonić, Tobias Rohner, Roger Käppeli, Roberto Molinaro, Emmanuel
 de Bézenac, and Siddhartha Mishra. Poseidon: Efficient foundation models for pdes, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19101.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yu Huang, Yuan Cheng, and Yingbin Liang. In-context convergence of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.05249, 2023.
Jaerin Lee, Bong Gyun Kang, Kihoon Kim, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Grokfast: Accelerated grokking by
  amplifying slow gradients, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20233.
Jerry Weihong Liu, N Benjamin Erichson, Kush Bhatia, Michael W Mahoney, and Christopher Re.
  Does in-context operator learning generalize to domain-shifted settings? In The Symbiosis of Deep
  Learning and Differential Equations III, 2023a.
Zhuang Liu, Zhiqiu Xu, Joseph Jin, Zhiqiang Shen, and Trevor Darrell. Dropout reduces underfitting,
  2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01500.
Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is
  provably the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.03576, 2023.
Nick McGreivy and Ammar Hakim. Weak baselines and reporting biases lead to overoptimism in
  machine learning for fluid-related partial differential equations. Nature Machine Intelligence, 6
  (10):1256–1269, September 2024. ISSN 2522-5839. doi: 10.1038/s42256-024-00897-5. URL
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00897-5.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision
 transformers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 2023.
 doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00562. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.tacl-1.31.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Eric J. Michaud, Ziming Liu, and Max Tegmark. Precision machine learning. Entropy, 25(1):175,
  January 2023. ISSN 1099-4300. doi: 10.3390/e25010175. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  3390/e25010175.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.
  05217.
Eric Nguyen, Michael Poli, Matthew G. Durrant, Armin W. Thomas, Brian Kang, Jeremy Sul-
  livan, Madelena Y. Ng, Ashley Lewis, Aman Patel, Aaron Lou, Stefano Ermon, Stephen A.
  Baccus, Tina Hernandez-Boussard, Christopher Ré, Patrick D. Hsu, and Brian L. Hie. Se-
  quence modeling and design from molecular to genome scale with evo. bioRxiv, 2024.
  doi: 10.1101/2024.02.27.582234. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
  2024/02/27/2024.02.27.582234.
Steven A Orszag. Comparison of pseudospectral and spectral approximation. Studies in Applied
  Mathematics, 51(3):253–259, 1972.
Matteo Pagliardini, Pierre Ablin, and David Grangier. The ademamix optimizer: Better, faster, older,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.03137.
Bo Peng, Eric Alcaide, Quentin Anthony, Alon Albalak, Samuel Arcadinho, Huanqi Cao, Xin
  Cheng, Michael Chung, Matteo Grella, Kranthi Kiran GV, et al. Rwkv: Reinventing rnns for the
  transformer era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13048, 2023.
Peter Bürgisser and Michael Clausen and M. Amin Shokrollah. Algebraic Complexity Theory.
  Springer, 1997.
Tobias Von Petersdorff. Polynomial approximation and interpolation. 2015. Numerical Analysis Class
  Notes. https://www.math.umd.edu/~petersd/666/amsc666notes02.pdf.
W. Pleśniak. Multivariate jackson inequality. Journal of Computational and Applied Math-
  ematics, 233(3):815–820, 2009. ISSN 0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.
  2009.02.095. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0377042709001307. 9th OPSFA Conference.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Eric Nguyen, Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Stephen Baccus, Yoshua
 Bengio, Stefano Ermon, and Christopher Ré. Hyena hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional
 language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 28043–28078. PMLR,
 2023.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: General-
  ization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2201.02177.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Pratik Rathore, Weimu Lei, Zachary Frangella, Lu Lu, and Madeleine Udell. Challenges in training
  pinns: A loss landscape perspective, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01868.
Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the
  emergence of non-bayesian in-context learning for regression. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Gleb Rodionov and Liudmila Prokhorenkova. Neural algorithmic reasoning without intermediate
  supervision, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.13411.
Gleb Rodionov and Liudmila Prokhorenkova. Discrete neural algorithmic reasoning, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11628.
Günther Schulz. Iterative berechung der reziproken matrix. ZAMM-Journal of Applied Mathematics
  and Mechanics/Zeitschrift für Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik, 13(1):57–59, 1933.
Gilbert Strang. Linear algebra and its applications. 2012.
Lloyd N Trefethen. Spectral methods in MATLAB. SIAM, 2000.
Lloyd N. Trefethen and David Bau. Numerical Linear Algebra, Twenty-fifth Anniversary
  Edition. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 2022. doi:
  10.1137/1.9781611977165. URL https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.
  9781611977165.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Petar Veličković, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, David Budden, Razvan Pascanu, Andrea Banino,
  Misha Dashevskiy, Raia Hadsell, and Charles Blundell. The clrs algorithmic reasoning benchmark,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15659.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Yongji Wang and Ching-Yao Lai. Multi-stage neural networks: Function approximator of machine
  precision, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08934.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Sanford Weisberg. Applied linear regression, volume 528. John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
D.C. Wilcox. Turbulence Modeling for CFD. Number v. 1 in Turbulence Modeling for CFD. DCW
  Industries, 2006. ISBN 9781928729082. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=
  tFNNPgAACAAJ.
Steve Yadlowsky, Lyric Doshi, and Nilesh Tripuraneni. Pretraining data mixtures enable narrow
  model selection capabilities in transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00871, 2023.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liu Yang, Siting Liu, Tingwei Meng, and Stanley J. Osher. In-context operator learning with data
  prompts for differential equation problems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  120(39), September 2023a. ISSN 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2310142120. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310142120.
Liu Yang, Siting Liu, Tingwei Meng, and Stanley J Osher. In-context operator learning for differential
  equation problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07993, 2023b.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J. Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are
  transformers universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions?, 2020a.
Chulhee Yun, Yin-Wen Chang, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv
  Kumar. O (n) connections are expressive enough: Universal approximability of sparse transformers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13783–13794, 2020b.
Michael Zhang, Khaled K. Saab, Michael Poli, Tri Dao, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Effectively
 modeling time series with simple discrete state spaces, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2303.09489.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023b.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
The appendix is organized as follows:

        • Appendix A provides a more detailed overview of related work.
        • Appendix B provides details about our experimental setup.
        • Appendix C provides additional experiments and ablation studies.
        • Appendix D provides details about our main theoretical results.

A     E XTENDED BACKGROUND
A.1     L EAST SQUARES

Least squares, Ax = b, is well-understood theoretically, and we know of simple numerical algorithms
for solving least squares to high precision (Weisberg, 2005; Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). We focus
on two algorithms: gradient descent and Newton’s method.

Gradient descent Given a guess for x∗ , we minimize the least squares loss
                                                  N
                                               1 ∑︂ T
                                     L(x) =         (a x − bi )2                                     (7)
                                               2 i=1 i

via gradient descent on x:
                                                N
                                               ∑︂
                                    ∇x LN =          (xT ai − bi )ai                                 (8)
                                               i=1
                                      xt+1 = xt − η∇LN (xt )                                         (9)

Ordinary Least Squares and Newton’s method In the noiseless, full determined regime, the
Bayes-optimal estimator is ordinary least squares (OLS) (Weisberg, 2005):
                                      xOLS = (AT A)−1 AT b,                                        (10)
where                                  ⎛    ⎞                   ⎛    ⎞
                                     ← a1 →                     b1
                                 A=⎝    ..                 b = ⎝ ... ⎠
                                            ⎠,                                                     (11)
                                   ⎜        ⎟                  ⎜ ⎟
                                         .
                                         ← aN →                   bN
Note that this estimator requires a matrix inverse, which is expensive to compute exactly. An
alternative is to use Newton’s method to approximate the matrix inverse term (Schulz, 1933). To
estimate (AT A)−1 , we can perform the following iterative algorithm:
                                  Mt+1 = Mt (2I − (AT A)Mt )                                       (12)
where Mt converges to (AT A)−1 .

A.2     R ELATED WORK

In this section, we detail prior work on in-context learning, Transformer expressivity, gated convolu-
tional architectures, and algorithm learning.

In-context learning. The capability of Transformers to perform in-context learning on language
and pattern matching tasks has been well-documented (Brown et al., 2020; Dasgupta et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2022). More recently, a flurry of work has investigated in-context learning for regression-style
tasks. Garg et al. (2022) first formulated the mathematical framework to analyze the estimators
Transformers implement in-context, focusing on linear regression and other least squares problems. A
number of works further observed empirically that Transformers seem to approximate Bayes-optimal
estimators on distributional problems. For example, based on the task distribution, the performance of


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in-context Transformers mimics optimally-tuned LASSO on sparse linear regression, ridge regression
on noisy dense linear regression, and Bayes-optimal priors for task mixtures (Akyürek et al., 2024;
Raventós et al., 2024; Yadlowsky et al., 2023; Ahuja et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024). Beyond standard
least squares problems, other works have investigated the ability of Transformers to in-context solve
broader problems of scientific interest like differential equations (Yang et al., 2023b; Chen et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2023a).
Towards explaining these observations, recent works have focused on understanding the expressivity
and optimziation landscapes of Transformer variants (typically non-causal linear attention) on linear
regression. Linear attention has been shown to be expressive enough to implement numerical
algorithms for solving linear regression, including gradient descent (Akyürek et al., 2022; Von Oswald
et al., 2023) and Newton’s method (Fu et al., 2023; Giannou et al., 2024). Recent work (Ahn et al.,
2024; Mahankali et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b) has also begun to investigate the optimization
dynamics for linear attention on least squares. Finally, we highlight that recent work (Bai et al.,
2024; Huang et al., 2023; Collins et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024) makes progress on theoretically
understanding non-linear attention, e.g. with softmax or ReLU activations.
Unlike prior work, we investigate the capabilities of standard Transformers, focusing on exploring
their capability to perform high-precision optimization algorithms. Noting a gap between empirical
performance and theoretical claims regarding in-context least squares as gradient descent, we further
investigate alternative architectures to softmax attention.

Expressivity and approximation ability of Transformers. Although Transformers were initially
designed for discrete tasks like language modeling, recent works have investigated the ability of
the Transformer architecture to express general continuous-valued sequence-to-sequence maps. We
briefly mention three classes of prior work:
       • Constructive arguments. We highlight Giannou et al. (2023), which proposes a looped-
         Transformer weight construction that implements a basic mathematical instruction set. Using
         compositions of these instructions, the authors demonstrate that Transformers are expressive
         enough to implement numerical algorithms, including matrix inversion and SGD on linear
         models.
       • Universal approximation results. Several works, such as Yun et al. (2020a;b), provide
         bounds on the number of parameters and layers required to approximate smooth sequence-
         to-sequence functions to arbitrary precision using Transformers. However, these results
         typically require parameters to scale exponentially with respect to problem size, which
         quickly becomes impractical in practice.
       • Complexity theory results. Recent works (Chiang et al., 2023; Merrill & Sabharwal,
         2023; 2024) prove that log-precision Transformers lie in T C 0 , a limited complexity class of
         circuits.

Gated convolutions. Gated convolutional models are a class of architectures that serve as an
efficient alternative to attention. These models, consisting of gating (element-wise multiplication)
and long convolutions (filter size equal to sequence length), stem from earlier work (Gu et al.,
2021) inspired by the signal processing literature. In this work we focus on the BASE C ONV model
from Arora et al. (2023), but a recent surge of interest in efficient attention replacements has led to a
flood of gated convolutional architectures (Poli et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2023).
Recent architectural innovations within the class of gated convolutional models have been largely
motivated by language modeling tasks (Fu et al., 2022; Arora et al., 2023). Unlike these prior works,
which focus on matching attention’s performance on discrete tasks, we observe that the connection
between gated convolutions and arithmetic circuits implies they are able to exactly express a range of
important numerical algorithms for continuous-valued tasks. We further investigate their ability to
learn these algorithms in-context.

Algorithm learning. We mention two lines of work related to learning algorithms using ML:
       • Grokking. Several works (Power et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024) have
         observed the ability of Transformers to learn to perfectly perform small discrete algorithmic
         tasks, e.g. modular arithmetic.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Neural Algorithmic Reasoning. Recent work (Rodionov & Prokhorenkova, 2023; 2024)
         investigates the ability of graph neural networks to learn fundamental algorithms like
         breadth-first search (Veličković et al., 2022).

Crucially, we note that these previous works focus on learning discrete algorithmic tasks, which
Transformers excel at. As far as we know, we are the first to investigate whether Transformers are
able to learn numerical algorithms, which rely on addressing key challenges with high-precision
floating-point arithmetic.

Precision and scientific ML. The importance and difficulty of high-precision ML for scientific
settings is well-established: although the scientific ML community has made exciting progress in
recent years, numerical methods are still known to outperform existing ML methods in precision
even on simple PDE benchmarks (McGreivy & Hakim, 2024). Despite this, we are aware of only a
few works which directly focus on investigating high precision for ML. We highlight (Michaud et al.,
2023; Wang & Lai, 2023), which focus on small MLPs for regression tasks and propose alternate
training recipes.
As far as we are aware, we are the first to investigate and isolate effects of model architectures and
optimizers on precision in a controlled setting: in-context least squares. We find that typical training
recipes for sequence models (e.g. softmax attention, Adam, and standard LR schedulers) encounter
surprising precision barriers when applied to numerical tasks.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Here, we provide additional details about our experimental setup.

B.1   M ODEL ARCHITECTURE

We base our Transformer and BASE C ONV models off the GPT2 family (Radford et al., 2019). Unless
otherwise specified, we use the following default settings for Transformers:

                                   Config               Setting
                              Embedding size              64
                              Number of layers            12
                              Number of heads              8
                                   MLPs                  True
                              MLP hidden size      4× embedding size
                               MLP activation           ReLU
                                LayerNorms               True
                                 Input dim                 5
                              Sequence length             20

                        Table 1: Standard Transformer architecture details.

and the following settings for BASE C ONVs:

                                         Config          Setting
                                    Embedding size         64
                                    Number of layers        3
                                         MLPs             False
                                     LayerNorms           False
                                       Input dim            5
                                    Sequence length        20

                             Table 2: BASE C ONV architecture details.

Finally, we describe the settings we use for our linear attention experiment (Figure 2):

                                         Config          Setting
                                    Embedding size         256
                                    Number of layers        3
                                    Number of heads        16
                                         MLPs             False
                                     LayerNorms           False
                                       Input dim            5
                                    Sequence length        20

                           Table 3: Linear attention architecture details.


B.2   O PTIMIZER

We describe two sets of optimizer settings we use throughout this work.
The first, representative of standard training procedures, is inspired by prior in-context learning
setups (Garg et al., 2022; Von Oswald et al., 2023).
The second, our training recipe, is for our high-precision experiments, where we find a more
aggressive learning rate scheduler is essential. Note we use the adaptive learning rate scheduler and
EMA described in Section 5.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Config           Setting
                                       Batch size           256
                                       Optimizer           Adam
                                     Learning rate         10−3
                                       Scheduler          StepLR
                                   Training iterations      106
                                        Step rate           104
                                       Decay rate           0.9

                               Table 4: Standard optimizer settings.

                                       Config              Setting
                                     Batch size             1024
                                     Optimizer              Adam
                                   Learning rate            10−2
                                     Scheduler           AdaptiveLR
                                 Training iterations      2.5 × 106
                                      Step rate            3 × 103
                                     Decay rate               0.9
                                    EMA decay                0.98
                                   EMA lambda                  2

                 Table 5: High-precision training recipe settings for BASE C ONV.


Finally, we describe the optimization settings we used for high-precision linear attention, which we
found needed a slightly different learning rate scheduler.

                                       Config              Setting
                                     Batch size             1024
                                     Optimizer              Adam
                                   Learning rate            10−2
                                     Scheduler           AdaptiveLR
                                 Training iterations      2.5 × 106
                                      Step rate            3 × 103
                                     Decay rate               0.9
                                    EMA decay                0.98
                                   EMA lambda                  2

                Table 6: High-precision training recipe settings for linear attention.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3     TASKS

Each of our in-context learning tasks can be viewed as a sequence-to-sequence map
                                    M : RNin ×Din → RNout ×Dout
In this subsection, we provide details about task implementations, specifying the input/output formats
for each of the synthetic tasks and in-context least squares variants we implement.

B.3.1    I N - CONTEXT LEAST SQUARES .
We consider MLS : RN ×(D+1) → RD , where as above the inputs are formatted as
                                       [︃              ]︃
                                         a . . . aN
                               uin := 1
                                          b1 . . . b N
and the expected output is
                                         Tθ (uin )[:-1, -1:] := x.

B.3.2    P RIMITIVES .
For each of the following linear algebra primitives, we increase the task size, setting D = 20 and
N = 40.

        • R EAD is defined as MRead : RN ×D → RN ×D , where the inputs are formatted as
                                         uin ∈ RN ×D := [x1         ...      xN ]
          and the expected outputs are Tθ (uin ) ∈ RN ×D such that
                                                        {︃
                                                           uin [i, :] k = j
                                     Tθ (uin )[k, :] :=
                                                           uin [k, :] k ̸= j
          for task parameters i ̸= j ∈ [N ].
        • L INEAR is defined as MLinear : RN ×D → RN ×1 , where the inputs are formatted as
                                         uin ∈ RN ×D := [x1         ...      xN ]
          and the expected outputs are
                                                     [︁                       ]︁
                                         Tθ (uin ) := xT1 h       ...    xTN h
         where h ∈ RD is a task parameter.
        • M ULTIPLY is defined as MM ultiply : RN ×D → RN ×D/2 , where the inputs are formatted
          as
                                   uin ∈ RN ×D := [x1 . . . xN ]
          and the expected outputs are
                Tθ (uin ) := (x1 [:, : D/2] ⊙ x1 [:, D/2 :] . . .       xN [:, : D/2] ⊙ xN [:, D/2 :]) .

B.3.3    E XPLICIT GRADIENT UPDATES .
In Section 5, we investigate a simple training setting, in which the model is explicitly trained
to predict the gradient of the least squares loss. We proceed to define the task Mgradient :
            2
R(N +1)×(D +2D+1) → RD .
The inputs are formatted as                    [︃                     ]︃
                                                 a1    ...   aN    x0
                                    uin :=                               .
                                                  b1   ...   bN    0

The expected outputs are
                                    Tθ (uin )[-1:, :D] := ∇w L(x0 ).


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3.4    k- TH GRADIENT DESCENT ITERATE .
Finally, toward end-to-end least squares, we investigate a series of increasingly end-to-end tasks in
which the model is explicitly trained to predict the k-th gradient descent iterate. We proceed to define
                              2
the task Mkiter : R(N +1)×(D +2D+1) → RD .
The inputs are formatted as                [︃                      ]︃
                                             a      ...   aN    x0
                                     uin := 1                         .
                                              b1    ...   bN    0

The expected outputs are
                                        Tθ (uin )[-1:, :D] := xk .

B.4     DATA GENERATION

At each training step, we produce a random training prompt uin by sampling each variable randomly:
from the isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0, I) for continuous-valued parameters, and from the
uniform distribution for discrete parameters. Concretely:

        • For the in-context linear regression tasks, input vectors x1 , . . . , xN are sampled from
          N (0D , I D ), and the unknown linear function is determined by w∗ , also drawn from
          N (0D , I D ).
        • For the synthetic tasks R EAD, L INEAR, M ULTIPLY (Section 3.3), each column of the inputs
          uin ∈ RN ×D is sampled from the isotropic Gaussian distribution N (0D , I D ). The tasks
          R EAD and L INEAR require specifying additional parameters as follows:
             – For R EAD, at each iteration, i ̸= j ∈ [N ] are sampled uniformly.
             – For L INEAR, at each iteration, the affine transformation h is sampled from
               N (0D , 3I D ).
        • For the explicit gradient task and the k-th gradient descent iterate task, the random initializa-
          tion w0 is also drawn from N (0D , I D ).

The model is trained to minimize mean squared error over the distribution of prompts.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
C.1   A BLATIONS : LINEAR ALGEBRA PRIMITIVES

In Figure 6, we train Transformers and BASE C ONVs, with MLPs, with and without LayerNorms
(LN), on the R EAD, L INEAR, and M ULTIPLY primitives from Section B.3.2. We vary the model depth
L ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8} and investigate how precision scales with number of layers. In these experiments,
we use a standard exponentially decaying LR schedule for Adam.
We show that Transformers and BASE C ONVs both achieve high precision (< O(10−9 )) on the R EAD
and L INEAR tasks. However, the Transformers struggle to implement M ULTIPLY to high precision,
and performance scales poorly with model depth. We observe that BASE C ONV without LayerNorm
generally performs the best across all three primitives, consistently outperforming BASE C ONV with
LayerNorm by 2-4 orders of magnitude.


Figure 6: Attention vs. BASE C ONV, with and without LayerNorms, on synthetic tasks. Precision
consistently scales better with depth for BASE C ONV models than for Transformers. While both
models solve R EAD and L INEAR tasks to at least 10−8 MSE, the precision of Transformers scales
poorly for the M ULTIPLY task.

Focusing on 2-layer Transformers and the M ULTIPLY task, we additionally find that precision scales
poorly with multiple scaling axes, including hidden dimension, number of heads, and MLP upscaling
factor (Figure 7).


Figure 7: Precision of (2-layer) Transformers on M ULTIPLY task scales poorly with attention
dimension (left), number of heads (middle), and MLP width (right, where MLP hidden dimension =
width × attention dimension).


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Scaling number of training iterations for 1-layer Transformer vs. BASE C ONV on the
M ULTIPLY task. Both models improve precision by 2-3 orders of magnitude as training duration
increases by 3 orders of magnitude.


Finally, we investigate the effect of training duration on precision. In Figure 8, we train 1-layer
Transformers and BASE C ONVs, with MLPs and LayerNorms, on the M ULTIPLY primitive and vary
the number of iterations for which the model is trained. Recall that since new data is sampled at
each iteration, we also effectively scale the dataset size proportionally. To keep the learning rates
consistent across runs, we scale back the scheduler step size accordingly:
                                num_iters ∈ {105 , 106 , 107 , 108 }
                                  step_size ∈ {103 , 104 , 105 , 106 }
We observe a power law, particularly clearly for BASE C ONV, as we scale from 105 to 108 iterations.
Both models achieve a 2-3 order of magnitude improvement in precision, but this requires also
increasing training duration by 3 orders of magnitude.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   A BLATIONS : HIGH - PRECISION OPTIMIZATION

In Figure 9, we try directly training on the end-to-end least squares task, simply replacing softmax
attention with BASE C ONV in the standard Transformer architecture. We find we are unable to reach
high precision using this training procedure.


Figure 9: Replacing softmax attention with BASE C ONV in the standard Transformer architecture
and training end-to-end on least squares is not enough to achieve high-precision solutions. BASE C-
ONV models trained end-to-end perform as badly as Transformers at small scale, and our largest
models perform 100× worse than parameter-matched Transformers.

In Figure 10, we ablate the effects of constant and exponentially decaying LR schedulers with Adam
(cutting off training after 106 iterations). We find that neither are able to efficiently train to machine
precision on the explicit gradients task. For exponentially decaying LR schedule, we find that the
LR steprate is a crucial parameter: on the explicit gradient task, a difference of 10, 000× between
precision saturation thresholds using 1 × 103 vs 3 × 103 for example.


Figure 10: Training with Adam on the explicit gradient task, we ablate LR for constant scheduler
(left), initial LR (middle) and LR steprate (right) for decaying scheduler.


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Figure 11, we ablate the effect of applying an EMA over the update vectors from the Adam
optimizer. Empirically, we find that this boosts the final MSE by as much as 100, 000× on the explicit
gradient task.


Figure 11: Training on the explicit gradient task, applying EMA over Adam’s update vectors
consistently boosts final MSE, by up to 5 orders of magnitude.

In Figure 12, we ablate the effect of restoring the MLPs and LayerNorms to BASE C ONV models.
Surprisingly, we find that even these architectural components worsen the model’s precision: on the
explicit gradient task, by a factor of up to 1, 000, 000× MSE. We note that due to training instability
with the BASE C ONV+MLP model, we used a less aggressive LR schedule with initial LR 10−3 and
LR steprate 104 .


Figure 12: Training on the explicit gradient task, adding MLPs and LNs consistently bottlenecks
precision: here, by up to 6 orders of magnitude.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In Figure 13, we evaluate 3-layer BASE C ONV and linear attention models trained on the explicit
gradient task. As in Section 5.2, we apply them iteratively until convergence. We then evaluate on
out-of-distribution regression targets, as in Section 3.2.
We surprisingly find that linear attention demonstrates poor numerical generality, despite training to
near machine precision on the training distribution. Beyond σ = 4, the iterations of linear attention
diverge.
This result suggests that although different polynomial architectures may equally be able to express
algorithms, they may learn solutions that exhibit vastly different numerical properties.


Figure 13: While BASE C ONV demonstrates improved numerical generality compared to end-to-end
trained Transformers, the generalization gap for linear attention is as bad as the Transformer.


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3   k- TH ITERATE GD

In this section, we investigate how well our proposed techniques can learn the k-th GD iterate tasks
as defined in Section 5:
         {(a1 , b1 ), . . . , (aN , bN ), x0 } → xk , where xi+1 = xi − η∇L(xi ), i ∈ [k − 1].    (13)
Recall that k = 1 is equivalent to the explicit gradient task, while taking k → ∞ is equivalent to
the standard in-context least squares task. Here, we are interested in understanding how well our
techniques extend to larger k, towards learning end-to-end least squares. See Appendix B for a more
detailed description of the training setup.
Our theoretical results in Section 4 imply that a k + 2-layer BASE C ONV is expressive enough to
solve the k-th iterate task to machine precision. Thus we train k + 2-layer BASE C ONV models on the
k-th iterate task for k ≥ 1 using our training recipe.

                 k            1               2               3               4
                MSE      5.0 × 10−13     2.5 × 10−11     2.5 × 10−11     3.1 × 10−10

Table 7: We can learn up to 4 iterations of GD at once with our current training techniques. Model
stability becomes a bottleneck with harder tasks.

Training on the k-iter GD task, we find our training recipe scales to k = 4 before training instability
occurs. Adding LayerNorms, we are able to train deeper models, but we find MSE worsens by at
least 1, 000× for small k: see Figure 14.


Figure 14: BASE C ONV with LayerNorms are able to stably scale to deeper models, but LayerNorms
present a precision bottleneck: even on small k, MSE degrades by over 1, 000×.


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4   I N - CONTEXT ODE SOLVING

In this section, we demonstrate the generality of our insights on the more practical setting of in-context
ODE solving. We note that solving differential equations in-context with Transformers is a framework
that has been explored in recent papers (Yang et al., 2023a; Herde et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023a),
and thus represents a natural first step towards extending our techniques to realistic scientific ML
problems.

Experimental setup. We follow the setup from Liu et al. (2023a):

       • We train on a distribution of 1D ODEs over t ∈ [−1, 1], defined by
                                        u′ (t) = α1 c(t) + α2 u(t) + α3 .                            (14)
         For each operator, we provide 25 in-context examples of forcing functions, initial conditions,
         and their corresponding solution values at a fixed time tquery ∈ [−1, 1]. We then give
         the model a query forcing function and initial condition, and the goal is to predict the
         corresponding solution at tquery .
       • We sample our parameters α1 ∼ Unif([0.5, 1.5]), α2 ∼ Unif([−1, 1]), α3 ∼ Unif([−1, 1]).
       • Initial conditions are sampled from u(0) ∼ Unif([−1, 1]).
                                                                                         ′
       • Forcing       )︂ c(t) are sampled from a Gaussian process with RBF kernel K(x, x ) =
             (︂ functions
                      ′ 2
         exp − (x−x
                 2ℓ2
                     )
                            , with length-scale parameter ℓ = 1. We sample each forcing function on
         21 equispaced points over [−1, 1].
       • ODEs are solved pseudospectrally on N = 41 nodes: we find this is sufficient for machine-
         precision solutions with FLOAT 32 datatype.

We find that our observations from least squares transfer to the setting of in-context ODEs:

Transformers struggle to learn precise solutions. We find that a 12-layer, 9M parameter Trans-
former model only achieves ≈ 10−4 MSE, almost 1010 × worse than the threshold FLOAT 32 machine
epsilon implies. Furthermore, as with least squares, we observe precision saturation with model size.
In Figure 15, we find that scaling the depth of the model by up to 2× does not improve precision.
We further note that precision saturation already seems to occur with 4-layer Transformers. We
hypothesize that the depth at which precision saturation begins is dependent on the task difficulty.


Figure 15: Transformers fail to learn precise algorithms for solving ODEs in-context. As with
least squares, precision saturates with deeper models: in our experiments, we observe no significant
performance boost between 4-layer and 24-layer Transformers.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Transformers fail to learn numerically general solutions: performance is brittle to out-
of-distribution ODE parameters (left), forcing function smoothness (middle), and initial condition
distribution (right).


Transformers exhibit brittle generalization. We observe that Transformers are not robust to
changes to the distributions of ODE parameters, forcing functions, and initial conditions. We describe
our experimental setup below, mirroring Liu et al. (2023a):

       • Out-of-distribution ODE parameters. We parameterize out-of-distribution ODEs via a scale
         parameter σop , where α1 ∼ Unif([1− 21 σop , 1+ 12 σop ]) and α2 , α3 ∼ Unif([−σop , σop ]). As
         we increase σop , we sample from a wider distribution of ODE solution operators, including
         those with larger operator norms and worse-conditioned design matrices.
       • Out-of-distribution forcing functions. We vary ℓ, the length parameter of the Gaussian
         process from which we sample our forcing functions, which effectively controls their
         smoothness.
       • Out-of-distribution initial conditions. We sample out-of-distribution initial conditions as
         u(0) ∼ Unif([−σIC , σIC ]). As we vary σIC , we widen the distribution of the solution
         values at t = 0, which increases the overall magnitudes of the solutions.

We note that in all out-of-distribution experiments, the Transformer’s MSE explodes to near O(1):
refer to Figure 16.

Our proposed techniques obtain precise and general solutions. Liu et al. (2023a) shows that
in-context ODEs can be reduced to solving least squares problems. Thus, we train a 3-layer BASE C-
ONV architecture on the explicit gradient task for the equivalent least squares problem, and apply our
model iteratively, as in Section 5. We compare the performance of our iterative model with end-to-end
Transformers, least squares solvers, and standard gradient descent applied to the equivalent least
squares problem.
We note that our ODEs reduce to least squares problems that are ill-conditioned. In this set of
experiments, we find the condition numbers of our design matrices are O(108 ). Since the theo-
retical convergence rate of gradient descent on least squares depends inversely on the condition
number (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004), we expect our iterative models and standard gradient descent
will require orders of magnitude more iterations than in the least squares problems of Section 5. As
such, we limit the number of iterations for our BASE C ONV model and standard gradient descent to
10, 000. Nonetheless, we find that our BASE C ONV model learns to high enough precision that we are
able to maintain the stability of the iterative algorithm for up to O(105 ) steps. In our experiments, we
iteratively apply our BASE C ONV model until convergence to a fixed point and report final MSEs.
We find that BASE C ONV learns a precise and general algorithm for in-context ODEs:

       • Precision. In Figure 17, we show that our BASE C ONV model, applied iteratively, converges
         to about 10−10 MSE, 1, 000, 000× higher precision than our best Transformers.
       • Generality. In Figure 18, we find that our BASE C ONV model exhibits more robust gen-
         eralization than the Transformer model: in all the out-of-distribution settings we test, our
         BASE C ONV model achieves higher precision than Transformers in-distribution. Like above,


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        we evaluate on out-of-distribution ODE parameters, forcing functions, and initial condi-
        tions. In particular, we note that the performance of our BASE C ONV model almost exactly
        matches proper gradient descent, even in out-of-distribution settings. Additionally, we find
        the generalization behavior of our BASE C ONV model matches the generalization of a proper
        least squares solver with preconditioning, except for out-of-distribution initial conditions,
        where we note that the iterative procedure suffers from slow convergence and times out at
        10, 000 iterations.

We believe these preliminary results show the promise of our techniques towards learning numerical
algorithms for more complex tasks, such as solving PDEs, directly from data.


Figure 17: In-distribution error comparison between Transformer, BASE C ONV, gradient descent, and
least squares.


Figure 18: Out-of-distribution error comparison between Transformer (orange), BASE C ONV (blue),
gradient descent (gray), and least squares (green): we evaluate out-of-distribution ODE parameters
(left), forcing function smoothness (middle), and initial condition distribution (right). BASE C-
ONV learns a numerically general algorithm that closely matches proper gradient descent and least
squares.



                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     T HEORETICAL RESULTS

This section is organized as follows:

       • We detail notation and definitions in Appendix D.1.
       • In Appendix D.2, we include theoretical results regarding the primitives from Section 3.3:
         expressivity results with BASE C ONV and attention, and iterative algorithms as compositions
         of primitives.
       • In Appendix D.3, we discuss upper and lower bounds for implementing gradient descent on
         least squares using BASE C ONV, supplementing Section 4.1.
       • In Appendix D.4, we provide theoretical details regarding the universal function approxima-
         tion properties of BASE C ONV.
       • Finally, in Appendix D.5, we provide technical details about the claims from Section 4.1
         that BASE C ONV can perfectly recover S QUARE and L INEAR.

D.1   N OTATION

We heavily borrow notation from Appendix H of Arora et al. (2023), which we recollect below. We
denote the all 1 row vector of size k, given by [1 1 . . . 1 1], and the all 0 row vector of size k,
given by [0 0 . . . 0 0], as 1k and 0k , respectively. We also construe the standard basis vector
ei as a column vector in this appendix, and adhere to the following matrix indexing convention:
M[i, j] is the entry in the ith row and the jth column, M[i, :] ∈ F1×n denotes the ith row, and
M[:, j] ∈ Fm×1 denotes the jth column of M ∈ Fm×n , where F is a field (the reader can assume
that F is the field of real numbers i.e. F = R). We then use 1m×n , 0m×n ∈ Fm×n to denote the
matrix of all 1s and 0s, respectively. We note that some notation differs from those used in earlier
sections.
Next, we denote the Hadamard product of vectors u, v ∈ Fn as u ⊙ v; the operation can be extended
to matrices by applying the Hadamard product column-wise across the matrices. This is commonly
referred to as (element-wise) gating. For vectors u, v ∈ Fn , we also denote their linear (or acyclic)
convolution as u ∗ v and cyclic convolution as u ⊛ v.

Polynomial Notation. Since convolution is equivalent to operations on polynomials, it is convenient
to use them to discuss the inputs and outputs of gated convolution models. Let us define maps
poly : Fn → F[X]/(X n ) such that
                                                    n−1
                                                    ∑︂
                                        poly(u) =         u[i]X i .
                                                    i=0


This allows us to map between vectors and polynomial. Accordingly, we also define coeff :
F[X]/(X n+1 ) → Fn as the map converting polynomials back to vectors: coeff(u(X)) = u with
u[i] defined as the coefficient in u(X) at degree i.
These operations allow us to interpret the convolution of vectors in terms of polynomial multiplica-
tion (Heideman & Burrus, 1988). More specifically, we have
                             u ∗ v = coeff (u(X) · v(X)               mod X n )

The following notation for a polynomial will be used in this section:
Definition D.1. A polynomial P (X) with degree d and some coefficients c ∈ Rd+1 is defined as,
                                                     d
                                                    ∑︂
                                          P (X) =          ci X i .
                                                     i=0


Further, the degree of P (X) will be denoted as deg(P ).


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Function Approximation. In this part, we collect notation and known results about function
approximation. We will reference some definitions from Pleśniak (2009); Petersdorff (2015).
The following notation is to denote the kth derivative of a function:
                                                                 k
                                                       d
Definition D.2. For some function f : R → R, f (k) := dx k f (x) is the kth derivative of f .


Define a set of univariate functions with a notion of continuity:
Definition D.3. We denote C k [a, b] for k = 1, 2, . . . the space of univariate functions f : [a, b] → R,
which have derivatives f (1) , . . . , f (k) that are continuous on the closed interval [a, b].

Next we define a set of multivariate functions with a notion of continuity:
Definition D.4. A function f : [a, b]n → R is in C k [a, b]n for k = 1, 2, . . . if all partial derivatives
                                          ∂α
                                                 αn f (y1 , y2 , . . . , yn )
                                 ∂xα   α2
                                   1 ∂x2 · · · ∂xn
                                    1


exist and are continuous, for every α1 , α2 , . . . , αn ∈ Z≥0 , such that α1 + α2 + · · · + αn ≤ k and
every (y1 , . . . yn ) ∈ [a, b]n .

We use the following notation for the set of all univariate polynomials:
Definition D.5. For any integer d ≥ 0, we define
                            Pd (X) = {c0 + c1 X + · · · + cd X d |ck ∈ R}.
In other words, Pd (X) is the space of univariate polynomials of degree less or equal to d.

We use the following notation for multivariate polynomials:
Definition D.6. For any integers n, d ≥ 0 , we define
                                {︄                                 ⃓        n
                                                                                    }︄
                                     ∑︂                            ⃓       ∑︂
         n                                          α1 α2       αn ⃓
        Pd (X1 , . . . , Xn ) =                 cα X1 X2 · · · Xn ⃓cα ∈ R,    αi ≤ d .
                                             n
                                                                   ⃓
                                α=(α1 ,...,αn )∈Z≥0                                 i=0


Then Pdn (X1 , . . . Xn ) is the space of n-variate polynomials of degree less or equal to d.

The following notation is for considering the pointwise absolute value of a matrix:
Definition D.7. For M ∈ RN ×D define,
                                                      max
                                              0≤i<N |M [i, j]| .
                                      ∥M ∥∞ = 0≤j<D

Now lets define the corresponding ∞−norm for functions:
Definition D.8. For g : [−1, 1]N ×D → RN ×D , define
                                                      max
                                      ∥g∥∞ = x∈[−1,1]N ×D |g(x)| .

We will use the following version of Jackson’s theorem for univariate inputs:
Theorem D.9 (D. Jackson (1930) Jackson’s Theorem for C k [−1, 1].). Let d, k be integers with
d + 1 ≥ k ≥ 0 and f ∈ C k [−1, 1]. Then
                                       (︂ π )︂k              1             ⃦     ⃦
                     inf                                                   ⃦ (k) ⃦
                   P ∈Pd ∥f − P ∥ ∞ ≤                                            ⃦ .     (15)
                                          2     (d + 1)d · · · (d − k + 2)
                                                                           ⃦f
                                                                                  ∞


We will use the following version of Jackson’s theorem for multivariate inputs:
                                                                     n
Theorem D.10 (Pleśniak (2009) Jackson’s Theorem for C k [−1, 1] ). Let d, k be integers with
                          k         n
d + 1 ≥ k ≥ 0 and f ∈ C [−1, 1] . Then
                                                    n
                                                      ⃦             ⃦
                                                      ⃦ ∂ k+1
                                                ck ∑︂ ⃦             ⃦
                             inf n
                                   ∥f − P ∥  ≤                f (x)                      (16)
                                                                    ⃦
                           P ∈Pd           ∞
                                                dk    ⃦ ∂xk+1
                                                      ⃦             ⃦
                                                           j
                                                                    ⃦
                                                           j=1                  ∞

where ck is a positive constant.


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We will use the following definition of univariate smooth functions:
Definition
⃦ (k) ⃦    D.11. We call a k times differentiable function f : [−1, 1] → R to be (k, L)-smooth if
⃦f ⃦ ≤ L.
       ∞

Next, we observe that given a univariate smooth function, there’s a univariate bounded degree
polynomial that approximates it to some error, ϵ:
Corollary D.12. For some (k, L)-smooth univariate function f (as in Definition D.11), then there
exists a polynomial Pf (x) with
                                                  (︄ √︃ )︄
                                                     k L
                                    deg(Pf ) ≤ O           +k
                                                       ϵ

such that for all x ∈ [−1, 1]
                                        |f (x) − Pf (x)| ≤ ϵ.

Proof. We will be a bit more specific on an upper bound of deg(Pf ). We pick:
                                              ⌈︄ (︃ )︃ 1     ⌉︄
                                                π L k
                                  deg(Pf ) =              +k .                                    (17)
                                                2 ϵ

Let d = deg(Pf ) where Pf is the polynomial that achieves the left hand side of Equation (15). Then
we have error at most           (︂ π )︂k              1             ⃦
                                                                    ⃦ (k) ⃦
                                                                           ⃦
                                                                    ⃦f ⃦ .
                                   2     (d + 1)d · · · (d − k + 2)         ∞

Using the definition of a (k, L)-smooth univariate function in Definition D.11 we get the error at most
                         (︂ π )︂k               L                 (︂ π )︂k    L
                                                               ≤
                            2      (d + 1)d · · · (d − k + 2)        2     (d − k)k
where the inequality follows since each d + 1, d, . . . , d − k + 2 ≥ (d − k).
Plugging in Equation (17) for d we get the error is at most:
                                   (︂ π )︂k        L
                                                             = ϵ,
                                      2     (︁ )︁ (︂ √︂ )︂k
                                              π k        k   L
                                              2              ϵ

as desired.

We will use the following definition of multivariate smooth functions that map to a single value:
Definition ⃦D.13. We call a k times differentiable f : [−1, 1]n → R to be (k, L)-smooth if
⃦
⃦ ∂k
⃦ ∂xk f (x)⃦ ≤ L for all 1 ≤ m ≤ n.
           ⃦
    m         ∞

Now we show the corresponding observation for multivariate functions and polynomials:
Corollary D.14. Let deg(Pf ) = d. For some (k, L)-smooth multivariate function f (as in Defini-
tion D.13), then there exists a polynomial Pf (x) with
                                                     (︄ √︃   )︄
                                                        k nL
                                      deg(Pf ) ≤ Ok
                                                           ϵ

such that for all x ∈ [−1, 1]n
                                        |f (x) − Pf (x)| ≤ ϵ.

Proof. Let Pf be the polynomial we get from the left hand side of Equation (16). We want to upper
bound the error as                       ⃦             ⃦
                                     n
                                 ck ∑︂ ⃦ ⃦ ∂ k+1
                                                       ⃦
                                                 f (x) ⃦ ≤ ϵ,
                                                       ⃦
                                 dk j=1 ⃦ ∂xk+1
                                         ⃦
                                              j
                                                       ⃦
                                                        ∞


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which follows if
                                                     n
                                                 ck ∑︂
                                                        L≤ϵ
                                                 dk j=1
since f is (k, L)-smooth. The above is the same as
                                                     ck nL
                                                           ≤ ϵ,
                                                      dk
or equivalently                                  √︃
                                                 k    ck nL
                                                            ≤ d.
                                                         ϵ
              ⌈︃ √︂           ⌉︃
                  k   ck nL
Picking d =             ϵ          suffices.


Arithmetic Circuit Notation. We briefly recall arithmetic circuits Peter Bürgisser and Michael
Clausen and M. Amin Shokrollah (1997). An arithmetic circuit C with variables X ≜
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } over a field F is interpreted as a directed acyclic graph, where the input nodes
are labelled by either the variables from X or constants from F and the internal nodes are labelled by
+ or × with the output being the polynomial computed at the output node.
We shall also refer to the size1 of the circuit C as the number of wires (or edges in C), the depth of the
circuit as the length of the longest path between an input node and the output node, and the width of
the circuit as the number of wires that will be intersected by a horizontal ‘cut’ through the circuit.
Moreover, the degree of a circuit is defined as the degree of the polynomial computed by the circuit.
We summarize this with the following definition:
Definition D.15. An arithmetic circuit C is an (n, s, ∆, w)-circuit if C is an n-variate arithmetic
circuit of size s, depth at most ∆, and width w.

BASE C ONV Architecture. In the following definitions we formally define the BASE C ONV model
Arora et al. (2023). To formally define BASE C ONV, we will need the Kaleidoscope hierarchy Dao
et al. (2020) as well.
To start, we define butterfly factors:
Definition
[︃        ]︃D.16. A butterfly factor of size k ≥ 2 (denoted as Bk ) is a matrix of the form Bk =
  D1 D2
             where each Di is a k2 × k2 diagonal matrix. We restrict k to be a power of 2.
  D3 D4

The following definition is for a butterfly factor matrix, which is made up of the above butterfly
factors:
                                                                                                  (n)
Definition D.17. A butterfly factor matrix of size n with block size k (denoted as Bk ) is a block
diagonal matrix of nk (possibly different) butterfly factors of size k:
                              (n)
                                           (︂[︁ ]︁ [︁ ]︁           [︁ ]︁ )︂
                            Bk = diag Bk 1 , Bk 2 , . . . , Bk n
                                                                              k



Now lets define a butterfly matrix:
                                                                     (n)
Definition D.18. A butterfly matrix of size n (denoted as B ) is a matrix that can be expressed as
                                         (n)      (n) (n)       (n)                            (n)
a product of butterfly factor matrices: B = Bn B n2 . . . B2 . Equivalently, we may define B
recursively as a matrix that can be expressed in the following form:
                                               [︄ ( n )             ]︄
                                    (n)     (n) [B 2 ]1        0
                                  B = Bn                      (n)
                                                     0     [B 2 ]2
               (n)                  (n)
(Note that [B 2 ]1 and [B 2 ]2 may be different.)
   1
     Note that if all the gates of an arithmetic circuit have bounded arity then the number of wires and gates are
asymptotically the same but in this appendix we will consider gates with unbounded arity.


                                                        35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using these butterfly matrices, lets define the Kaleidoscope Hierarchy:

Definition D.19 (The Kaleidoscope Hierarchy (Dao et al., 2020)).

                                                                                     (n)
       • Define B as the set of all matrices that can be expressed in the form B           (for some n).

       • Define (BB ∗ ) as the set of matrices M of the form M = M1 M∗2 for some M1 , M2 ∈ B.

                        w
       • Define (BB ∗ ) as the set of matrices M that can be expressed as M = Mw . . . M2 M1 ,
         with each Mi ∈ (BB ∗ ) (1 ≤ i ≤ w). (The notation w represents width.)

                        w
       • Define (BB ∗ )e as the set of n × n matrices M that can be expressed as M = SES⊤ for
                                           w
         some en × en matrix E ∈ (BB ∗ ) , where S ∈ Fn×en = [In 0 . . . 0]] (i.e. M is the
         upper-left corner of E). (The notation e represents expansion relative to n.)

Here we now formally define a BASE C ONV layer:

Definition D.20 (BASE C ONV (Arora et al., 2023)). Given an input sequence u ∈ RN ×D , where N is
the sequence length and D is the model dimension, a learned weight matrix W ∈ RD×D and biases
B1 , B2 ∈ RN ×D and a matrix of convolution filters H ∈ RN ×D , a BASE C ONV layer computes the
following:


                       y BASE C ONV := (uW + B1 ) ⊙ (H ∗ u + B2 ) ∈ RN ×D ,                            (18)


where the jth column of H ∗ u ∈ RN ×D is defined as H[:, j] ∗ u[:, j].

The corresponding pseudocode for a BASE C ONV layer is as follows:

Algorithm 1 BASE C ONV(u, W , B1 , H, B2 )
Require: Input sequence u ∈ RN ×D , linear map W ∈ RD×D , convolution filter H ∈ RN ×D , and
    bias matrices B1 , B2 ∈ RN ×D .
 1: In parallel for 0 ≤ n < N : x[n, :] = u[n, :] · W
 2: In parallel for 0 ≤ t < D : z[:, t] = H[:, t] ∗ u[:, t]

 3: In parallel for 0 ≤ t < D : y[:, t] ← (x[:, t] + B1 [:, t]) ⊙ (z[:, t] + B2 [:, t]).      ▷ See eq. (18)
 4: return y


Remark D.21. The definition of a BASE C ONV layer in Equation (19) has the input go through a
linear layer before the convolution operation. For this section we will assume the linear layer is the
identity matrix, as it is not needed for the results in this section.

Assumption D.22. Moving forward we assume the weight matrix W ∈ RD×D in Definition D.20
                                         log D
also has the property W ∈ (BB ∗ )poly-
                                   poly- log D . Consequently, each matrix W has Õ(D) parameters
and runtime for matrix vector multiplication Dao et al. (2020).

In this section, we will establish some additional basic primitives that we expect need to implement
via a BASE C ONV layer: shift and remember. We specify them below:

Definition D.23. shift(y, r, t, f )
Shift an sequential input of length N up or down by s entries:
I NPUT: y ∈ RN ×D , s ≥ 0.
O UTPUT: z ∈ RN ×D where z + = shift_down(y, s) and z − = shift_up(y, s)


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                ⎛             ⎞               ⎛               ⎞              ⎛                ⎞
                    ← y0 →                        ←0→                            ← ys →
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
                 ..                              ..                             ..
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜
           ⎜      .    ⎟
                       ⎟
                                           ⎜
                                           ⎜      .     ⎟
                                                        ⎟
                                                                           ⎜
                                                                           ⎜     .   ⎟
                                                                                     ⎟
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜ ← yi−1 → ⎟                    ⎜ ←0→ ⎟                         ⎜← yN −1 →⎟
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
         y≡⎜                          z+ ≡ ⎜                          z− ≡ ⎜
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
                       ⎟                                ⎟                            ⎟
           ⎜ ←y → ⎟                        ⎜ ←y → ⎟                        ⎜ ←0→ ⎟
           ⎜         i ⎟                   ⎜        0   ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜           ⎟                   ⎜            ⎟                  ⎜         ⎟
           ⎜      ..   ⎟                   ⎜      ..    ⎟                  ⎜     ..  ⎟
           ⎜
           ⎜       .   ⎟
                       ⎟
                                           ⎜
                                           ⎜       .    ⎟
                                                        ⎟
                                                                           ⎜
                                                                           ⎜      .  ⎟
                                                                                     ⎟
           ⎝           ⎠                   ⎝            ⎠                  ⎝         ⎠
             ← yN −1 →                      ← yN −1−s →                      ←0→

The following(︁ proposition  is        defining   the   convolution   Kernel     that   computes   the
shift_down ·, ⌊ N2 ⌋ primitive:
                    )︁

Proposition D.24. Define H ∈ R2N ×D as
                                               {︃ D
                                                 1      if k = N
                                     H[k, :] =                    .
                                                 0      otherwise

For any u ∈ R2N ×D , H ∗ u will result in
                                         (︃ )︃   (︃       )︃
                                           u1       0N ×D
                                   H∗          →             ,
                                           u2        u1

where u1 , u2 ∈ RN ×D .
                                           (︃ )︃
                                             u1
Proof. The convolution operation: H ∗             where each column of H is convolved with each
                                             u2
column of u can be restated as a polynomial multiplication. For column i, 0 ≤ i < 2N ,
                           (︃ )︃
                             u1
                 H[:, i] ∗        [:, i] = coeff((X N · u[:, i](X)) mod X 2N ).
                             u2

Note that the columns of H are all eN basis vectors and poly(eN ) = X N .
When we multiply the term through the input polynomial we get,
       coeff X N · u[0][i] + u[1][i]X + · · · + u[2N − 1][i]X 2N −1          mod X 2N
            (︁      (︁                                              )︁                   )︁

         = coeff(u[0][i]X N + u[1][i]X N +1 + · · · + u[2N − 1][i]X 3N −1        mod X 2N ).
With the lower order terms all becoming zeros, the above is same as
              coeff((0 + 0X + · · · 0X N −1
              + u[0][i]X N + u[1][i]X N +1 + · · · + u[2N − 1][i]X 3N −1 )   mod X 2N ).

After we take the mod X 2N we get
           coeff(0 + 0X + · · · + 0X N −1 + u[0][i]X N + · · · + u[N − 1][i]X 2N −1 ),
                       (︃ )︃
                         u1
which implies that H ∗       is
                         u2
                                          (︃       )︃
                                            0N ×D
                                                      ,
                                             u1
as desired.

We also define the following primitive:


                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition D.25. remember(y, r, t, f )
               ′   ′
I NPUT: y ∈ RN ×d , r ∈ Z, t ∈ Z, f : Rt−r → Rt−r+s , v1 ∈ Rr , x ∈ Rt−r , where y is defined as
below.           ′   ′
O UTPUT: z ∈ RN ×d , which is defined as follows:
                              ← v1 →                      ← v1 →
                             ⎛         ⎞               ⎛             ⎞
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜← x →⎟                   ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜← f (x) →⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜ 0s×d′ ⎟                 ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜← v2 →⎟                  ⎜ ← v2 → ⎟
                       y≡⎜             ⎟          z≡⎜                ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                                                              0
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜ 0 ⎟                     ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜     ..  ⎟               ⎜       ..    ⎟
                                                                .
                             ⎜         ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎜      .  ⎟               ⎜             ⎟
                             ⎝         ⎠               ⎝             ⎠
                                     0                             0

We will need the following BASE C ONV implementation of remember:
                                                                                               ′
Proposition D.26 (Arora et al. (2024), The Remembering Primitive). For any x ∈ Rn×d , v1 ∈
       ′                                                                   ′   ′
Rr×d , v2 ∈ Rm−r where n = t − r contained in some y ∈ RN ×d such that v1 is in the first r
rows, x is in the next n rows, 0s fill up the next s rows, and v2 are in the next m − r rows, for some
                                                                         ′   ′                    ′
3n + 3m + 2s + 2t ≤ N ′ so that for h ∈ Rn×d and W ∈ Rd ×d with x ∗ h ∈ R(n+s)×d and
                          ′                     ′
v ∗ h ∈ R(m+t)×d , where v ∈ Rm×d is defined as v2 +shift_down(v1 , m − r), there exists a
(N ′ , 8, d′ , N ′ , d′ ) − BASE C ONV that computes remember(y, r, t, f ), where f can be implemented
                                                                   ′   ′            ′   ′    ′  ′
in 1 layer of BASE C ONV through the parameters W ∈ Rd ×d , h ∈ RN ×d , b1 ∈ RN ×d , b2 ∈
    ′    ′
RN ×d as defined below:
                                    (︃(︃        )︃ (︃      )︃)︃ (︃           (︃       )︃)︃
                                         uW           b1                         b2
                            f (u) =           ′   +      ′     ⊙  u  ∗ h  +         ′
                                         0s×d        1s×d                      0s×d

We will also need the following generalization of the above result:
Corollary D.27 (Arora et al. (2023)). Let y be as in Proposition D.26 but now let f be implemented
with BASE C ONV(N, L, D, N, D). Then remember(y, r, t, f ) where t − r = n can be implemented
with BASE C ONV via (N, O(L), D, N, D) − BASE C ONV.

The rest of Appendix D will use this 5−tuple notation for BASE C ONV:
Definition D.28. Lets define a 5-tuple notation for a BASE C ONV layer as (N, ℓ, D, N ′ , D′ ) −
BASE C ONV with ℓ layers such that:

      1. Input and output are N × D matrices.
      2. Each layer is defined by Definition D.20 where N and D are replaced by N ′ and D′ . I.e.
         each layer takes in N ′ × D′ matrices and output N ′ × D′ matrices. We refer to the tuple
         (N ′ , D′ ) as the inner dimension of the model.
      3. The matrices are projected from (N, D) → (N ′ , D′ ) (and vice-versa) via a linear projection.

We state the following bounds on parameters and runtime for a single BASE C ONV layer:
Proposition D.29 (Arora et al. (2023)). An (N, 1, D, N, D) − BASE C ONV requires Õ(N D) param-
eters and runtime.

We state the following result that says arithmetic circuit can be represented as a BASE C ONV model:
Theorem D.30 (Arora et al. (2023), Theorem H.21). For any (N D, s, ∆, w)-arithmetic circuit
C, there exists an equivalent (N, ∆′ , D, N ′ , D′ ) − BASE C ONV with ∆′ = O(∆ log w), N ′ =
O(w), D′ = D that simulates C.


                                                 38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2     P RIMITIVES

In this section, we provide theoretical results about primitives.
        • In Appendix D.2.1, we implement the three primitives (R EAD, L INEAR, and M ULTIPLY)
          from Section 3.3 using BASE C ONV, each using a single layer.
        • Next, in Appendix D.2.2 and D.2.3, we briefly sketch how the three primitives R EAD,
          L INEAR, and M ULTIPLY can be used in composition to exactly express gradient descent
          and Newton’s method iterations on least squares (see Appendix A).
        • Finally, in Appendix D.2.4, we provide a proof that a single layer of causal softmax attention
          cannot exactly represent the entry-wise squaring function. As a corollary, since entry-wise
          square is a special case of M ULTIPLY, this implies that attention cannot exactly express the
          M ULTIPLY task for all arguments.

BASE C ONV parameterization We recount the parameterization of BASE C ONV from Equation 2:
            ⎛                                                   ⎞

           y := ⎝(u · Wgate + bgate ) ⊙ (h ∗ (u · Win + bin ) + bconv )⎠ · Wout + bout
                ⎜                                                      ⎟
                  ⏞      ⏟⏟        ⏞    ⏞             ⏟⏟             ⏞                                     (19)
                      Linear Projection                   Convolution

             := Wout (Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)))

where Win , Wgate , Wout are linear projections RD → RD .

D.2.1      1- LAYER BASE C ONV CAN IMPLEMENT LINEAR ALGEBRA PRIMITIVES
Below, we formally define the linear algebra primitives we discuss in Section 3.3, and we describe
our BASE C ONV weight constructions.

Read The R EAD operator, which maps inputs u ∈ RN ×d to outputs y ∈ RN ×d , is:
                                              {︃
                                                 u[k, a : b] k ̸= j
                       R EAD(i, j, a, b)(u) =                       .                                      (20)
                                                 u[i, a : b] k = j

Our implementation requires the use of the positional encodings and residual connections within the
BASE C ONV architecture. Concretely, consider the input
                                     (︃                               )︃
                                         e1       e2     ...     eN
                              uin =                                      ,
                                       u[1, :] u[2, :] . . . u[N, :]
where the basis vector ek represents the positional encoding for the k-th entry of the sequence. Define
the output of the BASE C ONV layer with residual connection:
                           y := Wout (Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)) + u).
Then the following weight construction is equivalent to R EAD(i, j, a, b):
        • Wgate (u[k, :]) := u[k, j]1D
        • Conv(Win (u))[k, :] := u[k + i − j, :] − u[k, :]
        • Wout := proj(a : b).
In particular, Wgate is defined such that
                                                        {︃ D
                                                          1        k=j
                                      Wgate (u[k, :]) =                   .
                                                          0D       k ̸= j
Thus
                                           {︃
                                                u[k + i − j, :] − u[k, :] = u[i, :] − u[j, :]   k=j
        Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)) =                                                                    .
                                                0D                                              k ̸= j
Finally,                                                            {︃
                                                                 u[i, :] k = j
                         Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)) + u =
                                                                 u[k, :] k ̸= j
so the final output of this layer will be exactly equivalent to R EAD(i, j, a, b).


                                                        39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Linear transformation           The L INEAR operator, which maps inputs u ∈ RN ×din to outputs y ∈
RN ×dout , is:
                                            L INEAR(H)(u) = uH                                                   (21)
              din        dout
where H : R         →R          is a linear map.
Define Conv(Win (u)) = 1D , Wgate = I, and Wout = H. Then
                                      Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)) = u
so
                            Wout (Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u))) = uH.
Thus the output of this layer is exactly equivalent to L INEAR(H).

Element-wise multiply The M ULTIPLY operator, which maps inputs u ∈ RN ×din to outputs
y ∈ RN ×dout , is:
                    M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout )(u) = u[:, a : a + dout ] ⊙ u[:, b : b + dout ]                        (22)

Define Conv = Identity, Win = proj(a : a + dout ), Wgate = proj(b : b + dout ), and Wout = I.
Then
             Wgate (u) ⊙ Conv(Win (u)) = u[:, a : a + dout ] ⊙ u[:, b : b + dout ].
Since Wout = I, the output of this layer will be equivalent to M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout ).

D.2.2    G RADIENT DESCENT
We assume our input is of the form
                                            (︃                         )︃
                                              a1      ...    aN     x0
                                         u=                               .
                                               b1     ...    bN     0
Our goal is to compute the gradient update
                                                       N
                                                      ∑︂
                                       x1 := x0 − η         (xT0 ai − bi )ai .                                   (23)
                                                      i=1

Intuitively, our argument proceeds similarly to the causal gradient descent construction from Ap-
pendix D.3.1:

        • First, we repeatedly apply R EAD and L INEAR to move the information {ai , bi } ∀i into e.g.
          the final entry of the sequence. Without loss of generality, we omit the rest of the sequence,
          and assume we have access to a large enough embedding dimension that we can make use
          of arbitrary amounts of memory.
          After this phase, our u is of the form
                                                                                          T
                                 . . . (x0   0   a1   ...    aN     b1   ...     bN   . . .) .

        • Next, we use M ULTIPLY and L INEAR to compute and store {xT0 ai } for all i. We will end
          up with                    (︁                                    )︁
                            u = . . . x0 0 {ai }i {bi }i {xT0 ai }i . . . .
        • We use L INEAR to compute and store {xT0 ai − bi } for all i:
                              (︁                                                                      )︁
                     u = . . . x0 0 {ai }i {bi }i {xT0 ai }i {xT0 ai − bi }i                       ... .

        • We use M ULTIPLY and L INEAR to compute and store {(xT0 ai − bi )ai } for all i:
                           (︁                                                           )︁
                  u = . . . x0 0 {ai }i {bi }i {xT0 ai }i {(xT0 ai − bi )ai }i . . . .
        • Finally, we can use L INEAR to compute the gradient update:
          u = . . . x0 − η N
                   (︁                                                                                                      )︁
                                    T
                                                  0 {ai }i {bi }i {xT0 ai }i                     {(xT0 ai − bi )ai }i
                           ∑︁
                              i=1 (x0 ai − bi )ai                                                                       ... .

                                                       40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2.3    N EWTON ’ S METHOD
We assume our input is of the form
                            (︃                                               )︃
                               a1 . . .    aN    M0 [1, :] . . .    M0 [D, :]
                       u=                                                       .
                               b1 . . .    bN      0       ...         0
Our goal is to compute the Newton’s iterate:
                                    M1 := M0 (2I − (aT a)M0 ),                                     (24)
where                                 ⎛     ⎞                 ⎛    ⎞
                                     ← a1 →                   b1
                                 a=⎝    ..               b = ⎝ ... ⎠ .
                                            ⎠,                                                     (25)
                                   ⎜        ⎟                ⎜ ⎟
                                         .
                                          ← aN →                   bN
For any matrix M ∈ Rn×p , let f lt denote the flatten operation, so that f lt(M ) represent a
vectorized version of M : f lt(M ) ∈ Rnp .
We proceed similarly to the argument from Appendix D.2.2.

        • First, we repeatedly apply R EAD and L INEAR to move all information {ai }i ∀i and f lt(M )
          to e.g. the final entry of the sequence. We omit the rest of the sequence for notational ease,
          and we assume we have access to a large enough embedding dimension that we can make
          use of arbitrary amounts of memory.
          After this phase, we have
                                       u = . . . (f lt(M0 ) {ai }i      . . .) .

        • Using L INEAR, we can copy and rearrange the ai ’s to construct copies of f lt(a) and
          f lt(aT ):              (︁                                       )︁
                         u = . . . f lt(M0 ) {ai }i f lt(aT ) f lt(a) . . . .
        • Now, note that we can represent the matrix multiplication aT a as a linear combination of
          the entries of the element-wise multiplication f lt(aT ) ⊙ f lt(a). This means that we can
          obtain f lt(aT a) using a single application of M ULTIPLY and L INEAR:
                                (︁                                                    )︁
                       u = . . . f lt(M0 ) {ai }i f lt(aT ) f lt(a) f lt(aT a) . . . .

        • By the same argument, we can obtain f lt((aT a)M0 ) using another application of M ULTI -
          PLY and L INEAR :
                            (︁                                                        )︁
                   u = . . . f lt(M0 ) {ai }i f lt(aT ) f lt(a) f lt((aT a)M0 ) . . . .

        • Finally, we have that f lt(M1 ) := 2f lt(M0 ) − f lt((aT a)M0 ) can be obtained using
          L INEAR once more:
                             (︁                                                       )︁
                    u = . . . f lt(M1 ) {ai }i f lt(aT ) f lt(a) f lt((aT a)M0 ) . . . .


                                                  41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2.4   S OFTMAX ATTENTION CAN ’ T IMPLEMENT ELEMENT- WISE SQUARING .

In this section, we consider the following parameterization of softmax attention:

                    Attn(u) = softmax (uWQ )(uWK )T + M (uWV + B),
                                        (︁                       )︁
                                                                                       (26)

where u ∈ RN ×D , WQ , WK , WV ∈ RD×D , B ∈ RN ×D , and M ∈ RN ×N is the causal attention
mask:
                                     {︃
                                        −∞ i < j
                               Mij =                                                 (27)
                                        0    otherwise
Theorem D.31. One-layer single-headed causal softmax attention cannot exactly represent the
entry-wise squaring function S QUARE : RN ×D → RN ×D s.t.
                                       S QUARE(u)ij = u2ij

for all u ∈ RN ×D .


Proof. We proceed by contradiction. Let’s assume there exists WQ , WK , WV , B ∈ RD×D and
B ∈ RN ×D such that ∀u ∈ RN ×D ,
               softmax (uWQ )(uWK )T + M (uWV + B) = S QUARE(u).
                       (︁                      )︁
                                                                                      (28)

Consider the set of inputs u ∈ RN ×D with at most one non-zero entry, defined as
                                           {︃
                                              uab (i, j) = (a, b)
                                 u[i, j] =                                             (29)
                                              0   else

for an arbitrary choice of a ∈ [N ], b ∈ [D]. Then:

                                                        0N
                                                  ⎛             ⎞
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                 ..
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜
                                            ⎜     .    ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                   N
                                                0
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                 Q := uWQ = ⎜                                          (30)
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎜u W [b, :]⎟
                                            ⎜ ab Q     ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜     ..   ⎟
                                            ⎜
                                            ⎜      .   ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎝          ⎠
                                                        0N

where Q’s rows are all 0N except for the a-th, which is uab WQ [b, :].
Similarly:
                                                        0N
                                                 ⎛               ⎞
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                 ..
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜
                                            ⎜     .    ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                0N
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                 K := uWK = ⎜                                          (31)
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎜u W [b, :]⎟
                                            ⎜ ab K     ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜          ⎟
                                            ⎜     ..   ⎟
                                            ⎜
                                            ⎜      .   ⎟
                                                       ⎟
                                            ⎝          ⎠
                                                        0N

                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
                                                               0N
                                                          ⎛            ⎞
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                     ..
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎜
                                                ⎜     .    ⎟
                                                           ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                    0N
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                     V := uWV = ⎜                                                         (32)
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                           ⎟
                                                ⎜u W [b, :]⎟
                                                ⎜ ab V     ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎜
                                                ⎜     .
                                                      ..
                                                           ⎟
                                                           ⎟
                                                ⎜          ⎟
                                                ⎝          ⎠
                                                               0N

Then the pre-softmax attention matrix, A′ = QK T , satisfies
                                {︃ 2         T
                                  uab (WQ WK   )[b, b] (i, j) = (a, a)
                         A′ij =                                        .                                  (33)
                                  0                     otherwise
Define
                                         C := u2ab (WQ WK
                                                        T
                                                          )[b, b].                                        (34)
Now consider what happens after we apply the softmax operator. Recall that the softmax operator is
defined as
                                                   exp(z[i])
                              softmax(z)[i] = ∑︁D                                            (35)
                                                  j=1 exp(z[j])

for z ∈ RD . Then A := softmax(A′ + M ) satisfies
                                  ⎧1
                                  ⎨i
                                  ⎪               i ̸= a
                                         1
                            Aij = exp(C)+a−1 i = a, j ̸= a                                                (36)
                                  ⎩ exp(C)
                                  ⎪
                                                  (i, j) = (a, a)
                                    exp(C)+a−1


Now let’s consider the output of softmax attention:
                                              O = A(V + B)                                                (37)
such that O = S QUARE(u).
Note that for i ̸= a:
                                                      i
                                                   1 ∑︂
                                       O[i, :] =        (V + B)[k, :]                                     (38)
                                                   i
                                                    k=1

and this must also be equal to 0N = S QUARE(u)[i, :]. We consider three cases:

         • First, consider i < a in order from i = 1, . . . , a − 1. Since this equality is true for all i < a,
           we can verify that (V + B)[i, :] must equal 0N for all i < a.
         • Next, looking at i = a + 1, we have
                                  1
                                     ((V + B)[a, :] + (V + B)[a + 1, :]) = 0N                             (39)
                                 a+1
           so we must have
                                        (V + B)[a, :] = −(V + B)[a + 1, :]                                (40)

         • Finally, from i ≥ a + 1, we can again conclude that (V + B)[i, :] must equal 0N for all
           i > a + 1.


                                                      43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This means the only rows of V + B that might not be zero are (V + B)[a, :] and (V + B)[a + 1, :].
Thus looking at the a-th row:
                            exp(C)
                                       (V + B)[a, :] = S QUARE(u)[a, :]
                        exp(C) + a − 1
                                                     = 0 . . . u2ab . . .
                                                       [︁                          ]︁
                                                                                  0
Recall that from above,
                                           V [a, :] = uab WV [b, :]                             (41)

Then analyzing entry-wise, we have:
                                  exp(C)
                                             (uab WV [b, j] + B[a, j]) = 0                      (42)
                              exp(C) + a − 1
for all j ̸= b, and
                                 exp(C)
                                            (uab WV [b, b] + B[a, b]) = u2ab .                  (43)
                             exp(C) + a − 1

We now plug back in our expression for C and simplifying the latter equation. For ease of notation,
                    T
denote A := (WQ WK    )bb , V := WV [b, b], and B := B[a, b]. Then the expression simplifies to:
                  V exp(Au2ab )uab + B exp(Au2ab ) = exp(Au2ab )u2ab + (a − 1)u2ab
This must hold for all non-zero values of uab . We can take V = B = 0, but we are still left with
                                      − exp(Au2ab )u2ab = (a − 1)u2ab
                                           − exp(Au2ab ) = a − 1
However, there is no choice of A such that this statement holds. This completes the proof by
contradiction.
As a corollary, we have
Corollary D.32. One-layer single-headed causal softmax attention cannot exactly represent the
entry-wise multiply function M ULTIPLY : RN ×D → RN ×dout s.t.
                   M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout )(u) = u[:, a : a + dout ] ⊙ u[:, b : b + dout ]        (44)
                N ×D
for all u ∈ R          and all choices of a, b, dout .

Proof. Note that for a = 0, b = 0, and dout = D,
                                 S QUARE(u) = M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout )(u).
Since softmax attention cannot exactly represent S QUARE for all u, it also cannot represent
M ULTIPLY for all u.


                                                         44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3     U PPER AND LOWER BOUNDS WITH BASE C ONV FOR GRADIENT DESCENT

In this section, we detail upper and lower bounds for implementing gradient descent using BASE C-
ONV , as discussed in Section 4.1.


        • Upper bounds. We provide two explicit constructions for implementing iterations gradient
          descent on linear regression: one for non-causal BASE C ONV requiring O(1) layers and
          O(D) state size, and one for causal BASE C ONV requiring O(1) layers and O(D2 ) state
          size.
        • Lower bounds. In Appendix D.3.2, we prove that our constructions are asymptotically
          optimal with respect to layers and state size.

D.3.1    U PPER BOUNDS : BASE C ONV CAN IMPLEMENT GRADIENT DESCENT FOR LINEAR
         REGRESSION

In this section, we provide weight constructions for exactly implementing gradient descent on linear
regression. Recall:
                                                N
                                            1 ∑︂ T
                                    LN =           (x ai − bi )2                                (45)
                                           2N i=1
so
                                           N
                                   1 ∑︂ T
                           ∇x LN =       (x ai − bi )ai                                          (46)
                                   N i=1
                                     (︄ N          (︄ N        )︄ )︄
                                   1 ∑︂              ∑︂
                                                             T
                                 =         bi ai −       ai ai x                                 (47)
                                   N i=1             i=1


Non-causal BASE C ONV        This weight construction uses Equation 46 to compute the gradient
descent update.
We note that non-causal constructions for in-context linear regression are standard in the literature:
e.g. Von Oswald et al. (2023); Ahn et al. (2024).
We start with input:                  ⎛                                  ⎞
                                       a1        ...       aN       aq
                                    b≡⎝                                  ⎠
                                        b1       ...          bN     0

We define the initial embedding:
                                                                   0D
                                      ⎛                                 ⎞
                                          a1   ...     aN
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜ b1     ...     bN           0 ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜ x0     ...        x0       x0 ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜0D      ...     0D          0D ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜0D      ...     0D           D⎟
                                                                   0 ⎟
                                      ⎜
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎜0D      ...     0D          aq ⎟
                                      ⎜                               ⎟
                                      ⎝                               ⎠
                                        0      ...        0         0

We drop the bottom two rows of the block matrix representation for now and show how to perform
the gradient descent update with the rest of the embedding.


                                                     45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Layer 1:
                                      ← 1D →
                        ⎛            ⎛ ⎞    ⎞ ⎛          ⎞
                            ← ai →                ← ai →
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎜ ← bi → ⎟ ⎜ ← 1 → ⎟ ⎜ ← bi → ⎟
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                                 ⎟ ⊙ ⎜← 1D →⎟ = ⎜ ← x0 → ⎟
                        ⎜← x →⎟ ⎜           ⎟   ⎜        ⎟
                        ⎜    0
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜        ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎜ ← ai → ⎟ ⎜ ← x → ⎟ ⎜← ai ⊙ x0 →⎟
                        ⎜        ⎟ ⎜     0  ⎟ ⎜          ⎟
                        ⎝        ⎠ ⎝        ⎠ ⎝          ⎠
                             D           D           D
                          ←0 →        ←0 →        ←0 →
                        ⏞   ⏟⏟   ⏞ ⏞    ⏟⏟   ⏞
                       conv(in_proj(·))        gate_proj(·)

                      ⎛                    ⎞               ⎛                    ⎞
                            ← ai →                                 ← ai →
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜ ← bi → ⎟                       ← bi →
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                                                ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜ ←x → ⎟                         ← x0 →
                                        →
                                                ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜      0    ⎟ ⏞⏟⏟⏞        ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜           ⎟ out_proj(·) ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎜← ai ⊙ x0 →⎟             ⎜   ← ai ⊙ x0 →       ⎟
                      ⎜           ⎟             ⎜                     ⎟
                      ⎝           ⎠             ⎝                     ⎠
                        ← 0D →                   ← (xT0 ai − bi )1D →

Layer 2:

                                        ← 1D →
            ⎛                          ⎛   ⎞    ⎞ ⎛                     ⎞
                       ← ai →                            ← ai →
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
                    ← bi →         ⎟ ⎜ ←1→ ⎟ ⎜           ← bi →
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎜                                                           ⎟
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
                    ← x0 →                  D           ← x0 →
                                   ⎟ ⊙ ⎜← 1 →⎟ = ⎜
            ⎜                      ⎟   ⎜        ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎜                                                           ⎟
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎜
            ⎜    ← ai ⊙ x0 →       ⎟ ⎜← 1 →⎟ ⎜ ← ai ⊙ x0 → ⎟
                                   ⎟   ⎜    D   ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
            ⎝                      ⎠ ⎝          ⎠ ⎝                     ⎠
              ← (xT0 ai − bi )1D →       ← ai →    ← (xT0 ai − bi )ai →
            ⏞           ⏟⏟         ⏞ ⏞     ⏟⏟   ⏞
                    conv(in_proj(·))             gate_proj(·)

             ⎛                             ⎞                       ⎛                ⎞
                       ← ai →                                           ← ai →
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
                       ← bi →                                       ← bi →
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜
             ⎜        ← x0 →          ⎟
                                      ⎟          →
                                               ⏞⏟⏟⏞
                                                             ⎜
                                                             ⎜     ←   x0 →       ⎟
                                                                                  ⎟
             ⎜                        ⎟                      ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜                        ⎟ out_proj(·)=Identity ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎜
             ⎜     ← ai ⊙ x0 → ⎟      ⎟
                                                             ⎜ ← ai ⊙ x0 → ⎟
                                                             ⎜                    ⎟
             ⎝                        ⎠                      ⎝                    ⎠
                 ← (xT0 ai − bi )ai →                         ← (xT0 ai − bi )ai →

Layer 3:

                                                                       ← ai →
            ⎛                          ⎞                       ⎛                    ⎞
                      ← ai →
            ⎜                    ⎟                  ⎜                         ⎟
                   ← bi →                                  ← bi →
            ⎜                    ⎟                  ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟                  ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟                  ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟                  ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜
            ⎜     ← x0 →         ⎟
                                 ⎟       →
                                                    ⎜
                                                    ⎜      ← x0 →             ⎟
                                                                              ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟      ⏞⏟⏟⏞        ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟ conv(in_proj(·)) ⎜                         ⎟
            ⎜ ← ai ⊙ x0 → ⎟
            ⎜                    ⎟
                                                    ⎜
                                                    ⎜   ←  a i ⊙ x 0 →        ⎟
                                                                              ⎟
            ⎝                    ⎠                  ⎝                         ⎠
                                                      ∑︁N
             ← (xT0 ai − bi )ai →                    ← i=1 (xT0 ai − bi )ai →

                                                      46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                   ⎛               ← ai →              ⎞
                                                         ⎛                   ⎞
                   ⎜                       ⎟                    ← ai →
                   ⎜
                   ⎜      ←   bi  →        ⎟
                                           ⎟
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                                                                ← b   →
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                                                                    i
                          ←   x   →
                                                         ⎜                   ⎟
                                0
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                   ⎜                       ⎟
                                                 →
                                                         ⎜← x0 − η∇x L(w0 ) →⎟
                        ← ai ⊙ x0 →
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                   ⎜                       ⎟    ⏞⏟⏟⏞
                   ⎜                       ⎟ out_proj(·) ⎜
                                                         ⎜
                                                                             ⎟
                                                                             ⎟
                                                                   D
                                                               ←0 →
                   ⎜                       ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                   ⎜
                   ⎜ ∑︂N                   ⎟
                                           ⎟             ⎜                   ⎟
                   ⎜←    (xT0 ai − bi )ai →⎟
                                                         ⎝                   ⎠
                                                                   D
                                                               ←0 →
                   ⎜                       ⎟
                   ⎝ i=1                   ⎠
                      ⏞       ⏟⏟        ⏞
                                  =∇x L(x0 )


Causal BASE C ONV               This weight construction uses Equation 47 to compute the gradient descent
update.
We start with input:

                                                       a1   ...     aN     0D
                                                   ⎛                            ⎞
                                                   ⎜                             ⎟
                                               b ≡ ⎜ b1     ...       bN       0 ⎟
                                                   ⎜                             ⎟
                                                   ⎝                             ⎠
                                                       0D   ...       0D   x0


We use two BASE C ONV layers to construct an initial embedding, after which each gradient descent
update step will only require a single BASE C ONV layer.
In the following construction, we use f lt to denote the flatten operation, which maps an M × N
matrix to a M N -entry vector with the same elements.
Layer 1:


          a1              ...            aN                  0D                                              ← 1D →
⎛                                                                          ⎞    ⎛                                                             ⎞
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
           b1             ...            bN                   0                                               ←1→
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜
⎜         0D              ...            0D                  x0            ⎟⊙⎜
                                                                           ⎟ ⎜                               ← 1D →                           ⎟=
                                                                                                                                              ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
          a1              ...            aN                  0D                                      b1 1D   ...     bN 1D       0D
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                ⎟
⎝                                                                          ⎠ ⎝                                                                ⎠
    f lt(a1 (1D )T ) . . .        f lt(aN (1D )T ) f lt(0D (0D )T )                  f lt(1D aT1 )     ...   f lt(1D aTN ) f lt(0D (0D )T )
⏞                                      ⏟⏟                           ⏞           ⏞                                ⏟⏟                         ⏞
                                conv(in_proj(·))                                                             gate_proj(·)


        a1         ...             aN               0D                                               a1        ...          aN           0D
⎛                                                                 ⎞                        ⎛                                                       ⎞
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
        b1         ...             bN                  0                                             b1        ...          bN            0
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜
⎜       0D         ...             0D                  x0         ⎟
                                                                  ⎟        →
                                                                                      ⎜
                                                                                      ⎜              0D        ...          0D           x0        ⎟
                                                                                                                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟       ⏞⏟⏟⏞        ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟ out_proj=Identity ⎜                                                            ⎟
       b1 a 1      ...           b1 aN              0D                                           b1 a1         ...      b1 aN            0D
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎜                                                                 ⎟                   ⎜                                                            ⎟
⎝                                                                 ⎠                   ⎝                                                            ⎠
    f lt(a1 aT1 ) . . .    f lt(aN aTN ) f lt(0D (0D )T )                                    f lt(a1 aT1 ) . . .     f lt(aN aTN ) f lt(0D (0D )T )

                                                            47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Layer 2:

                  a1      ...     aN       0D            ← 1D →                    a1        ...    aN     0D
              ⎛                                 ⎞    ⎛               ⎞        ⎛                                    ⎞
              ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜ b    . . . bN 0 ⎟    ⎟ ⎜ ← 1 → ⎟ ⎜ b1 . . . bN 0 ⎟
                                       ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜   1
              ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜ 0D . . . 0D x ⎟ ⎜ ← 1D → ⎟ ⎜ 0D . . . 0D x ⎟
              ⎜                    0 ⎟⊙⎜       ⎟=⎜                   0 ⎟
              ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜                      ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜                     ⎟
              ⎜ ← ∑︁N b a → ⎟ ⎜ ← 1D → ⎟ ⎜ ← ∑︁N b a → ⎟
              ⎜       i=1 i i        ⎟ ⎜       ⎟ ⎜     i=1 i i         ⎟
              ⎝                      ⎠ ⎝       ⎠ ⎝                     ⎠
                 ∑︁N           T           D2      ∑︁N           T
                ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →     ←1 →     ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →
              ⏞           ⏟⏟         ⏞ ⏞   ⏟⏟  ⏞
                       conv(in_proj(·))                  gate_proj(·)



                     a1     ...       aN    0D                                   a1         ...    aN    0D
                 ⎛                               ⎞                        ⎛                                    ⎞
                 ⎜                       ⎟                   ⎜                       ⎟
                 ⎜ b    . . . b      0   ⎟                   ⎜ b    . . . b      0   ⎟
                 ⎜   1          N        ⎟                   ⎜   1          N        ⎟
                 ⎜                       ⎟                   ⎜                       ⎟
                 ⎜                       ⎟                   ⎜                       ⎟
                 ⎜ 0D . . . 0D x ⎟                           ⎜ 0D . . . 0D x ⎟
                 ⎜                     0 ⎟        →
                                                 ⏞⏟⏟⏞        ⎜                     0 ⎟
                 ⎜                       ⎟                   ⎜                       ⎟
                 ⎜                       ⎟ out_proj=Identity ⎜                       ⎟
                 ⎜ ← N ba → ⎟
                       ∑︁                                    ⎜ ← ∑︁N b a → ⎟
                 ⎜        i=1 i  i       ⎟                   ⎜        i=1 i  i       ⎟
                 ⎝                       ⎠                   ⎝                       ⎠
                    ∑︁N            T
                                                                ∑︁N            T
                  ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →                        ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →

Now, we use a single BASE C ONV layer to implement a gradient descent update.


                          0D                                                                                                            0D
⎛                                 ⎞    ⎛                                           ⎞          ⎛                                                         ⎞
    a1     ...    aN                                 ←      1D       →                                          a1        ...     aN
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜ b1 . . . bN 0 ⎟ ⎜                  ← 1 →                                                                         b1      ...     bN    0
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜ 0D . . . 0D x ⎟ ⎜
⎜                    0 ⎟ ⎜          ← 1   D
                                                →
                                                           ⎟ ⎜
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                  0D        ...     0D     x0             ⎟
                                                                                                                                                        ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜ 0D . . . 0D 1D ⎟ ⎜
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜          ← 1   D
                                                →
                                                           ⎟ ⎜
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                 0D         ...     0D     1D             ⎟
                                                                                                                                                        ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
                       ⎟⊙⎜
⎜    ∑︁N               ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟=⎜                                                           ∑︁N                            ⎟
                                          D
⎜ ← i=1 bi ai → ⎟ ⎜                 ← 1         →                                                                  ←        i=1 bi ai →
⎜                                                          ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜ ∑︁N                                       2                                                                      ∑︁N
                 T                       D                                                                                            T
⎜← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →⎟ ⎜            ← 1         →                                                              ←         i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →
                       ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟ ⎜                                                                                          ⎟
⎜ ← N bi ai → ⎟ ⎜
⎜                      ⎟ ⎜        D           D     D
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                                      ∑︁N                 ⎟
                                 0    ... 0        1                                                      0D                0D
     ∑︁
⎜       i=1            ⎟ ⎜
                                                           ⎟ ⎜
                                                           ⎟ ⎜                                                     ...                  i=1 bi ai
                                                                                                                                                        ⎟
                                                                                                                                                        ⎟
⎝                      ⎠ ⎝                                 ⎠ ⎝                                                                                          ⎠
   ∑︁N                         2           2                      2                                                  2      ∑︁N
                 T           D           D           D T
  ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →     0       ... 0       f lt(1 x0 )     0D                                        ...    0D                                     T
                                                                                                                                 i=1 f lt(ai (ai ⊙ x0 ) )
⏞         ⏟⏟           ⏞ ⏞               ⏟⏟                ⏞
         conv(in_proj(·))                             gate_proj(·)


Note that the gradient
                                                      N
                                                                     (︄ N              )︄
                                                     ∑︂                ∑︂
                                      ∇x L(x0 ) =          bi ai −            ai aTi        w0
                                                     i=1                i=1

can be written as a linear combination of the vector
                                   ⎛         ∑︁N                   ⎞
                                                i=1 bi ai
                                   ⎝                               ⎠
                                     ∑︁N                       T
                                        i=1 f lt(ai (ai ⊙ x 0 )  )

                                                             48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


so we can write a weight construction for out_proj that updates w0 → w0 − η∇x L(x0 ):
              a1 . . . aN 0D                                              a1 . . . aN 0D
⎛                                                ⎞          ⎛                                                   ⎞
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
                b1 . . . bN 0                                               b1 . . . bN 0
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
                D           D                                      D                D
⎜
⎜             0      ... 0        x0             ⎟
                                                 ⎟
                                                            ⎜
                                                            ⎜     0      ... 0           x0 − η∇x L(x0 )        ⎟
                                                                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
                D           D       D                                       D              D       D
⎜
⎜             0      ... 0        1              ⎟
                                                 ⎟
                                                            ⎜
                                                            ⎜             0         ... 0        1              ⎟
                                                                                                                ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                   ∑︁N                          ⎟    → ⎜   ⎜                      ∑︁N                          ⎟
                ← i=1 bi ai →                                               ← i=1 bi ai →
⎜                                                ⎟ ⏞⏟⏟⏞                                                         ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟ out_proj ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
                ∑︁N             T
                                                                            ∑︁N                T
             ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →                                       ← i=1 f lt(ai ai ) →
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
                                N                                                              N
⎜                                                ⎟          ⎜                                                   ⎟
            D           D                                              D               D
                             ∑︁                                                             ∑︁
⎜
⎜         0      ... 0          i=1  b i ai
                                                 ⎟
                                                 ⎟
                                                            ⎜
                                                            ⎜        0       . . .    0        i=1  bi ai
                                                                                                                ⎟
                                                                                                                ⎟
⎝                                                ⎠          ⎝                                                   ⎠
    D2          D2                                             D2           D2
                      ∑︁N                      T
                                                                                     ∑︁N                      T
  0      ... 0           i=1 f lt(ai (ai ⊙ x0 ) )            0      ... 0               i=1 f lt(ai (ai ⊙ x0 ) )


D.3.2    L OWER BOUNDS : BASE C ONV CONSTRUCTIONS ARE ASYMPTOTICALLY OPTIMAL
Note that the non-causal weight construction in Appendix D.3.1 requires O(1) layers and O(D) state
size, while the causal weight construction in Appendix D.3.1 requires O(1) layers and O(D2 ) state
size. Clearly the O(D) state size requirement for non-causal models is tight, since one needs to store
the gradient ∇x L ∈ RD . In this section, we prove that the O(D2 ) state size requirement for causal
models is also asymptotically tight.

Theorem D.33. Any single-pass (causal) algorithm computing the gradient
                                                 ⎛          ⎞
                                     N
                                    ∑︂             N
                                                  ∑︂
                            ∇x L =       bj aj − ⎝   aj aTj ⎠ x
                                          j=1               j=1


given inputs {(a1 , b1 ), . . . , (aN , bN ); x}, with (ai , bi ) ∈ R(D+1)N ) and x ∈ RD , requires Ω(D2 )
state size in the worst case, where bj ∈ R and aj , x ∈ RD .

Proof. For simplicity, we pick N = D for large enough D.
                             ∑︁D
Since we can compute
      (︂∑︁           )︂        j=1 bj aj in O(D) space, we focus on computing the expen-
          N        T
sive      j=1 aj aj     x term. Assume there exists a single-pass algorithm A that computes
(︂∑︁           )︂
     N       T
     j=1 aj aj    x exactly for all choices of a1 , . . . , aD , x ∈ RD . Now consider the following
two claims:

      1. Define sD to be the state of the algorithm after seeing a1 , . . . , aD . Then we claim that sD
                                                                             ∑︁D
         must have enough information to exactly reconstruct MD := j=1 aj aTj .
         This follows since the algorithm must be correct for any value x ∈ RD takes on. In
         particular, setting x = ei for i ∈ [D], we observe that the algorithm must be able to exactly
         recover MD ei = MD [:, i], i ∈ [D].
      2. The space of matrices                    ⎧                  ⎫
                                                    D
                                                  ⎨∑︂                ⎬
                                                            aj aTj
                                                  ⎩                  ⎭
                                                      j=1

         over all choices of aj ∈ RD , j ∈ [d] contains the set of all real symmetric matrices in
         RD×D .


                                                   49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         This holds since for any real symmetric matrix A, we can obtain a set of possible aj ’s via
         its eigendecomposition Strang (2012):
                                                            D
                                                           ∑︂
                                         A = QΛQT =              aj aTj
                                                           j=1
                      √︁
         where aj =        λj Q[:, j].

From the first claim, we conclude that sD must contain enough information to be able to recover MD
for any possible value MD can take on (over all choices of a1 , . . . , aD ∈ RD ). From the second
claim, we have that the space of possible values of MD includes the set of all possible real symmetric
matrices. Since we know that this set requires (D)(D+1)
                                                     2    parameters to represent, we can conclude
that |sD | ≥ (D)(D+1)
                  2    ≥  Ω(D  2
                                 ).


                                                 50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4     BASE C ONV AND JACKSON ’ S T HEOREM

In this section we prove BASE C ONV’s ability to approximate arbitrary univariate and multivariate
smooth functions.

D.4.1    U NIVARIATE FUNCTION APPROXIMATION
We start with a special case of smooth functions that apply entry-wise univariate smooth functions:
Definition D.34. Let f : [−1, 1] → R be a (k, L)-smooth univariate function. Then define
                                         f : [−1, 1]N ×D → RN ×D
as follows. For all 0 ≤ i < N , 0 ≤ j < D, and u ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D :
                                         (f (u))[i, j] = f (u[i, j]).

Now we will state a simple observation on BASE C ONV’s ability to approximate these functions.
Lemma D.35. For any smooth function f as defined in Definition D.34, let g(x) = Pf̄ (x) with Pf̄
being the polynomial from Corollary D.12. Then for all x ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D ,
                                          ∥g(x) − f (x)∥∞ ≤ ϵ.

Proof. Follows from Definitions D.7 and D.34 and Corollary D.12.

Next we will state a construction of an arithmetic circuit for a function that applies a univariate
polynomial to all entries in [−1, 1]N ×D :
Lemma D.36. Let P(X) be a degree d univariate polynomial.                 Then there is a
(N D, O(N D), O(d), N D)-circuit to compute P (u) where P (u) is defined as follows. For an
input u ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D ,
                                   P (u)[i, j] = P (u[i, j]).

Proof. Let the univariate polynomial be
                                                        d
                                                       ∑︂
                                            P (X) =          ci X i
                                                       i=0

where coefficients ci ∈ R.
Next we state the natural arithmetic circuit to compute P (x) for x ∈ R in Algorithm 2:

Algorithm 2 circuit CP (x):
 1: s0 ← c0
 2: m0 ← 1
 3: for j = 1, 2, . . . , d do
 4:     mj ← mj−1 · x                                                         ▷ Multiplication gate
 5:     tj ← cj · mj                                                          ▷ Multiplication gate
 6:     sj ← sj−1 + tj                                                              ▷ Addition gate
 7: return sd                                                                ▷ sd is the output gate


Next we apply the above circuit in parallel to form the circuit that computes P (u) in Algorithm 3:

Algorithm 3 Circuit for P (u):
 1: for i = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1 do
 2:     for j = 0, 1, . . . , D − 1 do
 3:         z[i, j] = CP (u[i, j])                                             ▷ Do this in parallel
 4: return z                                                                ▷ z is the output matrix


                                                     51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Looking at Algorithm 2, the depth of the circuit is 3d, or O(d), since that is the bound on iter-
ations of the for loop, and each iteration we compute 3 sequential operations. Therefore it’s a
(1, O(d), O(d, O(1))-circuit.
For Algorithm 3, The width is O(N D), since we have our input of size N × D, which goes through
the circuit in parallel, as stated in Algorithm 3. Therefore we have an (N D, O(N D), O(d), O(N D))-
circuit that computes P (u).

Since BASE C ONV has the ability to represent any arithmetic circuit, we get the following:
Corollary D.37. We can implement P (u) (where P (u) is as defined in Lemma D.36 ) when deg(P ) =
d with a (N, O(d log(N D)), D, O(N D), D) − BASE C ONV.

Proof. Follows from Lemma D.36 giving us the (N D, O(N D), O(d), O(N D))-circuit for an arbi-
trary polynomial and Theorem D.30 gives us the BASE C ONV model to implement the circuit.

We will prove a tighter bound showing we can represent P (u) using a constant number of BASE C ONV
layers (for constant deg(P )):
Theorem D.38. We can implement P (u) when deg(P ) = d with an (O(N ), O(d), D, O(N ), D) −
BASE C ONV model.

Proof. We will convert the steps done in Algorithm 2 to layers of BASE C ONV. Since Algorithm 3
is essentially running Algorithm 2 in parallel over all entries of input u ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D , the latter
happens automatically in our BASE C ONV implementation.
For this proof, define
                                         Pj (X) = X j
and let Ci be the matrix of size N × D and all the entries are ci .
We expand the input to our BASE C ONV layers as follows,
                                                 u′
                                           (︃        )︃
                                       u=               .
                                              03N ×D
This means that the size of the internal dimension of our BASE C ONV layers will be (4N, D).
To begin iterations of the for loop we need to store initial values into the extra space in u. Taking us
from                                 ⎛ ′ ⎞
                                         u                u
                                                     ⎛         ⎞
                                         N ×D            N ×D
                                     ⎜0              ⎜1
                                 u = ⎝ N ×D ⎠ → ⎝ N ×D ⎠ =: u0
                                              ⎟                ⎟
                                       0               1
                                       0N ×D              C0
                                        (︄ N ×D )︄
                                             0
We do this via BASE C ONV(u′ , I D×D ,       1N ×D   , 04N ×D , 14N ×D ) which computes
                                             1N ×D
                                               C0
                           ⎛ N ×D ⎞⎞ ⎛
                   u        0                        u
            ⎛⎛           ⎞                       ⎛       ⎞         ⎞
                  N ×D        N ×D                  N ×D
            ⎜⎜0     ⎟ D×D ⎜1                     ⎜0
            ⎝⎝0N ×D ⎠ I  + ⎝ N ×D ⎠⎠ ⊙ ⎝04N ×D ∗ ⎝ N ×D ⎠ + 14N ×D ⎠ .
                                   ⎟⎟ ⎜                  ⎟         ⎟
                            1                      0
              0N ×D           C0                   0N ×D
The above simplifies to
                                         ⎛ N ×D ⎞⎞
                                    u     0
                             ⎛⎛          ⎞
                             ⎜⎜0N ×D ⎟ ⎜1N ×D ⎟⎟ (︁ 4N ×D )︁
                             ⎝⎝0N ×D ⎠ + ⎝ N ×D ⎠⎠ ⊙ 1       ,
                                          1
                                 N ×D
                               0            C0
which gives us
                                                u
                                          ⎛          ⎞
                                          ⎜1N ×D ⎟
                                          ⎝ N ×D ⎠ =: u0 ,
                                           1
                                             C0

                                                     52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as desired
This was done with a (4N, 1, D, 4N, D) − BASE C ONV layer.
Our goal is, at the end of iteration j to compute uj ∈ R4N ×D such that,
                                                     u
                                ⎛                                        ⎞
                                                   Pj (u)
                         uj = ⎝                                          ⎠.
                                ⎜                                        ⎟
                                                Cj ⊙ Pj (u)
                                   C0 + C1 ⊙ P1 (u) + · · · + Cj ⊙ Pj (u)

We will view the above matrix in terms of the variables in the Algorithm 2 as follows
                                          u                            u
                      ⎛                                       ⎞     ⎛ ⎞
                                       Pj (u)                       ⎜mj ⎟
                                                              ⎠ =: ⎝ t ⎠ .
                      ⎜                                       ⎟
                      ⎝             Cj ⊙ Pj (u)                         j
                        C0 + C1 ⊙ P1 (u) + · · · + Cj ⊙ uj             sj

The for loop runs for values of 1 ≤ j ≤ d which the remainder of this proof will replicate. There
are three lines in the for loop in Algorithm 2 which we will cover how these operations happen in
constant number of BASE C ONV layers.
In line 4, the first line in the for loop computes
                                              u        u
                                           ⎛      ⎞ ⎛      ⎞
                                           ⎜m ⎟     ⎜m ⎟     (1)
                                  uj−1 = ⎝ j−1 ⎠ → ⎝ j ⎠ =: uj .
                                             tj−1     tj−1
                                             sj−1     sj−1
Note that mj = mj−1 ⊙ u.
                                                          (1)
We use the remember primitive to compute uj from uj−1 . Define f : R2N ×D → R2N ×D as
follows                         (︃      )︃ (︃         )︃
                                    u            u
                              f           =              .
                                   mj−1       mj−1 ⊙ u
                                                                                        (1)
If we can compute f with BASE C ONV layers then we can compute uj                             for uj−1 by calling
remember(uj , 0, 2N − 1, f ).
                   (︃(︃ )︃                                   )︂)︃
                       u
                                                   (︂
                                 D×D    2N ×D           N ×D
We show BASE C ONV            ,I     ,0               1
                                              , H, 0N ×D          maps
                       mj
                                    (︃      )︃    (︃ )︃
                                         u             u
                                                →            ,
                                       mj−1          mj
where H is defined as in Proposition D.24. We plug the matrices into the BASE C ONV layer as
follows:       (︃(︃      )︃                 )︃ (︃     (︃      )︃ (︂        )︂)︃
                     u         D×D    2N ×D               u         1 N ×D
                            ·I     +0         ⊙ H∗              + 0N ×D         .
                    mj−1                                 mj−1
We know from Proposition D.24 that this convolution operation is a shift down by N rows. Therefore
the above simplifies to
                   (︃(︃      )︃                 )︃ (︃(︃         )︃ (︂         )︂)︃
                         u                              0N ×D            N ×D
                                · I D×D + 02N ×D ⊙                 + 10N ×D        ,
                        mj−1                               u
which simplifies to
                      (︃          )︃    (︃       )︃       (︃        )︃        (︃      )︃
                            u            1N ×D                  u                  u
                                       ⊙              =                  =f              ,
                           mj−1            u                mj−1 ⊙ u               mj

as desired. Therefore by Proposition D.26, line 4 can be computed by (4N, 8, D, 4N, D) −
BASE C ONV.


                                                          53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For line 5 of the for loop we need to compute
                                          u        u
                                       ⎛      ⎞ ⎛      ⎞
                                 (1)   ⎜m ⎟     ⎜m ⎟     (2)
                               uj = ⎝ j ⎠ → ⎝ j ⎠ =: uj .
                                         tj−1      tj
                                         sj−1     sj−1
Note that tj = Cj ⊙ mj .
                                                                                                      (2)
To do this we will use three BASE C ONV layers. We use the remember primitive to compute uj
       (1)
from uj . Define g : R2N ×D → R2N ×D as follows,
                                 (︃      )︃ (︃         )︃
                                     mj          mj
                               g           =              .
                                    tj−1       Cj ⊙ mj
                                                                                (2)
If we can compute g with BASE C ONV layers then we can compute uj                     for uj−1 by calling
          (1)
remember(uj , N, 3N − 1, g).
Indeed,   we
          (︂         show       the   g   can    be   computed      by    first                computing
             (︁ mj )︁ D×D 2N ×D 2N ×D (︂ N ×D )︂)︂
BASE C ONV tj−1 , I            ,0    ,0       1
                                            , 0N ×D :
              (︃(︃      )︃                )︃ (︃        (︃      )︃ (︃ N ×D )︃)︃
                    mj                                     mj       1
                           · ID×D + 02N ×D ⊙ 02N ×D ∗            +              ,
                   tj−1                                   tj−1      0N ×D
which simplifies to                (︃(︃          )︃)︃        (︃(︃ N ×D )︃)︃
                                           mj                    1
                                                        ⊙                   .
                                          tj−1                   0N ×D
This results in                                   (︃           )︃
                                                        mj
                                                                    .
                                                       0N ×D
                                            (︂(︁                  (︂      )︂   (︂      )︂)︂
                                                 mj )︁               N ×D         N ×D
We pass into the next layer, BASE C ONV 0N ×D          , I D×D , 01N ×D , H, 01N ×D         where H is
defined as in Proposition D.24:
              (︃(︃       )︃           (︃ N ×D )︃)︃ (︃         (︃        )︃ (︃ N ×D )︃)︃
                    mj          D×D     0                          mj        1
                            · I     +              ⊙     H  ∗              +              .
                   0N ×D                1N ×D                    0N ×D       0N ×D
Since the kernel H is as in Proposition D.24, this simplifies to
                           (︃(︃       )︃ (︃(︃        )︃ (︃ N ×D )︃)︃)︃
                                 mj           0N ×D         1
                                        ⊙              +               .
                                1N ×D           mj          0N ×D
The above simplifies further to       (︃            )︃       (︃  )︃
                                            mj             1N ×D
                                                         ⊙          ,
                                           1N ×D            mj
which results in:                                  (︃ )︃
                                                     mj
                                                         .
                                                     mj
                                (︂(︁ )︁                           (︂ N ×D )︂)︂
We pass the above to BASE C ONV m    j
                                    mj , I
                                           D×D
                                               , 02N ×D , 02N ×D , 1 Cj        :
               (︃(︃ )︃                     )︃ (︃            (︃ )︃ (︃             )︃)︃
                   mj                                         mj        1N ×D
                        · I D×D + 02N ×D ⊙ 02N ×D ∗                 +
                   mj                                         mj          Cj
which simplifies to                       (︃ )︃ (︃       )︃
                                            mj     1N ×D
                                               ⊙            .
                                            mj      Cj

The above results in                (︃                  )︃        (︃ )︃
                                           mj                    mj
                                                             =g         ,
                                         Cj ⊙ m j               tj−1

                                                         54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as desired.
Therefore by Corollary D.27, line 5 was computed by (4N, O(1), D, 4N, D) − BASE C ONV.
For line 6, the final line of the for loop, we want
                                               u        u
                                            ⎛      ⎞   ⎛ ⎞
                                     (2)    ⎜ mj ⎟     ⎜mj ⎟
                                   uj = ⎝            → ⎝ ⎠ =: uj .
                                               tj ⎠     tj
                                              sj−1      sj
Note that sj = sj−1 + tj
Define function h : R2N ×D → R2N ×D as follows,
                                  (︃     )︃ (︃           )︃
                                     tj           tj
                                h          =                .
                                    sj−1       sj−1 + tj
If we can compute h with BASE C ONV layers then we can compute uj for uj−1 by calling
            (2)
remember(uj , 2N, 4N − 1, h).
Indeed        we
              (︃(︃         show
                           )︃         that      h     can )︃ be    computed  by     computing
                      tj
BASE C ONV                    , 0D×D , 12N ×D , H, 02N ×D , where kernel H ∈ R2N ×D is defined
                     sj−1
as:                                                      {︃ D
                                                           1     if k ∈ {0, N }
                                             H[k, :] ≡
                                                           0D    otherwise.
.
This layer computes
                (︃(︃               )︃                       )︃    (︃     (︃        )︃                )︃
                             tj          2N ×D      2N ×D                     tj             2N ×D
                                        ·0       +1              ⊙ H∗                   +0                .
                            sj−1                                          sj−1
This simplifies to                         (︃  (︃     )︃)︃ (︃  (︃     )︃)︃
                              (︁ 2N ×D )︁         tj              tj
                                1         ⊙ H∗            = H∗             .
                                                 sj−1            sj−1
Now
(︃      )︃ compute this convolution for column i, 0 ≤ i < 2N . For notational convenience, let
       we
    tj
           be noted as matrix V. Then we have:
   sj−1

                    H[:, i] ∗ V[:, i] = coeff (1 + X N )V[:, i](X) mod X 2N ,
                                             (︁                            )︁

where (1 + X N ) is the polynomial representation of the columns of H (since there’s a one in the 0th
index and a one in the N th index of each column).
The expression simplifies to
                                   coeffV[:, i](X) + V[:, i](X)X N            mod X 2N ,
which can be broken down to
      coeff V[0][i] + V[1][i]X + · · · + V[2N − 1][i]X 2N −1    mod X 2N
           (︁(︁                                              )︁            )︁

       + coeff V[0][i]X N + V[1][i]X N +1 + · · · + V[2N − 1][i]X 3N −1      mod X 2N
                (︁(︁                                                    )︁            )︁

with the lower order terms in the second coefficient vector being zeros,
 coeff V[0][i] + V[1][i]X + · · · + V[2N − 1][i]X 2N −1         mod X 2N
       (︁(︁                                                 )︁           )︁

  + coeff 0 + 0X + · · · + 0X N −1 + V[0][i]X N + · · · + V[2N − 1][i]X 3N −1                                 mod X 2N
            (︁(︁                                                              )︁                                         )︁


After taking mod X 2N we get
             coeff V[0][i] + V[1][i]X + · · · + V[2N − 1][i]X 2N −1
                  (︁                                                 )︁

              + coeff 0 + 0X + · · · 0X N −1 V[0][i]X N + · · · V[N − 1][i]X 2N −1
                     (︁                                                            )︁



                                                            55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first set of coefficients is the input matrix as is. And the second one is the input matrix shifted
down as seen in Proposition D.24. Therefore when we add these vectors we are doing
                                   (︃      )︃ (︃       )︃     (︃      )︃
                                       tj       0N ×D             tj
                                             +            =h             ,
                                      sj−1        tj             sj−1

as desired. Therefore by Proposition D.26, line 6 is computed with by (4N, 1, D, 4N, D) −
BASE C ONV.
The sd matrix gives us C0 + C1 ⊙ m1 + · · · + Cd ⊙ md . Recalling that
                                                               d
                                                              ∑︂
                    C0 + C1 ⊙ m1 + · · · + Cd ⊙ md ≡                 Cj ⊙ uj = P (u),
                                                              j=0

and hence sd is our desired output.
We have d layers, each consisting of O(1) BASE C ONV layers. Giving us O(d) many layers to
implement Algorithm 2.
Therefore, via the ability to stack BASE C ONV layers to do function composition, the for loop was
computed by a (4N, O(d), D, 4N, D) − BASE C ONV , as desired.

The following states BASE C ONV’s ability to approximate a univariate smooth function:

Proposition
(︂      (︂ √︂ D.39.
               )︂   Let f be the (k,
                                  )︂ L) -smooth function defined in Definition D.34. Then there is a
           k L
   N, O      ϵ + k, D, (N D), D − BASE C ONV model that approximates f within error ϵ.



Proof. Follows from Corollary D.12, Lemma D.35, and Theorem D.38.

D.4.2    M ULTIVARIATE FUNCTION APPROXIMATION
We consider the following multivariate functions:

Definition D.40. For 0 ≤ 1 < N, 0 ≤ j < D, let f̄ i,j : [−1, 1]N ×D → R be a (k, L)-smooth
multivariate function. Then define
                                    f (x) : [−1, 1]N ×D → RN ×D
as follows. For all 0 ≤ i < N , 0 ≤ j < D, u ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D define
                                        f (u)[i, j] := f̄ i,j (u).

Lemma D.41. For any smooth function f as defined in Definition D.40, let g(X1 , . . . , XN ×D ) =
Pf̄ (X1 , . . . , XN ×D ) be the polynomial from Corollary D.14. Then for all x ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D ,

                                       ∥g(x) − f (x)∥∞ ≤ ϵ.

Proof. Follows from Definitions D.7 and D.40 and Corollary D.14.

Next we will state a construction for an arithmetic circuit for a function that takes a [−1, 1]N ×D
variable input:

Lemma
(︁          D.42. Let P (X) be )︁a degree d multivariate polynomial.              Then there is a
   n, O(d · nd ), O(d log(n)), O(nd ) -circuit to compute P (u) on any input u ∈ [−1, 1]n .

Proof. Let the multivariate polynomial be as defined in Definition D.6. We build the circuit to
compute this in Algorithm 4,


                                                   56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 circuit CP (x):
                                                    ∑︁n
 1: for α = (α1 , . . . , αn ) ∈ Zn  ≥0 such that     i=1 αi ≤ d do
 2:     mα ← 1
 3:     for i = 1, 2, . . . , n do                                                 ▷ Done in parallel
 4:         if αi ̸= 0 then
 5:             mα ← mα · xα       i
                                     i


 6:     tα ← cα · mα
                                              ∑︁n
 7: for α = (α1 , . . . , αn ) ∈ Zn
                                  ≥0 such that i=1 αi ≤ d do
            ∑︁
 8:     s ← tα                                                                      ▷ Done in parallel
 9: return s


We compute the for loop starting on line 3 by making multiplications in parallel. Therefore obtaining a
depth of O(log(d)). We also have the for loop starting on line 7, making pairwise addition operations,
resulting in a depth of O(d log(n)).

We again use the result that BASE C ONV can represent any arithmetic circuit to get:
Corollary D.43. We can implement      (︁ P (u) (where P (u) is as defined in
                                                                           )︁ Lemma D.42) when
deg(P (X1 , . . . , XN D )) = d with a N, O(d log(N D)), D, O((N D)d ), D − BASE C ONV where
u ∈ [−1, 1]N ×D .

Proof. Lemma D.42(︁ gives us the arithetmic circuit that computes
                                                          )︁      this polynomial. Then via Theo-
rem D.30 we get a N, O(d log(N D)), D, O((N D)d ), D − BASE C ONV model to implement the
circuit.

Finally we state BASE C ONV’s ability to approximate multivariate smooth functions:
Proposition
(︁            D.44. Let f be the function
                                     )︁    defined in Definition D.40. Then there is a
   N, O(d log(N D)), D, O((N D)d ), D − BASE C ONV model that approximates f to within error ϵ,
              √︂
with d = Ok ( k N DL
                  ϵ ).


Proof. We get the existence of a polynomial that approximates f for some ϵ from Corol-
lary
(︁    D.14. Then via Corollary D.43)︁ we get that we can represent any polynomial, implying
   N, O(d log(N D)), D, O((N D)d ), D − BASE C ONV represents any polynomial that approximates
the multivariate smooth function f .


                                                          57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5     Z ERO POPULATION GRADIENT BASE C ONV ON PRIMITIVES RECOVERS EXACT SOLUTION

In this section, we prove we can recover the functions L INEAR and M ULTIPLY exactly given the
expected gradients of their respective loss functions being 0 along with some necessary assumptions.

D.5.1    N OTATION
We start by defining additional notation for this subsection.
For readability, we will redefine how we index an entry of a 2 dimensional matrix - note that we are
using 0 indexing [N ] = {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}. For an entry of matrix A[i, j] where i is the row number
and j is the column number, we denote it as Ai,j . Now recall our BASE C ONV layer in 18, we will
define the parameters of the layer as follows. We have the weight matrix, W = {Wi,j } ∈ Rd×d ,
                                                                                    (1)
the kernel matrix, K = {Ki,j } ∈ RN ×d , the first bias matrix B (1) = {Bi,j } ∈ RN ×d and
                                           (2)
the second bias matrix, B (2) = {Bi,j } ∈ RN ×d . We denote the array of these parameters as
     (︁                 )︁
θ = W , K, B (1) , B (2) . Therefore we have the BASE C ONV layer operation,
                                      (︂            )︂ (︂               )︂
                                                (1)                 (2)
  Z = BASE C ONV (θ, u, c, dout ) def
                                  =      uW + B       ⊙   K ∗ u + B        [:, c : c + dout − 1] (48)

for some integers dout ∈ [d] (with dout ̸= 0) and c ∈ [d − dout ] that we use to truncate columns of
the output layer to match function input and output size as stated below.
Recall that u is the input to a BASE C ONV layer, u = {ui,j } ∈ RN ×d .
Moving onto our target function:
                                           f : RN ×d → RN ×dout .
Naturally, for i ∈ [N ] and j ∈ [dout ], we’ll denote (f (u)) [i, j] by f (u)i,j ).
Next, we define the training input distribution.

D.5.2    T RAINING I NPUT D ISTRIBUTION
      1. Let ∆ be the training distribution on RN ×d such that:
                                                         mk
                                                              , if mk is odd for some k then E Πk um
                                                                                              [︁         ]︁
Assumption D.45. Given a monomial, Πk (uik ,jk )                                                   ik ,jk =
                                                                                                      k

                              m
0. Otherwise, E [Πk (uik ,jk ) k ] > 0.
Assumption D.46. Assume that the training data is generated as

        • u ∼ ∆ as input
        • Output is y = f (u) + E where E = {Ei,j } ∈ RN ×dout is the random error matrix such that
            – The distributions on E and ∆ are independent. (Call the distribution on E to be ∆E )
            – E[Ei,j ] = 0 for all (i, j) ∈ [N ] × [dout ]

Loss function

        • Define for i ∈ [N ] and j ∈ [dout ]
                                                             (︂                      )︂2
                                                           2
                            Li,j (u, θ, E) = (Zi,j − yi,j ) = Zi,j − f (u)i,j − Ei,j                   (49)

                   ∑︁N −1 ∑︁dout−1
        • L(u) =      i=0      j=0     Li,j (u, θ, E)

        • Training loss, L(t) (θ) = L(t) = E u∼∆ [L(u)]
                                                  E∼∆E
                                ∑︁N −1 ∑︁dout−1
        • ∇θ L(t) (θ) = Eu,E         i=0    j=0    ∇θ Li,j (u)


                                                        58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                             (︁                       )︁
The Goal Given a target function f , what can we infer for θ =                    W , K, B (1) , B (2) from
∇θ L (θ) = 0?

      1. Ideally, we would like to assume that f can be represented exactly by 1-layer BASE C ONV.
      2. For now, let’s assume that f (u)i,j only depends on ui,:
         This includes as special cases:
            • f (u) = u:,a:a+dout −1 ⊙ u:,b:b+dout −1 for some integers a, b ∈ [dout ]
            • f (u) = u · W for W ∈ Rd×d

We want to prove that when the gradients of the expected loss function are 0, then the set of parameters
that satisfy the condition perform exactly these functions.

D.5.3    A GENERIC PARTIAL DERIVATIVE
Let’s
(︁     try and reason  )︁ as much as we can for a generic partial derivative. Let x ∈ θ =
   W , K, B (1) , B (2) . Then from Equation (49), we have that for any (i, j) ∈ [N ] × [dout ]:

                               ∂Li,j   (︂                      )︂ ∂Z
                                                                    i,j
                                     =2 Zi,j − f (u)i,j − Ei,j
                                ∂x     (︂                   )︂     ∂x
                                              (1)     (2)     (3)
                                      =2 Ti,j − Ti,j − Ti,j         ,

where
                                           (1)       ∂Zi,j
                                         Ti,j = Zi,j        .
                                                      ∂x
                                           (2)           ∂Zi,j
                                         Ti,j = f (u)i,j       .
                                                          ∂x
                                           (3)       ∂Zi,j
                                         Ti,j = Ei,j       .
                                                      ∂x
                             (3)
Proposition D.47. Eu,E [Ti,j ] = 0.

Proof. Follows from the facts that ∆ and ∆E are independent, and E[Ei,j ] = 0.

                                             (3)
From now on, we will ignore the term Ti,j because of Proposition D.47 we can (in expectation)
               (3)
assume that Ti,j = 0.

D.5.4    S ETTING THE GRADIENTS TO 0
In this section we will prove the gradients of the loss function are 0, under some given assumptions
on the input data and parameters, when the functions we’re learning are M ULTIPLY and L INEAR. In
order to do so we need to have another restriction on the target function f which is that f must be
defined with a linear map, W ∈ Rd×d that has non-zero columns. We make further assumptions on
W , B (1) , K, B (2) , which we will justify later. We note that this assumption is satisfied for both the
M ULTIPLY and L INEAR functions.
                                                                                           (︂            )︂
                                                                                               (2)
Assumption D.48. For all j ∈ [dout ] and c ∈ [d − dout ], (i) either (K:,j+c ̸= 0) or B:,j+c ̸= 0
and (ii) W:,j+c ̸= 0. Further, we have B (1) = 0.
 The target function f : RN ×d → RN ×dout is
                                      (︂       (1)  (2)
                                                        )︂
      1. Implementable with 1-layer BC W , K, B , B        such that for all j ∈ [dout ] and
         c ∈ [d − dout ], W :,j+c ̸= 0


                                                    59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         2. f (u)i,j only depends on ui,:

We make another assumption to assist with the following theorems,
                                                       ⟨︁           ⟩︁
Assumption D.49. For all j ∈ {c, . . . , c + dout − 1}, W:,j , W :,j ̸= 0 and W :,j ̸= 0.

The main results are as follows. First for the M ULTIPLY function we have
Theorem D.50. Given Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, and a function
                      f (u, a, b, dout ) = u:,a:a+dout −1 ⊙ u:,b:b+dout −1 ,
where a, b ∈ [d − dout ] and with a ≤ b and c = a2 . Let θ0 be such that, E∇θ L|θ←θ0 = 0 then
BASE C ONV(u, θ0 )[:, c : c + dout ] = f (u).

We prove a similar result for L INEAR function:
Theorem D.51. Given Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, D.49, and a function
                                       f (u) = uW .
Let θ0 be such that, E∇θ L|θ←θ0 = 0 with c = 0 and dout = d. Then BASE C ONV(u, θ0 , 0, d) =
f (u).

The following is to provide information about each entry in the output of a BASE C ONV layer.
Lemma D.52. For all (i, j) ∈ [N ] × [dout ], the entries of a resulting layer of BASE C ONV, Z, are:
          (︄(︄d−1               )︄            )︄ (︄(︄ i                        )︄         )︄
                                        (1)                                          (2)
              ∑︂                                       ∑︂
   Zi,j =         ui,ℓ · Wℓ,j+c + Bi,j+c ·                 Kk,j+c · ui−k,j+c + Bi,j+c           (50)
                     ℓ=0                                          k=0


Proof. To begin, from Equation (48), we know that a layer of BASE C ONV yields a matrix Z as,
                      (︂              )︂ (︂               )︂
                 Z = u · W + B (1) ⊙ K ∗ u + B (2) [:, c : c + dout − 1] .

Looking at the u · W operation, we know that for a row i ∈ [N ] and column j ∈ [dout ], the vector
dot product is computed as
                                                d−1
                              ⟨︁ ⊤           ⟩︁ ∑︂
                                ui,: , W:,j+c =     ui,ℓ · Wℓ,j+c .
                                                            ℓ=0
Meaning each entry in the resulting matrix is defined as such
                                                  d−1
                                                  ∑︂
                                (u · W )i,j+c =       ui,ℓ · Wℓ,j+c .
                                                           ℓ=0
                           (1)
To sum the matrix B to this operation, we simply add the corresponding index giving us
                                           (︄d−1              )︄
                   (︂              )︂
                                                                    (1)
                                             ∑︂
                               (1)
                      u·W +B            =        ui,ℓ · Wℓ,j+c + Bi,j+c .                       (51)
                                             i,j+c
                                                           ℓ=0
Then, for the convolution operation between K and u, that’s computed column by column, we have
for all j ∈ [dout ]:
                                 (K ∗ u):,j+c = K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c ,
i.e. for any i ∈ [N ],
                                                             i
                                                            ∑︂
                                 (K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c ) [i] =         Kk,j+c · ui−k,j+c .
                                                            k=0
Finally, to sum B (2) we add the corresponding entry giving us
                                           (︄ i                  )︄
                     (︂               )︂
                                                                     (2)
                                             ∑︂
                                  (2)
                        K ∗u+B           =      Kk,j+c · ui−k,j+c + Bi,j+c .                    (52)
                                                     k=0
Combining Equations (51) and (52), gives us Equation (50) as expected.
   2
       These assumptions are without loss of generality.


                                                           60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.5.5     S OME PARTIAL DERIVATIVES ARE ALWAYS ZERO
To simplify future computations in this section, we will state a simple lemma on some partial
derivatives that always go to 0.
Lemma D.53. Fix i ∈ [N ] , j ∈ [dout ] , j ′ ∈ [d] , c ∈ [d − dout ]. Then for any j ′ ̸= j +c, 0 ≤ ℓ < N ,
and 0 ≤ k < N we have,
                                       ∂Zi,j           ∂Zi,j
                                                 =            = 0.
                                      ∂Wℓ,j ′         ∂Kk,j ′
Further, any (i, j + c) ̸= (i′ , j ′ ) we have,
                                                 ∂Zi,j         ∂Zi,j
                                                (1)
                                                          =        (2)
                                                                          = 0.
                                              ∂Bi′ ,j ′       ∂Bi′ ,j ′

Proof. Follows from Equation (50) and definition of partial derivatives.

D.5.6     G ENERIC FORM OF PARTIAL DERIVATIVES PLUS A CONSEQUENCE
Given Lemma D.52 we can conclude the following.
Lemma D.54. For 0 ≤ i < N , 0 ≤ j < dout , and 0 ≤ c < d − dout , any entry
               (1)
x ∈ {Wi,j+c , Bi,j+c },
                ∂Zi,j  (︂
                                                  (2)
                                                        )︂ ∂ (︂⟨︁
                                                                                   (1)
                                                                                         )︂
                                                                  u⊤
                                                                               ⟩︁
                      = (K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c ) [i] + Bi,j+c            i,: , W:,j+c + Bi,j+c
                 ∂x                                        ∂x
                                        (2)
then for any entry x ∈ {Ki,j+c , Bi,j+c },
             ∂Zi,j  (︂⟨︁
                                         (1)
                                              )︂ ∂ (︂
                                                                                (2)
                                                                                     )︂
                   = u⊤
                                     ⟩︁
                         i,: , W:,j+c + Bi,j+c ·      (K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c ) [i] + Bi,j+c .
              ∂x                                 ∂x

A consequence of Lemma D.54 is the following.
                       (︁                   )︁
Corollary D.55. Let θ = W , K, B (1) , B (2) = 0. Then for all parameter variables x, we have
                                                         ∂Zi,j
                                                               = 0.
                                                          ∂x
Specifically,
                                                  ∇θ L (θ) |θ=0 = 0.

Corollary D.55 implies that initializing θ = 0 is not a good choice for initializing parameters since it
is a local minima.
We can exactly figure out the partial derivatives in Lemma D.54 by the following.
Lemma D.56. Fix i ∈ [N ] , j ′ ∈ [d]. Then for any 0 ≤ ℓ < N we have,
                                 ∂     (︂⟨︁
                                                                (1)
                                                                      )︂
                                           u⊤
                                                         ⟩︁
                                            i,: , W:,j ′    + B i,j ′    = ui,ℓ
                              ∂Wℓ,j ′
and
                                        ∂   (︂⟨︁
                                                 ⊤
                                                              ⟩︁     (1)
                                                                           )︂
                                        (1)
                                                ui,: , W:,j ′    + B i,j ′    = 1.
                                   ∂Bi,j ′


Also,
                                    ∂       (︂
                                                                           (2)
                                                                                )︂
                                     (2)
                                                 (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ = 1.
                                 ∂Bi,j ′



                                                              61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Next, for any 0 ≤ k ≤ i, we have
                                   ∂     (︂
                                                                      (2)
                                                                           )︂
                                            (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ = ui−k,j ′
                                 ∂Kk,j ′
and for all k > i,
                                      ∂     (︂
                                                                         (2)
                                                                              )︂
                                               (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ = 0.
                                    ∂Kk,j ′

Proof. Let’s begin by looking at
                                          ∂     (︂⟨︁
                                                                         (1)
                                                                              )︂
                                                    u⊤
                                                                  ⟩︁
                                                     i,: , W:,j ′    + Bi,j ′    .
                                        ∂Wℓ,j ′
Expanding this out gives us
                                                 (︄ d−1                                    )︄
                                       ∂            ∑︂                             (1)
                                                               ui,ℓ′ · Wℓ′ ,j ′ + Bi,j ′        .
                                     ∂Wℓ,j ′
                                                       ℓ′ =0
                                                                                                    (1)
When we take the partial derivative of this with respect to Wℓ,j ′ , the Bi,j ′ term goes to 0. And the
term                                   (︄ d−1                 )︄
                                  ∂       ∑︂
                                              ui,ℓ′ · Wℓ′ ,j ′ = ui,ℓ ,
                              ∂Wℓ,j ′      ′           ℓ =0
as desired, since W    ℓ,j ′   only shows up in the summation when ℓ′ = ℓ.


Next, let us look at
                                             ∂       (︂⟨︁
                                                          ⊤
                                                                       ⟩︁     (1)
                                                                                    )︂
                                                 (1)
                                                         ui,: , W:,j ′    + B i,j ′
                                         ∂Bi,j ′
        (1)
Since Bi,j ′ doesn’t show up in the dot product of the vectors, we know that piece goes to zero, giving
us
                              ∂ (︂⟨︁ ⊤                            )︂ ∂B (1)′
                                                     ⟩︁     (1)         i,j
                               (1)
                                      u i,: , W:,j ′    + B i,j ′   =   (1)
                                                                              = 1,
                           ∂Bi,j ′                                    ∂Bi,j ′
as desired.
 Next, for any 0 ≤ k ≤ i we have
                                        ∂     (︂
                                                                           (2)
                                                                                )︂
                                                 (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ .
                                      ∂Kk,j ′
       (2)
The Bi,j ′ term goes to 0 as we’re taking the partial derivative with respect to Kk,j ′ . So we have
                                                                            i
                  ∂                                  ∂     ∑︂
                        ((K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i]) =            Kk′ ,j ′ ui−k′ ,j ′ = ui−k,j ′
                ∂Kk,j ′                            ∂Kk,j ′ ′
                                                                         k =0

as desired, since Kk,j ′ only shows up in the summation when k ′ = k.
Next, for k > i we have
                                                                                 i
                       ∂                                  ∂     ∑︂
                             ((K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i]) =            Kk′ ,j ′ ui−k′ ,j ′ , = 0              (53)
                     ∂Kk,j ′                            ∂Kk,j ′ ′
                                                                                k =0

as desired, since Kk,j ′ will never show up in the summation as k ′ < k.
Finally, let us look at the fourth piece,
                                         ∂        (︂
                                                                                 (2)
                                                                                      )︂
                                           (2)
                                                       (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ .
                                      ∂Bi,j ′

                                                                   62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              (2)
The term Bi,j ′ doesn’t appear in the result of the convolution operation, therefore that piece goes to
0, giving us
                           ∂ (︂                                  )︂ ∂B (2)′
                                                            (2)       i,j
                            (2)
                                  (K:,j ′ ∗ u:,j ′ ) [i] + Bi,j ′ =    (2)
                                                                            = 1,
                         ∂Bi,j ′                                    ∂Bi,j ′
as desired.


                                                                  (︁           )︁
Definition D.57. For the rest of the section, we will redefine θ = W , K, B (2) . Note that we are
just removing B (1) since it is all zeros as per Assumption D.48.

Lemma D.58. Given Assumption D.45 and recall that B (1) = 0. Fix i ∈ [N ] , j ∈ [dout ] , c ∈
[d − dout ]. Then we have
                          [︄           ]︄          d−1
                                ∂Zi,j         (2)
                                                   ∑︂
                                                         E u2i,ℓ′ Wℓ2′ ,j+c .
                                                          [︁     ]︁
                        E Zi,j   (2)
                                          = Bi,j+c
                               ∂Bi,j+c             ℓ′ =0


Next, for any 0 ≤ k ≤ i we have
                     [︃            ]︃          d−1
                            ∂Zi,j              ∑︂
                                                   Wℓ2′ ,j+c E u2i,ℓ′ · u2i−k,j+c .
                                                              [︁                 ]︁
                    E Zi,j            = Kk,j+c
                           ∂Kk,j+c              ′         ℓ =0

For k > i,
                                            [︃            ]︃
                                                   ∂Zi,j
                                           E Zi,j            = 0.
                                                  ∂Kk,j+c


Finally, for any 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ d − 1,
   [︃            ]︃            i
          ∂Zi,j              ∑︂                                 ]︁ (︂ (2) )︂2
                                 Kk2′ ,j+c E u2i−k′ ,j+c · u2i,ℓ + Bi,j+c Wℓ,j+c E u2i,ℓ .
                                            [︁                                    [︁    ]︁
  E Zi,j            = Wℓ,j+c
         ∂Wℓ,j+c             ′      k =0



Proof. Given Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 (along with the fact that B (1) = 0) we have
        [︄            ]︄
               ∂Zi,j        [︂(︂
                                                    (2)
                                                         )︂ ⟨︁              ⟩︁2 ]︂
       E Zi,j   (2)
                         = E K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c u⊤   i,: , W:,j+c
              ∂Bi,j+c
                                d−1 ∑︂
                                ∑︂  d−1 ∑︂
                                         i
                            =                        E [ui,ℓ′ ui−k′ ,j+c ui,ℓ′′ ] Wℓ′ ,j+c Wℓ′′ ,j+c Kk′ ,j+c
                                ℓ′ =0 ℓ′′ =0 k′ =0
                                         d−1 ∑︂
                                             d−1
                                  (2)
                                         ∑︂
                            + Bi,j+c                    E [ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ′′ ] Wℓ′ ,j+c Wℓ′′ ,j+c .
                                         ℓ′ =0 ℓ′′ =0

In the above, the first summation goes to 0 since for all ℓ′ , ℓ′′ , k, by Assumption D.45, the expected
value of the product of three u’s will be 0 since there’s an odd number of them. Again, by Assump-
tion D.45, the second summation will be non-zero if and only if ℓ′ = ℓ′′ . Therefore we get the
following,
                            [︄            ]︄           d−1
                                  ∂Zi,j          (2)
                                                       ∑︂
                                                             E u2i,ℓ′ Wℓ2′ ,j+c
                                                               [︁       ]︁
                           E Zi,j     (2)
                                             = B i,j+c
                                  ∂Bi,j                ℓ′ =0

as desired.


                                                           63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Moving onto the next piece, using Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 (along with the fact that B (1) = 0)
we have for 0 ≤ k ≤ i,
    [︃             ]︃
            ∂Zi,j         [︂(︂
                                                  (2)
                                                      )︂ ⟨︁              ⟩︁2          ]︂
  E Zi,j              = E K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c u⊤   i,: , W:,j+c     ui−k,j+c
          ∂Kk,j+c
                           d−1 ∑︂
                           ∑︂  d−1 ∑︂
                                    i
                       =                        E [ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ′′ ui−k′ ,j+c ui−k,j+c ] Wℓ′ ,j+c Wℓ′′ ,j+c Kk′ ,j+c
                           ℓ′ =0 ℓ′′ =0 k′ =0
                                    d−1 ∑︂
                                        d−1
                             (2)
                                    ∑︂
                       + Bi,j+c                    E [ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ′′ ui−k,j+c ] Wℓ′ ,j+c Wℓ′′ ,j+c .
                                    ℓ′ =0 ℓ′′ =0


By Assumption D.45, only expected values of terms with square monomials are non-zero. Specifically,
the first summation has the ui−k,j term, therefore, we need k ′ = k to get an even exponent. This is
the same reasoning for ℓ′ = ℓ′′ . Therefore, the first summation is non-zero if and only if k ′ = k and
ℓ′ = ℓ′′ . The second summation will be 0 since for all ℓ′ , ℓ′′ the expected value of the u’s is 0 since
there’s an odd number of them, there will always be an odd exponent. So we get
                     [︃              ]︃             d−1
                            ∂Zi,j                   ∑︂
                                                         Wℓ2′ ,j+c E u2i,ℓ′ · u2i−k,j+c
                                                                    [︁                  ]︁
                    E Zi,j              = Kk,j+c
                           ∂Kk,j+c                   ′     ℓ =0

as desired.
When k > i,                             [︃              ]︃
                                                ∂Zi,j
                                      E Zi,j               =0
                                              ∂Kk,j+c
since we index the convolution piece at i, ∂Kk,j+c for k > i will never be in the piece we’re taking
the derivative of. Moving onto the final piece, given Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 and B (1) = 0
we have
     [︃             ]︃    [︃(︂                                )︂)︂2 ⟨︁                    ]︃
             ∂Zi,j                                   (︂
                                                          (2)           ⊤
                                                                                    ⟩︁
   E Zi,j              = E (K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c ) [i] + Bi,j+c             ui,: , W:,j+c ui,ℓ
           ∂Wℓ,j+c
                            i
                           ∑︂  i
                              ∑︂ d−1
                                 ∑︂
                       =                        E [ui−k′ ,j+c ui,ℓ′ ui−k′′ ,j+c ui,ℓ ] Kk′ ,j+c Kk′′ ,j+c Wℓ′ ,j+c
                           k′ =0 k′′ =0 ℓ′ =0
                                       i ∑︂
                                         d−1
                           (2)
                                      ∑︂
                       + 2Bi,j+c                    E [ui−k′ ,j+c ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ ] Kk′ ,j+c Wℓ′ ,j+c
                                     k′ =0 ℓ′ =0
                        (︂          d−1
                                )︂2 ∑︂
                           (2)
                       + Bi,j+c         E [ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ ] Wℓ′ ,j+c .
                                         ℓ′ =0

We again use Assumption D.45 to simplify the summations. The first summation has the ui,ℓ term,
therefore to get an even exponent on it we need ℓ′ = ℓ. This is the same reasoning for k ′ = k ′′ .
Therefore the first summation will be non-zero if and only if ℓ′ = ℓ and k ′ = k ′′ . The second
summation will be 0 for all k ′ , ℓ′ since we’re taking the expected value of an odd number of u
products, there will always be an odd exponent. The third term will be non-zero if and only if ℓ′ = ℓ
to get an even exponent on u’s entry. Therefore we have,
      [︃              ]︃              i
             ∂Zi,j                 ∑︂                                  ]︁ (︂ (2) )︂2
                                        Kk2′ ,j+c E u2i−k′ ,j+c · u2i,ℓ + Bi,j+c Wℓ,j+c E u2i,ℓ
                                                   [︁                                      [︁    ]︁
    E Zi,j               = Wℓ,j+c
            ∂Wℓ,j+c                 ′ k =0

as desired.



D.5.7    L INEAR
The following lemma will be for when the function we are considering is a linear map.


                                                           64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma D.59. With c = 0 and dout = d, fix i ∈ [N ] , j ∈ [d], and W ∈ Rd×d . Then we have
                     [︄                     ]︄ d−1
                       ⟨︁ ⊤        ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j     ∑︂
                                                      Wℓ,j W ℓ,j E u2i,ℓ .
                                                                  [︁    ]︁
                    E ui,: , W :,j      (2)
                                              =
                                      ∂Bi,j     ℓ=0

For all k,                                 [︃                        ]︃
                                             ⟨︁ ⊤           ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j
                                       E       ui,: , W :,j             = 0.
                                                               ∂Kk,j
For all ℓ,                      [︃                        ]︃
                                  ⟨︁ ⊤           ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j       (2)
                                                             = Bi,j W ℓ,j E u2i,ℓ .
                                                                           [︁    ]︁
                            E       ui,: , W :,j
                                                    ∂Wℓ,j

Proof. Given Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 (and the fact that B (1) = 0) we have
                  [︄                     ]︄
                    ⟨︁ ⊤        ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j
                                            = E u⊤
                                               [︁⟨︁            ⟩︁ ⟨︁ ⊤          ⟩︁ ]︁
                 E ui,: , W :,j      (2)            i,: , W:,j      ui,: , W :,j }
                                   ∂Bi,j
                                                          d−1 ∑︂
                                                          ∑︂  d−1
                                                      =               Wℓ,j W ℓ′ ,j E [ui,ℓ ui,ℓ′ ]
                                                          ℓ=0 ℓ′ =0

From Assumption D.45 we get that the summation will always be non-zero if and only if ℓ = ℓ′ so
that the u variable has an even exponent. Therefore we get,
                           [︄                    ]︄ d−1
                             ⟨︁ ⊤       ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j     ∑︂
                                                         Wℓ,j W ℓ,j E u2i,ℓ
                                                                     [︁     ]︁
                         E ui,: , W :,j      (2)
                                                   =
                                           ∂Bi,j     ℓ=0

as desired.
Next, for all k, by Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 (and the fact that B (1) = 0)
                   [︃                    ]︃
                      ⟨︁ ⊤      ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j
                                            = E u⊤
                                               [︁⟨︁           ⟩︁     ⟨︁ ⊤          ⟩︁]︁
                 E ui,: , W :,j                     i,: , W:,j ui−k,j ui,: , W :,j
                                   ∂Kk,j
                                                    d−1 ∑︂
                                                    ∑︂  d−1
                                                =                Wℓ,j W ℓ′ ,j E [ui,ℓ ui,ℓ′ ui−k,j ] .
                                                    ℓ=0 ℓ′ =0

We simplify the above using Assumption D.45. The summation goes to 0 since there are an odd
number of u terms, there will always be an odd exponent. Note that this is true for k ≤ i. Recall
from Equation (53) that for k > i,
                                          ∂Zi,j
                                                 = 0.
                                          ∂Kk,j
Therefore, for all k,                   [︃                     ]︃
                                          ⟨︁ ⊤        ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j
                                       E ui,: , W :,j             =0
                                                         ∂Kk,j
as desired.
Next, for all ℓ, by Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 (and the fact that B (1) = 0)
               [︃                   ]︃
                 ⟨︁ ⊤      ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j        [︂(︂
                                                                  (2)
                                                                      )︂                    ⟩︁]︂
                                       = E (K:,j ∗ u:,j ) [i] + Bi,j ui,ℓ u⊤
                                                                           ⟨︁
            E ui,: , W :,j                                                     i,: , W  :,j
                              ∂Wℓ,j
                                         (︄ i d−1                                    )︄
                                           ∑︂ ∑︂
                                       =          Kk,j W ℓ′ ,j E [ui−k,j ui,ℓ′ ui,ℓ ]
                                                k′ =0 ℓ′ =0
                                                      d−1
                                                (2)
                                                      ∑︂
                                           + Bi,j             W ℓ′ ,j E [ui,ℓ ui,ℓ′ ]
                                                      ℓ′ =0



                                                          65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We simplify the above using Assumption D.45. The first summation will always be 0 due to an odd
exponent on the u’s. The second summation piece will always be non-zero if and only if ℓ′ = ℓ,
giving us the even exponent on the u variable. Therefore we get,
                            [︃                        ]︃
                                             ⟩︁ ∂Zi,j       (2)
                         E u⊤                            = Bi,j W ℓ,j E u2i,ℓ
                              ⟨︁                                       [︁     ]︁
                                 i,: , W :,j
                                                ∂Wℓ,j
as desired.

Next, we restate Theorem D.51 and prove it:
Theorem D.60 (Theorem D.51, restated). Given Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, D.49, and a function
                                              f (u) = uW .
Let θ0 be such that, E∇θ L|θ←θ0 = 0 with c = 0 and dout = d. Then BASE C ONV(u, θ0 , c, dout ) =
f (u).

Proof. From Lemma D.53 we get that
                           [︄        ]︄ N −1 d −1 [︄                ]︄
                               ∂L        ∑︂ out ∑︂        ∂Li′ ,j ′
                         E       (2)
                                       =                E    (2)
                              ∂Bi,j      i′ =0 j ′ =0     ∂Bi,j
                                            [︄         ]︄
                                               ∂Li,j
                                       =E          (2)
                                               ∂Bi,j
Recall our loss function from Equation (49). Then given Proposition D.47, Lemma D.58, and
Lemma D.59 we know that
                [︄       ]︄      [︄                               ]︄
                   ∂Li,j            ∂Zi,j (︂        (︁      )︁ )︂
              E      (2)
                            = 2E         (2)
                                             Zi,j − uW i,j
                   ∂Bi,j            ∂Bi,j
                               (︄        d−1                   d−1
                                                                                        )︄
                                     (2)
                                         ∑︂                    ∑︂
                                               2
                                                  E u2i,ℓ −         Wℓ,j W ℓ,j E u2i,ℓ .
                                                   [︁    ]︁                     [︁    ]︁
                            = 2 Bi,j         Wℓ,j
                                        ℓ=0                      ℓ=0

                                   (2)
Setting this to 0 and solving for Bi,j gives us,
                                               ∑︁d−1
                                      (2)           ℓ=0 Wℓ,j W ℓ,j
                                     Bi,j =         ∑︁d−1 2        .
                                                      ℓ=0 Wℓ,j

Given Assumption D.49 we know that the numerator will be non-zero and given assumption Assump-
tion D.48 we know the denominator will always be non-zero as well. Therefore we get that for all
i, j                                     ⟨︁             ⟩︁
                                            W:,j , W :,j def
                                Bi,j =                       bj .                          (54)
                                          ⟨W:,j , W:,j ⟩ =

Next, via Lemma D.53 we have for all k ≥ 0:
                             [︃
                                 ∂L
                                       ]︃ N∑︂     ∑︂−1 [︃ ∂Li′ ,j ′ ]︃
                                              −1 dout
                           E             =            E
                                ∂Kk,j       ′      ′
                                                          ∂Kk,j
                                                  i =0 j =0
                                                  N −1     [︃         ]︃
                                                  ∑︂        ∂Li′ ,j
                                              =           E
                                                            ∂Kk,j
                                                  i′ =0

From Equation (49) and Proposition D.47 we get
                       [︃       ]︃ N∑︂−1    [︃                              ]︃
                           ∂L                  ∂Zi′ ,j (︂         (︁ )︁ )︂
                     E            =      2E               Zi′ ,j − uW i′ ,j
                          ∂Kk,j     ′
                                               ∂Kk,j
                                       i =0



                                                     66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then by Lemma D.58 and Lemma D.59 we get
      −1
   N        [︃                                     ]︃   (︄N −1      d−1
                                                                                                      )︄
   ∑︂          ∂Zi′ ,j          ∂Zi′ ,j (︁   )︁           ∑︂        ∑︂
                                                                         2
                                                                                [︁ 2        2
                                                                                                    ]︁
         2E            Zi′ ,j −            uW i′ ,j = 2        Kk,j     Wℓ′ ,j E ui′ ,ℓ′ · ui′ −k,j
    ′
               ∂Kk,j            ∂Kk,j                      ′         ′
     i =0                                                                      i =0           ℓ =0
                                                                                   d−1
                                                                                   ∑︂              N
                                                                                                   ∑︂−1
                                                                                                           E u2i′ ,ℓ′ · u2i′ −k,j .
                                                                                                            [︁                   ]︁
                                                                   = 2Kk,j                Wℓ′ ,j
                                                                                  ℓ′ =0            i′ =0
                                                               ′
Since we know that the summation piece over ℓ is always non-zero due to the even exponents on the
u terms and at least one of Wℓ′ ,j ̸= 0. Therefore, when setting this to 0 and solve for Kk,j gives us,
                              [︃         ]︃
                                    ∂L
                                            = 0 =⇒ 2 Kk,j Wℓ2′ ,j = 0
                                                      (︁            )︁
                            E
                                 ∂Kk,j
implying for all k, Kk,j = 0. In other words,
                                                          K = 0N ×d .

Finally, via Lemma D.53 we have for all ℓ:
                              [︃
                                  ∂L
                                        ]︃ N∑︂    ∑︂−1 [︃ ∂Li′ ,j ′ ]︃
                                              −1 dout
                            E             =           E
                                 ∂Wℓ,j      ′      ′
                                                          ∂Wℓ,j
                                                              i =0 j =0
                                                              N −1        [︃             ]︃
                                                              ∑︂               ∂Li′ ,j
                                                          =           E
                                                                               ∂Wℓ,j
                                                              i′ =0

From Equation (49) and Proposition D.47 we get
                       [︃       ]︃ N∑︂−1    [︃                              ]︃
                           ∂L                  ∂Zi′ ,j (︂         (︁ )︁ )︂
                     E            =      2E               Zi′ ,j − uW i′ ,j
                          ∂Wℓ,j     ′
                                               ∂Wℓ,j
                                               i =0

Then from Lemma D.58 and Lemma D.59 we get
                                                     ⎛                                                   ⎞
 N  −1    [︃                                   ]︃       N  −1         i′
 ∑︂          ∂Zi ,j
                ′            ∂Zi ,j
                                ′                       ∑︂          ∑︂
                                                                          Kk2′ ,j E u2i′ −k′ ,j u2i′ ,ℓ ⎠
                                    (︁   )︁                                        [︁                  ]︁
       2E           Zi′ ,j −           uW i′ ,j = 2 ⎝         Wℓ,j
             ∂W ℓ,j          ∂W ℓ,j
 i′ =0                                                  i′ =0       k′ =0
                                                     (︃(︂       )︂2                                               )︃
                                                            (2)            [︁ 2 ]︁        (2)             [︁ 2 ]︁
                                                  +2     Bi′ ,j Wℓ,j E ui′ ,ℓ − Bi′ ,j W ℓ,j E ui′ ,ℓ

Which simplifies to
                                  −1 (︂                                     −1
                       (︄       N                                         N
                                                                                              )︄
                                                   )︂2
                                           (2)                                  (2) [︁ 2 ]︁
                                ∑︂                        [︁ 2 ]︁         ∑︂
                     2 Wℓ,j               Bi′ ,j         E ui′ ,ℓ − W ℓ,j      Bi′ ,j E ui′ ,ℓ .
                                i′ =0                                                 i′ =0
                                                                                                                                (2)
We can drop the summation with K in it as we know K = 0. Recall that from (54), Bi,j = bj .
Then we can rewrite the above as
                       [︃       ]︃       (︄N −1            )︄
                           ∂L              ∑︂ [︁
                                                   2
                                                         ]︁ (︁                 )︁
                     E             = 2bj        E ui′ ,ℓ       Wℓ,j bj − W ℓ,j
                          ∂Wℓ,j             ′             i =0

we know from Assumption D.45 that the first summation will always be non-zero since there’s an
even exponent on the u variable and we know that bj is non-zero. Therefore setting
                                          [︃       ]︃
                                              ∂L
                                        E             =0
                                             ∂Wℓ,j
tells us that Wℓ,j bj − W ℓ,j = 0 or,
                                                                      W ℓ,j
                                                         Wℓ,j =             .                                                         (55)
                                                                       bj

                                                                   67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given the above value for Wℓ,j and recall we have K = 0 and B (2) = (b0 b1 ...bd−1 ) where each bj
is a column vector comprised of all bj values. Therefore, when we take BASE C ONV(u) we get
                                                      (︂                )︂
                        BASE C ONV(u) = (uW ) ⊙ 0N ×d ∗ u + B (2)
                                                      (︂    )︂
                                          = (uW ) ⊙ B (2)

We can rewrite B (2) as
                                                b0        0    ...     0
                                               ⎛                         ⎞
                                                 0        b1   ...     0 ⎟
                               B (2) = 1N ×d ⎜
                                      (︁    )︁ ⎜
                                                               ..        ⎟.
                                               ⎝                  .      ⎠
                                                     0    0    ...    bd−1
let us call this diagonal matrix on the right, D. Then note that by Equation (55)
                                              W = W D −1 .
Therefore, we have
                                BASE C ONV(u) = uW D −1 ⊙ 1N ×d D
                                                  = uW ⊙ 1N ×d
                                                  = uW ,
as desired. In the above the second inequality follows since D is a diagonal matrix.

D.5.8    M ULTIPLY
Note that for i ∈ [N ] , j ∈ [dout ], the i, j-th entry of M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout ) is
                               M ULTIPLY(a, b, dout )i,j = ui,j+a · ui,j+b .
Lemma D.61. Fix i, j, a, b, c where i ∈ [N ] and a, b, c ∈ [d − dout ] and j ∈ [dout ]. Then we have
                                 [︄                           ]︄
                                                       ∂Zi,j
                               E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )      (2)
                                                                 = 0.                             (56)
                                                     ∂Bi,j+c
When k > 0:
                                   [︃                          ]︃
                                                        ∂Zi,j
                                  E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )            = 0.                           (57)
                                                       ∂Kk,j+c
When a = b then for all c:
                  [︃                         ]︃
                                      ∂Zi,j
                                                = E u2i,j+a · u2i,j+c Wj+c,j+c .
                                                   [︁                ]︁
                E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )
                                     ∂K0,j+c
When a = c then for all b:
                  [︃                         ]︃
                                      ∂Zi,j
                                                = E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+b Wj+b,j+c .
                                                   [︁                ]︁
                E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )                                                             (58)
                                     ∂K0,j+c
When b = c then for all a:
                  [︃                         ]︃
                                      ∂Zi,j
                                                = E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+a Wj+a,j+c .
                                                   [︁                ]︁
                E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )
                                     ∂K0,j+c
For all other values of a, b, c (i.e. a, b, c are all distinct),:
                                      [︃                            ]︃
                                                             ∂Zi,j
                                   E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )                = 0.
                                                            ∂K0,j+c
Next, when ℓ = j + a and b = c
                  [︃                          ]︃
                                       ∂Zi,j
                                                 = E u2 i,j+c · u2 i,j+a K0,j+c .
                                                    [︁                  ]︁
                 E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )
                                      ∂Wℓ,j+c

                                                     68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When ℓ = j + b and a = c,
                  [︃                         ]︃
                                      ∂Zi,j
                                                = E u2 i,j+c · u2 i,j+b K0,j+c .
                                                   [︁                  ]︁
                E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )                                                          (59)
                                     ∂Wℓ,j+c
When ℓ = j + c and a = b,
                 [︃                          ]︃
                                      ∂Zi,j
                                                = E u2 i,j+a · u2 i,j+c K0,j+c .
                                                   [︁                  ]︁
                E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )
                                     ∂Wℓ,j+c
For all other values of ℓ, a, b, c,
                                       [︃                          ]︃
                                                            ∂Zi,j
                                      E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )            = 0.
                                                           ∂Wℓ,j+c

Proof. Let us begin with
                                               [︄                           ]︄
                                                                   ∂Zi,j
                                          E ui,j+a · ui,j+b           (2)
                                                                                 .
                                                                  ∂Bi,j+c

From Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 we can simplify this to the following (recall that B (1) = 0):
         [︄                                                                                   ]︄
                         (︁⟨︁ ⊤             ⟩︁)︁        ∂   (︂
                                                                                      (2)
                                                                                            )︂
        E ui,j+a · ui,j+b ui,: , W:,j+c                 (2)
                                                               K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c
                                                 ∂Bi,j+c
        = E ui,j+a · ui,j+b u⊤
            [︁               (︁⟨︁                ⟩︁)︁]︁
                                  i,: , W:,j+c          .
This can be rewritten as the following
                                       d−1
                                       ∑︂
                                               E [ui,j+a ui,j+b ui,ℓ′ ] Wℓ′ ,j+c .
                                       ℓ′ =0

From Assumption D.45 we know this is always 0 as there’s an odd number of u’s being multiplied
together each iteration of the summation. Therefore we get
                                   [︄                       ]︄
                                                     ∂Zi,j
                                  E ui,j+a · ui,j+b   (2)
                                                               = 0.
                                                    ∂Bi,j+c
Next, let us consider for k ≤ i,
                                         [︃                          ]︃
                                                              ∂Zi,j
                                        E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )            .
                                                             ∂Kk,j+c

From Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 we can simplify this to the following (recall that B (1) = 0):
          [︃                                                                          )︂]︃
                         (︁⟨︁ ⊤         ⟩︁)︁   ∂      (︂
                                                                                (2)
        E ui,j+a · ui,j+b ui,: , W:,j+c                  K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c
                                             ∂Kk,j+c
          [︁             (︁⟨︁ ⊤        ⟩︁)︁        ]︁
       =E ui,j+a · ui,j+b ui,: , W:,j+c ui−k,j+c .
This can be rewritten as the following
                               d−1
                               ∑︂
                                       E [ui,j+a ui,j+b ui,ℓ′ ui−k,j+c ] Wℓ′ ,j+c .
                               ℓ′ =0

We have the following cases about the expected value of the above:

      1. When k > 0 for any ℓ′ , a, b, or c we get the expected value is 0.
                                                      [︁              ]︁
      2. When a = b, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+a · u2i,j+c Wj+c,j+c if and only if k = 0
         and ℓ′ = j + c.


                                                            69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                   [︂                ]︂
      3. When a = c, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+b Wj+b,j+c if and only if k = 0
         and ℓ′ = j + b.
                                                   [︁                ]︁
      4. When b = c, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+a Wj+a,j+c if and only if k = 0
         and ℓ′ = j + a.
      5. For all other values of ℓ′ , a, b, and c, we get the expected value is 0.

Via Assumption D.45, the reasoning for 1 and 5 is that there will always be an odd exponent on the
u’s. Then the reasoning for Items 2 to 4 is that there will always be an even exponent on the u’s.
Next, let us consider,
                                       [︃                          ]︃
                                                           ∂Zi,j+c
                                      E (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )            .
                                                           ∂Wℓ,j+c
From Lemma D.54 and Lemma D.56 we can simplify this to the following:
          [︃                                                                             ]︃
                         (︂
                                                 (2)
                                                       )︂    ∂    (︁⟨︁ ⊤            ⟩︁)︁
        E ui,j+a · ui,j+b K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c                ui,: , W:,j+c
                                                          ∂Wℓ,j+c
          [︂             (︂                           )︂    ]︂
                                                 (2)
       =E ui,j+a · ui,j+b K:,j+c ∗ u:,j+c [i] + Bi,j+c ui,ℓ

This can be rewritten as
             i
                                                                                             (2)
            ∑︂
                    (E [ui,j+a ui,j+b ui−k′ ,j+c ui,ℓ ] Kk′ ,j+c ) + E [ui,j+a ui,j+b ui,ℓ ] Bi,j+c
            k′ =0

This second term goes to zero via Assumption D.45 as there will always be an odd exponent on the
term we take the expected value of. The first summation will be zero or non-zero given specific cases,
just as we previously saw. Here they are:

      1. When k ′ > 0, for any ℓ, a, or b we get that the expected value is 0.
      2. When a = b, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+a · u2i,j+c K0,j+c if and only if k ′ = 0
                                                        [︁             ]︁
         and ℓ = j + c.
                                                        [︂             ]︂
      3. When a = c, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+b K0,j+c if and only if k ′ = 0
         and ℓ = j + b.
      4. When b = c, we get the expected value is E u2i,j+c · u2i,j+a K0,j+c if and only if k ′ = 0
                                                        [︁             ]︁
         and ℓ = j + a.
      5. For all other values of ℓ, a, b, and c, we get that the expected value is 0.

Via Assumption D.45, the reasoning for 1 and 5 is that there will always be an odd exponent on the
u’s. Then the reasoning for Items 2 to 4 is that there will always be an even exponent on the u’s.
Each of these scenarios, covers the pieces in the lemma statement.



Next, we restate Theorem D.50 and prove it:

Theorem D.62 (Theorem D.50, restated). Given Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, and a function
                              f (u, a, b, dout ) = u:,a:a+dout −1 ⊙ u:,b:b+dout −1 ,
where a, b ∈ [d − dout ] and without loss of generality assume a ≤ b then take c = a. Let θ0 be such
that, E∇θ L|θ←θ0 = 0 then BASE C ONV(u, θ0 )[:, c : c + dout − 1] = f (u).


                                                       70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. For i, i′ ∈ [N ] and j, j ′ ∈ [dout ] and a, b, c defined in theorem statement, let us consider
                                  [︄          ]︄ N −1 d −1 [︄                    ]︄
                                       ∂L         ∑︂ out  ∑︂           ∂Li′ ,j ′
                              E         (2)
                                                =               E        (2)
                                     ∂Bi,j+c      i′ =0 j ′ =0        ∂Bi,j+c
                                                     [︄          ]︄
                                                         ∂Li,j
                                                =E          (2)
                                                                    ,
                                                        ∂Bi,j+c
where the second equality follows from Lemma D.53.
Recall our loss function from Equation (49). Then given Proposition D.47 we have
                      [︄         ]︄      [︄                                    ]︄
                           ∂L                ∂Zi,j
                    E       (2)
                                    = 2E      (2)
                                                    (Zi,j − (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )) .
                         ∂Bi,j+c            ∂Bi,j+c
Simplifying and plugging in values from Lemma D.58 and Equation (56) from Lemma D.61 we get
     [︄                                    ]︄    [︄                                         ]︄
         ∂Zi,j                                          ∂Zi,j                        ∂Zi,j
  2E       (2)
                (Zi,j − (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )) = 2 E Zi,j   (2)
                                                               − (ui,j+a · ui,j+b )   (2)
        ∂Bi,j+c                                        ∂Bi,j+c                      ∂Bi,j+c
                                                                        d−1
                                                                  (2)
                                                                        ∑︂
                                                                                E u2i,ℓ′ Wℓ2′ ,j+c .
                                                                                 [︁     ]︁
                                                         = 2 Bi,j+c
                                                                        ℓ′ =0

From Assumption D.46 we know the expected values of the squared input terms will be positive.
Then from Assumption D.48 we know that at least one entry in W:,j+c is non-zero. Therefore the
above summation will be non-zero. Further implying, when we set
                                        [︄         ]︄
                                             ∂L
                                      E       (2)
                                                      = 0,
                                           ∂Bi,j+c
                              (2)
we can conclude that Bi,j+c = 0 for all i, j. Explicitly,
                                               (2)
                                           B:,c:c+dout −1 = 0N ×d−1 .                                     (60)

Recall from Lemma D.52 that we only consider values of the parameters in column range {c, . . . , c +
dout − 1}. Therefore, moving forward, the B (2) terms will be dropped from equations to simplify
them. Next let us consider for all k > 0,
                              [︃
                                    ∂L
                                          ]︃ N∑︂    ∑︂−1 [︃ ∂Li′ ,j ′ ]︃
                                                −1 dout
                            E               =           E
                                 ∂Kk,j+c      ′      ′
                                                           ∂Kk,j+c
                                                         i =0 j =0
                                                         N −1     [︃              ]︃
                                                         ∑︂         ∂Li′ ,j
                                                     =           E
                                                                   ∂Kk,j+c
                                                         i′ =0

the second equality follows from Lemma D.53. Then from Equation (49) we get
                     [︃           ]︃ N∑︂−1    [︃                                           ]︃
                            ∂L                    ∂Zi′ ,j
                 E                  =      2E             (Zi′ ,j − (ui′ ,j+a · ui′ ,j+b )) .
                          ∂Kk,j+c     ′
                                                 ∂Kk,j+c
                                        i =0

Simplifying and plugging in values from Lemma D.58 and Equation (57) from Lemma D.61 we get
N −1     [︃                                        ]︃     N  −1        d−1
∑︂        ∂Zi′ ,j                                         ∑︂           ∑︂
                                                                             Wℓ2′ ,j+c E u2i′ ,ℓ′ · u2i′ −k,j+c
                                                                                         [︁                     ]︁
      2E          (Zi′ ,j − (ui′ ,j+a · ui′ ,j+b )) = 2         Kk,j+c
         ∂K k,j+c
i′ =0                                                     i′ =0        ℓ′ =0
                                                                                      −1
                                                                 (︄ d−1             N
                                                                                                                     )︄
                                                                    ∑︂              ∑︂
                                                                         Wℓ2′ ,j+c       E u2i′ ,ℓ′ · u2i′ −k,j+c .
                                                                                            [︁                     ]︁
                                                      = 2 Kk,j+c
                                                                                   ℓ′ =0          i′ =0


                                                            71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From Assumption D.46 we know the expected values of the squared input terms will be positive.
Then from Assumption D.48 we know that at least one entry in W:,j+c is non-zero. Therefore the
summation piece will always be non-zero. Therefore, when setting
                                          [︃           ]︃
                                               ∂L
                                      E                   = 0,
                                             ∂Kk,j+c
we can conclude that Kk,j+c = 0 for all j, k > 0. This implies that we have for all j ∈ [dout ]:
                                  K:,j+c ̸= 0 ⇔ K0,j+c ̸= 0.                                     (61)
Next let us consider,
                            [︃
                                 ∂L
                                        ]︃ N∑︂       ∑︂−1 [︃ ∂Li′ ,j ′ ]︃
                                                 −1 dout
                          E                 =              E
                               ∂Wℓ,j+c         ′      ′
                                                               ∂Wℓ,j+c
                                                      i =0 j =0
                                                      N −1        [︃              ]︃
                                                      ∑︂                ∂Li′ ,j
                                                  =           E
                                                                       ∂Wℓ,j+c
                                                      i′ =0
The above follows from Lemma D.53. Then from Equation (49) we have
                 [︃         ]︃ N∑︂−1    [︃                                           ]︃
                      ∂L                    ∂Zi′ ,j
               E              =      2E             (Zi′ ,j − (ui′ ,j+a · ui′ ,j+b ))
                    ∂Wℓ,j+c     ′
                                           ∂Wℓ,j+c
                                      i =0

After simplifying and plugging in values from Lemma D.58 and Lemma D.61 (and recall that
B (2) [:, c : c + dout − 1] = 0 and a = c) we get the following for ℓ ̸= j + b:
N  −1      [︃                                             ]︃ N  −1         i′
∑︂             ∂Zi′ ,j                                  2
                                                             ∑︂           ∑︂
                                                                              Kk2′ ,j+c E u2i′ −k′ ,j+c · u2i′ ,ℓ
                                                                                         [︁                       ]︁
      2E               (Zi′ ,j − (ui′ ,j+a · ui′ ,j+b )) = 2       Wℓ,j+c
 ′
              ∂Wℓ,j+c                                         ′           ′
i =0                                                                    i =0            k =0
                                                                                  N
                                                                                  ∑︂    i′
                                                                                    −1 ∑︂
                                                                                                Kk2′ ,j+c E u2i′ −k′ ,j+c · u2i′ ,ℓ .
                                                                                                           [︁                      ]︁
                                                               = 2 Wℓ,j+c
                                                                                  i′ =0 k′ =0
From Assumption D.45 we know the expected values of squared input terms will be non-zero. Then
from Equation (61) and Assumption D.48 we know that the 0-th entry of each column of K is
non-zero. Therefore, this summation is always non-zero. Further we can say, when setting
                                               [︃           ]︃
                                                    ∂L
                                            E                  = 0,
                                                  ∂Wℓ,j+c
we can conclude that Wℓ,j = 0 for ℓ ̸= j + b. Explicitly,
                                      W:,j+c ̸= 0 ⇔ Wj+b,j+c ̸= 0.                                        (62)
Now let us consider the following for ℓ = j + b, by Lemma D.58 and Lemma D.61 (and recall that
B (2) [:, c : c + dout − 1] = 0 and a = c)
          N  −1 [︃                                              ]︃
          ∑︂            ∂
       2        E               (Zi′ ,j − (ui,j+a · ui′ ,j+b ))
                   ∂Wj+b,j+c
          i′ =0
          ⎛                                                                                             ⎞
             N −1
              ∑︂             i′
                            ∑︂
                                 Kk2′ ,j+c E u2i′ −k′ ,j+c · u2i′ ,j+b − E u2i′ ,j+c · u2i′ ,j+b K0,j+c ⎠ .
                                            [︁                        ]︁  [︁                    ]︁
   =2⎝            Wj+b,j+c
           i′ =0            k′ =0

From Assumption D.48 and Equation (61) let us simplify the above to the following:
      (︄N −1                                                                      )︄
        ∑︂
                       2
                              [︁ 2         2
                                                  ]︁  [︁ 2         2
                                                                          ]︁
    2        Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c E ui′ ,j+c · ui′ ,j+b − E ui′ ,j+c · ui′ ,j+b K0,j+c
          i′ =0
                                      −1                                     −1
             (︄                     N                                      N
                                                                                                        )︄
                                    ∑︂                                     ∑︂
                            2
                                             [︁ 2         2
                                                                 ]︁              [︁ 2         2
                                                                                                      ]︁
        =2        Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c           E ui′ ,j+c · ui′ ,j+b − K0,j+c      E ui′ ,j+c · ui′ ,j+b
                                    i′ =0                                              i′ =0
                                          −1
                      2
                                     )︁ N∑︂
                                             E u2i′ ,j+c · u2i′ ,j+b .
           (︁                                 [︁                    ]︁
        = 2 Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c − K0,j+c
                                                  i′ =0



                                                          72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


From Assumption D.45 we know the summation pieces are both always non-zero. Therefore when
setting

                               [︃               ]︃
                                       ∂L                    (︁         2
                                                                                      )︁
                           E                         = 0 =⇒ 2 Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c − K0,j+c = 0
                                    ∂Wj+b,j+c
                                                                         2
                                                            =⇒ Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c − K0,j+c = 0
                                                                         2
                                                            =⇒ Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c = K0,j+c
                                                            =⇒ Wj+b,j+c K0,j+c = 1.

In the above the last equality follows form the fact that K0,j+c ̸= 0. Thus, the above gives us

                                                                             1
                                                          K0,j+c =                  .                                 (63)
                                                                           Wj+b,j+c

Note that this is a valid assignment since Equation (62) and Assumption D.48 implies Wj+b,j+c ̸= 0.
Therefore, given Assumption D.48 and the above values; Wj+b,j+c ̸= 0 for all j ∈ [dout ]
and Wi′ ,j ′ = 0 for all other (i′ , j ′ ). Note that a multiplication on the right of u with this
lower
(︂  1                        1        )︂ input to the left by b − c. And we have K:,c:c+dout −1 =
       left shift matrix will shift the
 Wj+b,j+c ... Wj+b+d                                         (2)
                        out −1,j+c+dout −1
                   N −1×dout
                                                          , B:,c:c+dout −1 = 0N ×dout . Let us use these pieces to show
                   0
that BASE C ONV(u)[:, c : c + dout − 1] = u:,a:a+dout −1 ⊙ u:,b:b+dout −1 (without loss of generality,
where c = a).


Recall that B (1) = 0. Then indeed,

  BASE C ONV(u)[:, c : c + dout − 1] = (u · W ):,c:c+dout −1 ⊙ (K:,c:c+dout −1 ∗ u:,c:c+dout −1 ) .

Plugging in our values we get

               0       0       0        0       0                     0                 0   0 0
    ⎛     ⎛                                                                                    ⎞⎞
                                        ..      ..                    ..
    ⎜ ⎜0 0 0                             .       .                     .                0 0 0⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜      ..                                                                           ..   ⎟⎟
              .           0        0               0                                       .
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
                        W(b,c) 0                   0
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜
    ⎜u · ⎜                        ..                                                           ⎟⎟
                                                                                               ⎟⎟ [:, c : c + dout − 1]
    ⎜ ⎜                   0           .            0                                           ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜
    ⎜ ⎜                   0        0    W(b+dout −1,c+dout −1)                                 ⎟⎟
                                                                                               ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜       ..                                                                           ..  ⎟⎟
               .          0        0               0                                        .
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜                                                                                        ⎟⎟
    ⎜ ⎜                   ..       ..               ..                                         ⎟⎟
           0 0 0           .        .                .                                  0 0 0
    ⎝ ⎝                                                                                        ⎠⎠
           0 0 0          0        0               0                                    0 0 0
      ⎛⎛⎛ 1                        1            ⎞      ⎞                                                    ⎞
            W(b,c) . . . W(b+dout −1,c+dout −1)
    ⊙ ⎝⎝⎝                                       ⎠ ∗ u⎠ [:, c : c + dout − 1] + 0N ×dout ⎠ .
                        0N −1×dout


Let’s define
                                             ⎛                                                  ⎞
                                                 W(b,c)         0                 0
                                       D def
                                             ⎜                 ..                               ⎠.
                                                                                                ⎟
                                         = ⎝          0           .               0
                                                      0        0      W(b+dout −1,c+dout −1)

                                                                      73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we can say
    0 0 0       0           0                   0               0    00
  ⎛                                                                    ⎞
                ..          ..                  ..
  ⎜0 0 0         .           .                   .              0 0 0⎟
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜     ..                                                        ..   ⎟
         .      0           0                   0                  .
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
              W(b,c)        0                   0
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜
u·⎜                        ..                                          ⎟
                                                                       ⎟ [:, c : c+dout −1] = u:,b:b+dout −1 ·D
  ⎜             0             .               0                        ⎟
  ⎜
  ⎜             0           0       W(b+dout −1,c+dout −1)             ⎟
                                                                       ⎟
  ⎜    ..                                                          ..  ⎟
        .       0           0                   0                   .
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜                                                                    ⎟
  ⎜              ..         ..                  ..                     ⎟
    0 0 0         .          .                   .              0 0 0
  ⎝                                                                    ⎠
    0    0    0     0       0                   0               0 0 0

Also note that
                                                                   1
                                                              ⎛                                            ⎞
                                                                  W(b,c)    0               0
                                                         ⎜
        K:,c:c+dout −1 ∗ u:,c:c+dout −1 = u:,c:c+dout −1 ⎜                 ..                              ⎟
                                                         ⎝          0         .             0
                                                                                                           ⎟
                                                                                                           ⎠
                                                                                            1
                                                                    0       0     W(b+dout −1,c+dout −1)



                                          = u:,c:c+dout −1 · D −1
which gives us
        (uW ⊙ K ∗ u) [:, c : c + dout − 1] = (u:,b:b+dout −1 · D) ⊙ u:,c:c+dout −1 · D −1
                                                                   (︁                     )︁

                                                     = u:,b:b+dout −1 ⊙ u:,c:c+dout −1
                                                     = u:,b:b+dout −1 ⊙ u:,a:a+dout −1 .
Where in the last equality we used the fact that a = c. Therefore, we have shown that the gradients of
the expected loss function is 0,
                   BASE C ONV(u)[:, c : c + dout ] = u:,a:a+dout −1 ⊙ u:,b:b+dout −1
as desired. For the case of c = b, the proof remains the same, just values for a and b are swapped
where necessary.

A corollary of the above is that M ULTIPLY implements the S QUARE function
Corollary D.63. Given Assumptions D.45, D.46, D.48, and a function
                                                 f (u) = u ⊙ u.
Let θ0 be such that, E∇θ L|θ←θ0 = 0 with c = 0 and dout = d. Then BASE C ONV(u, θ0 , 0, d) =
f (u).

Proof. The proof follows when we have values c = 0 and dout = d for the Theorem D.62.

We now revisit the importance of Assumption D.48. Specifically, the following definition is a stronger
version of the complement of Assumption D.48. The following essentially states that there are many
ways to get the expected gradients of the loss function to be 0, though this doesn’t imply that we have
learned the exact solution, as we recover in Corollary D.63.
                                            ∁
Definition D.64. Define (assumption) to be

        • B (2) = 0
        • For all j ∈ [d], either
             (i) W:,j = 0 and K0,j = 0


                                                         74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (ii) K:,j = 0 and Wj,j = 0

The following theorem is to emphasize, there are many ways to get expected value of the gradients of
the loss function to be 0.
                                                           ⃓
Theorem D.65. Let θ∗ satisfy Definition D.64. Then, E∇θ L⃓θ←θ∗ = 0 when f (u) = u ⊙ u (where
c = 0 and dout = d).

Proof. This proof considers values of j ∈ [d]. Via Lemma D.58 and Lemma D.61 when k > 0 we
have
                       [︃       ]︃        N  −1 ∑︂
                                                d−1
                           ∂L             ∑︂
                                                    Wℓ2′ ,j E u2i′ ,ℓ′ · u2i′ −k,j .
                                                             [︁                   ]︁
                     E             = Kk,j
                          ∂Kk,j            ′     ′
                                               i =0 ℓ =0

This expected value goes to zero since every column j either K:,j or W:,j is 0.
When k = 0 we have
                        [︃       ]︃                          (︄N −1           )︄
                         ∂L                                    ∑︂ [︁
                                                                       4
                                                                            ]︁
                      E               = Wj,j (K0,j Wj,j − 1)        E ui′ ,j .
                        ∂K0,j
                                                                i′ =0

This expected value goes to zero since in (i) and (ii) from Definition D.64, K0,j = Wj,j = 0.
Next we have for all ℓ, j where ℓ ̸= j,
                      [︃       ]︃        N  −1
                          ∂L             ∑︂             ]︁ (︂ 2 [︁ 2 ]︁    (2)
                                                                                 )︂
                                               E u2i′ ,ℓ K0,j
                                                [︁
                   E              = Wℓ,j                       E ui′ ,j + Bi′ ,j
                         ∂Wℓ,j            ′ i =0

This expected value goes to zero since column j either K:,j or W:,j is 0.
Then when ℓ = j we have
                     [︃       ]︃ N∑︂−1
                         ∂L                  2
                                                 E u4i′ ,j − K0,j E u4i′ ,j
                                                  [︁      ]︁       [︁       ]︁
                   E            =      Wj,j K0,j
                        ∂Wj,j     ′     i =0

This expected value goes to zero since in (i) and (ii) from Definition D.64, K0,j = Wj,j = 0
And we know that since B (2) is all zeros, we don’t need to consider the gradient of the loss function
to it.

What the above proves is that there are infinite instantiations of parameters such that the expected
gradient loss is 0. However note that in Definition D.64, for all j either Kk,j for k ̸= 0 or Wℓ,j
for ℓ ̸= j are unconstrained. In other words, we can set these values arbitrarily, which means we
get L → inf but we still have the expected gradient loss to be 0. This shows that some form of
Assumption D.48 is necessary to prove Corollary D.63.


                                                    75
