Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTEXT-PARAMETRIC I NVERSION :
W HY I NSTRUCTION F INETUNING C AN W ORSEN
C ONTEXT R ELIANCE
Sachin Goyal∗† Christina Baek∗† J. Zico Kolter† Aditi Raghunathan†
Carnegie Mellon University†
{sachingo,kbaek,zkolter,raditi}@cs.cmu.edu



                                               A BSTRACT
             A standard practice when using large language models is for users to supplement
             their instruction with an input context containing new information for the model to
             process. However, models struggle to reliably follow the input context, especially
             when it conflicts with their parametric knowledge from pretraining. In-principle,
             one would expect models to adapt to the user context better after instruction fine-
             tuning, particularly when handling knowledge conflicts. However, we observe
             a surprising failure mode: during instruction tuning, the context reliance under
             knowledge conflicts initially increases as expected, but then gradually decreases
             as instruction finetuning progresses. This happens while the performance on stan-
             dard benchmarks keeps on increasing far after this drop. We call this phenomenon
             context-parametric inversion and observe it across multiple general purpose in-
             struction tuning datasets such as TULU, Alpaca and Ultrachat, across different
             model families like Llama, Mistral, and Pythia. We perform various controlled
             studies and theoretical analysis to show that context-parametric inversion occurs
             due to examples in the instruction finetuning data where the input context provides
             information that aligns with model’s parametric knowledge. Our analysis suggests
             some natural mitigation strategies with limited but insightful gains, and serves as
             a useful starting point in addressing this deficiency in instruction finetuning.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are widely used for a variety of tasks, many of which require care-
fully balancing the knowledge embedded in their parameters with the information provided through
the input context. A persistent challenge, however, is their tendency to overrely on parametric knowl-
edge, even when it contradicts with the context. This overreliance hinders the ability to update model
facts with augmented contexts and reliably follow atypical user instructions (Qiu et al., 2023; Ad-
lakha et al., 2024). This tension between contextual and parametric knowledge has been commonly
studied under the moniker of knowledge conflicts. Existing works explore various decoding and
finetuning remedies (Shi et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024; Longpre et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022), but
model behavior under knowledge conflicts remain difficult to control, and conflicts often occur more
frequently scale (McKenzie et al., 2024). Moreover, we have limited understanding of the underly-
ing dynamics that drive models to ignore the context and rely heavily on its parametric knowledge.
In this work, we study the effect of instruction finetuning (IFT)—a staple part of the LLM pipeline—
on the ability to override pretrained knowledge through the context. IFT seeks to enhance the
model’s ability to assist with user queries. Oftentimes, these instructions contains a context with
critical information needed to complete the task. For instance, an instruction “What is the total
price of my trip to Hawaii?” operates on a context “Context: [Itinerary List]”, and an in-
struction “Rank these famous soccer players based on these scores” could contain a context
like: “[Scores Table].” In these circumstances, instruction tuned models must appropriately lever-
age the input context to respond, instead of relying on parametric knowledge. However, we make
an intriguing observation during IFT, where in the presence of knowledge conflicts, the model’s re-
liance on context initially increases as expected but surprisingly starts decreasing.
    ∗
        Equal Contribution.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Context-Parametric Inversion
                                        with Instruction Finetuning on TULU
                                  0.8
Counterfactual Context Reliance
                                                                  Llama2-7B                                          Non-Context
                                                                  Pythia-6.9B
                                                                                 1 Context Critical           2
                                                                                                                       Critical
                                  0.7                             Mistral-7B
                                                                                   Context:                     Context:
                                                                                 Emmy loved                  Einstein loved
                                  0.6                                            playing violin               playing violin
                                                                                  in free time                in free time.
                                  0.5
                                                                                    Query:                       Query:
                                  0.4                                           What instrument             What instrument
                                                                                did Emmy play               did Einstein play
                                  0.3
                                          0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55            High Perplexity                Low Perplexity
                                            Standard Benchmarks Performance
                                                     (a)                                              (b)

Figure 1: (a) Context-Parametric Inversion In the presence of knowledge conflicts, context re-
liance first increases and then decreases during the process of instruction finetuning. (b) Instruction
datasets often include both context-critical examples and non-context-critical examples. This latter
group effectively causes the decline in context reliance (§ 4.3).

We measure the context reliance by designing inputs contexts that suggest a fictional answer to a user
query different from facts in the pretraining corpus (§ 3.2). We evaluate context reliance across the
IFT trajectory of multiple instruction datasets —TULU, Alpaca or UltraChat — and multiple model
families — Llama, Pythia and Mistral. Across these settings, we see that context reliance initially
increases and then decreases, a phenomenon we call context-parametric inversion. In fact, this
drop begins in early timesteps of IFT, while the performance on standard benchmarks (e.g., MMLU,
GSM8k, SQuAD) keeps on increasing far after this drop. For example, as shown in Figure 1a,
the context reliance of Llama2-7B (as measured on knowledge conflict datasets (§ 3.2)) increases
from 30% to 60% initially with IFT. However, it start dropping as the finetuning progresses further,
dipping to around 35%.
Why do we observe context-parametric inversion with instruction tuning? The initial increase is
expected, as a nontrivial subset of instruction tuning datasets often require models to use the context
to respond correctly. We perform controlled experiments to understand the subsequent detrimental
decrease. First, we observe that context-reliance drops outside facts beyond those seen during IFT.
Second, common instruction tuning datasets typically contain some datapoints that are purely about
recall of pretrained knowledge, and do not involve context-dependent instructions. Could the drop be
attributed to the presence of such points? We curate the datasets to only include context-dependent
points but still see a drop in context reliance after an initial increase.
We analyze this phenomenon theoretically in a one-layer tranformer and uncover the optimization
dynamic that explains context-parametric inversion. We can partition a generic dataset containing
context-dependent datapoints into two categories: (i) context-critical datapoints where context pro-
vides key information needed to answer a user query that the model does not know beforehand
(Fig. 1b), and (ii) non-context-critical datapoints where the context is approximately redundant with
model’s parametric knowledge (§ 4.3). In the early stages of training, context-critical points tend
to have higher loss and therefore dominate the gradient signal, driving the model to focus on the
context. However, as training progresses, the loss on context-critical points decreases, and the non-
context-critical points dominate the gradient. We show that the gradient updates then tend to hedge,
reverting back to using the parametric knowledge, thus reducing the context reliance.
Finally, our analysis naturally leads us to some mitigation strategies by data curation, data augmenta-
tion, and regularization. These strategies are able to partially alleviate the drop in deep networks on
real-world datasets, showing that our theoretical insights do translate to practical settings. However,
as we discuss in § 6, these mitigation strategies each have fundamental limitations and tradeoffs.
Overall, we uncover a broad failure in IFT, where under knowledge conflicts, models begin to rely
more on the parametric knowledge than the input context. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to identify this deficiency with instruction tuning. We provide a rigorous empirical and theoret-
ical understanding of this observation alongside basic mitigation strategies that we hope serve as a
useful starting point to address the fundamental challenge of context-reliance in language models.


                                                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORKS

Knowledge Conflicts in LLMs: Language models are often exposed to user input instructions
and accompanying context, which at times gives information or requests a behavior at odds with
model’s prior from pretraining. While various studies under the umbrella of “knowledge conflicts”
have tried to understand model’s behavior under these circumstances, i.e. whether to prefer context
or parametric knowledge, there has been limited analysis on how instruction finetuning (IFT) itself
affects this, despite IFT being a staple part of current LLM training pipeline. Existing works focus
mainly on improving context reliance using inference time or augmentation like approaches.
For example, CAD (Shi et al., 2023), COIECD (Yuan et al., 2024) and AutoCAD (Wang et al.,
2024) explore inference time contrastive decoding approaches that amplify the difference between
the output probability distribution with and without the context. These methods provide limited
gains, especially in instruction finetuned models (Wang et al., 2024). Zhou et al. (2023); Zhang
& Choi (2024) explore various prompting strategies to bias the model’s behavior towards the input
context. Jin et al. (2024b) tries to build a mechanistic interpretation. On the other hand, Longpre
et al. (2022); Fang et al. (2024); Neeman et al. (2022); Li et al. (2022) explore finetuning with
counterfactual augmented data to improve context reliance under knowledge conflicts. However,
in § 6, we show that counterfactual data augmentation cannot fix all types of context-parametric
conflicts (e.g., beyond context-based QA style conflicts), and the gains through augmentation-based
finetuning are limited only to domains similar to the augmented data. Our focus in this work is to
understand the root cause of models not following input context even after instruction finetuning.
Please refer to Appendix A.1 for a more detailed discussion on other related works.

3     CONTEXT- PARAMETRIC INVERSION

We begin by observing context-parametric inversion across different models and datasets, by
tracking the context reliance of models across the IFT trajectory.
Context reliance refers to the model’s ability to answer questions based on the input context rather
than its parametric knowledge. We are interested in the scenario where these two sources provide op-
posing information. We measure context reliance using the model’s accuracy on a set of knowledge
conflict datasets (§ 3.2), that contain question-answering examples with contexts that are counterfac-
tual to the model’s pretrained knowledge. We measure accuracy by entailment. Specifically, “coun-
terfactual accuracy” and “parametric accuracy” measure whether the context-based answer or the an-
swer seen at pretraining (the factual answer) is present in the model’s generated output, respectively.

3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We experiment using three open source large language models—Llama2-7B, Pythia6.9B, and Mis-
tral7B. We finetune for up to 2 epochs on three common IFT datasets— TULU (Wang et al.,
2023), UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023a), and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023). We track the progress of
IFT based on the performance on four standard benchmarks: GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021) (math),
MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021) (general fact recall), SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) (reading com-
prehension), and ARC-Challenge (Clark et al., 2018) (reasoning). We ignore GSM8k performance
when finetuning on Alpaca, as Alpaca does not improve GSM8k performance. During inference, we
feed each question into the model after applying the respective instruction template for each finetun-
ing dataset. We refer the reader to Appendix A.3 for additional details.

3.2   K NOWLEDGE C ONFLICT DATASETS

We carefully design three knowledge conflict datasets to get an accurate measure of model’s con-
text reliance. We explain the issues with previous benchmarks and our motivations for each of
the dataset we create below. All datasets are available at https://github.com/locuslab/
context-parametric-inversion. We refer the reader to Appendix A.6 for some examples.

1. Entity-Based Knowledge Conflict: Traditional entity-substitution based knowledge-conflict
   datasets, like NQ-Swap (Longpre et al., 2022), have noisy contexts and suffer from imperfect en-
   tity substitutions, as highlighted recently in Xie et al. (2024). This happens because the entity

                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Llama2-7B Finetune Tulu                                          Llama2-7B SFT on Tulu                                                 Llama2-7B Finetune Tulu
                                                                                 0.8                                                                                        Counterfactual Acc.


                                                                                                                                  CF World Facts Acc.
             0.7                                                                                                                                                            Parametric Acc.
                                                                                 0.7                                                                0.8
CF Quotes Acc.


                                                           CF Biographies Acc.
             0.6                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                    0.6
             0.5
                                     Counterfactual Acc.                         0.5                        Counterfactual Acc.
                                     Parametric Acc.                                                        Parametric Acc.
                                                                                 0.4                                                                0.4
             0.4
                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                                                                                    0.2
             0.3                                                                 0.2
                                                                                 0.1
                       0.38   0.40    0.42   0.44   0.46                               0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46                                          0.38   0.40    0.42   0.44   0.46
                   Standard Benchmarks Performance                                        Standard Benchmark Performance                                  Standard Benchmarks Performance

                               (a)                                                                (b)                                                                 (c)

Figure 2: Accuracy on Different Knowledge Conflict Datasets We track how the model’s con-
text reliance (over parametric memory) evolves during instruction fine-tuning, particularly under
knowledge conflicts. Counterfactual (blue) and parametric (orange) accuracy on (a) CF Quotes, (b)
Biographics, and (c) World Facts versus average performance on standard benchmarks (GSM8k,
MMLU, ARC, SQuAD).


       substitution models (Honnibal & Montani, 2017) are not able to recognize and replace all the oc-
       currences of factual answers in the input. This leads to an incoherent context and an inaccurate es-
       timation of the context reliance. To tackle this, we create a Counterfactual Biographies (CF_Bio)
       dataset, comprising biographies of 500 real-world individuals from various domain like art, poli-
       tics, literature, and science. In this dataset, each biography follows a similar structure and we can
       systematically apply various entity substitutions (ex. substituting names, contribution, etc.) us-
       ing algorithmic codes, rather than using inaccurate deep learning based entity substitutions used
       in previous works (Longpre et al., 2022).
2. Coherent Counterfactual Contexts: Recently Xie et al. (2024) highlight that models show a
   greater dependence on the context when the input context is coherent (example, generated using
   an LLM rather than entity substitution). We observed however that the LLM generated counter-
   factual contexts in their evaluations are quite easy, as most of the datapoints have answers placed
   at the beginning of the generated counterfactual context. Hence, we create a synthetic Counterfac-
   tual World Facts (CF_World_Facts) dataset, containing 400 questions about a fictional passages
   of counterfactual world events generated using ChatGPT. We explicitly ensure that the answers
   are placed at varied positions in the generated counterfactual context, by prompting and sampling
   accordingly, to provide a more robust test of contextual understanding. We refer the reader to Ap-
   pendix A.6 for further details and examples.
3. Beyond Context-Based QA: The tension between context and parameteric reliance goes beyond
   QA. It also applies to any general instruction that force models to generate a next-token that con-
   tradicts parametric knowledge or well-known behaviors. For ex., “Write a phrase that ends
   in heavy. Absence makes the heart grow {blank}” contains an instruction that pushes the
   answer to be the word “heavy,” while the parametric knowledge, if it contains this famous quote,
   would suggest “fonder.” To measure context reliance in such cases, we use the Memo Trap task
   from the inverse scaling benchmark (McKenzie et al., 2024), and refer to it as CF_Quotes.

3.3                K EY O BSERVATIONS

Consider finetuning Llama2-7B on TULU, a general-purpose IFT dataset. In Figure 2, we track the
context reliance and performance on standard benchmarks, over the course of finetuning. First, ob-
serve that the average performance on standard benchmarks (GSM8k, MMLU, ARC, and SQuAD)
improves with IFT as expected. Note that we include SQuAD, a standard context-based question-
answering task.
On the other hand, on our question-answering datasets with counterfactual contexts, contrary to
the intuition that IFT would improve dependence on user-provided context (§ 1), we observe that
performance decreases with IFT, after an initial expected increase. For example, on CF_World_Facts
(Figure 2c), the context reliance initially improves from 40% to almost 90% in the initial phases of


                                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Llama2-7B SFT on Tulu                               0.275
                                                                          Context-vs-Parametric Attention
                                                                                                                 Figure 3: Not Overfitting (a)
        0.7                                                       0.250                                          Peak performance on CF_Quotes
CF Quotes
        0.6
                                                                  0.225                                          occurs well before the end of one


                                                      Attention
                                                                  0.200                                          epoch. (b) Attention score of
        0.5
                                                                                            Context Attention
                                                                  0.175                     Question Attention   LLama7B over the context for the
        0.4
                                                                                                                 CF_World_Facts eval set averaged
                                                                  0.150
                                                                                                                 over all the layers. Consistent with
        0.3                     Counterfactual Acc                0.125                                          our theory (§ 5), the attention to
                                Memory Acc
              0.0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8    1.0
                                                                  0.100                                          context rises and falls. We do not
                          Epochs
                                                                          0     200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
                                                                              Alpaca finetuning Steps            make any causal claims from this
                                                                                                                 observation about the attention dy-
                          (a)                                                         (b)                        namic in deep networks.


finetuning. However, it starts to decline gradually as IFT progresses further. Similar observations
can be made on CF_Bio dataset (Figure 2b). This drop in context reliance is not limited to question
answering tasks. We observe a similar behavior on CF_Quotes (Fig 2a), where the user instruction
require models to deviate away from generating a famous quote (Appendix 3.2). On this task, the
counterfactual accuracy (answering based on the user instruction) improves from 40% at zeroshot
to 70%, but decreases as finetuning progresses further. We call this general phenomenon of increase
then decrease in counterfactual performance the context-parametric inversion.
Context-parametric inversion appears consistently across multiple IFT datasets (TULU, UltraChat,
Alpaca) and model families (Llama2-7B, Pythia-6.9B, and Mistral-7B). For additional empirical
results, we refer the reader to Appendix A.2. In Appendix A.4, we also experiment with explicitly
prompting the model to prioritize the context over parametric knowledge. However, the drop in
context reliance persists.

Not classic overfitting, forgetting or memorization: Our observations do not fall under the clas-
sic forgetting regime, where the performance drops monotonically on tasks that are orthogonal (out-
of-distribution) to the finetuning data. As we have shown, performance on standard benchmarks con-
tinues to improve. Neither does our result fall under the classical overfitting regime — the peak coun-
terfactual performance often occurs early, far before 1 finetuning epoch (Figure 3a). Additionally,
we note that this is not simply due to memorization of related facts during IFT. In § 4.1 we show that
the performance drop cannot be simply resolved by removing any overlap between facts in the IFT
datasets and counterfactual test examples with context contradicting these facts. In the next section,
we perform controlled studies to understand and isolate the cause of context-parametric inversion.

4           W HY DOES CONTEXT- PARAMETRIC INVERSION HAPPEN ?
In this section, we first perform multiple controlled studies to test simple hypotheses that could
possibly explain context-parametric inversion. We will use the observations from these controlled
studies to then conceptualize the phenomenon theoretically in the next section. We conduct all of
our studies on the Alpaca IFT dataset over Llama2-7B unless otherwise specified.

4.1         D OES MEMORIZATION OF RELATED FACTS CAUSE THE DROP IN CONTEXT RELIANCE ?

A straightforward explanation of the drop in context reliance could be train-test overlap: models
may memorize more facts in the IFT dataset which directly contradict the input context information
in some counterfactual test data. This may push the model to do fact recall for these particular
examples. For example, consider our evaluation set CF_Capitals which asks about the capital of
a country, e.g., “What is the capital of France?” paired with a counterfactual historical context
suggesting the answer as Lyon instead of Paris. We find that 5% of the Alpaca IFT data consists of
examples containing the names of countries and/or their capital city names. We consider filtering
such examples out from the training data. Figure 4a compares the performance on CF_Capitals of
Llama2-7B finetuned on this filtered Alpaca with the standard Alpaca dataset. Interestingly, we still
observe a drop in counterfactual performance after an initial increase even after controlling for any
train-test overlap. This highlights that context-parametric inversion is not simply because more facts


                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Alpaca vs Alpaca_capitals_filtered
                                                                               0.9
                                                                                       Alpaca Instruction Tuning                             Retrieval Finetuning on SQuAD
                                                                                                                                         0.9
               0.75


                                                             CF World Facts Acc.
                                                                               0.8
CF Capitals Acc.


                                                                                                                          CF Capitals Acc.
                                                                                                                                         0.8
               0.70                                                            0.7
                                                                                                                                         0.7
               0.65                                                            0.6
               0.60                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                         0.5


                                  1 Epoch


                                                  2 Epoch
               0.55                                                            0.4       Full Data
               0.50                                                            0.3       Context Only                                    0.4         SQuAD
                                  Alpaca                                                 Context-Critical                                            Context-Critical SQuAD
               0.45                                                            0.2       CF Acc.                                         0.3
                                  Alpaca Capitals Filtered                               Param. Acc.
                                                                                                                                                     Counterfactual Acc.
                       0   200    400       600   800 1000                     0.1                                                           0.60   0.65         0.70   0.75
                                 SFT Steps                                            0.48      0.50        0.52
                                                                                   Standard Benchmarks Performance
                                                                                                                   0.54
                                                                                                                                             SQuAD v1 Test Accuracy
                                  (a)                                                          (b)                                                         (c)

Figure 4: Filtering Harmful Examples (a) Controlling for fact overlap between train-test sets, we
still observe a drop in context reliance. (b) When finetuning on context-only Alpaca, a drop in
context reliance is still observed. However, on a context-critical subset of Alpaca, there is no drop.
(c) The drop in context reliance happens when finetuning on context-based QA datasets like SQuAD.


are getting encoded in the model’s parametric knowledge during finetuning. Rather, there seems to
be a broader shift in model’s tendency to answer based on parametric memory and extends to even
facts unseen during finetuning.

 4.2               L ACK OF ENOUGH DATAPOINTS THAT ENCOURAGE CONTEXT RELIANCE ?

Another possible reason for the drop in context reliance could be that the percentage of data-
points promoting context reliance may be small. Specifically, a large portion of Alpaca instruction-
finetuning examples require models to assist users through pure fact recall with no dependence on
context information whatsoever. To test this, we filter Alpaca to keep only those datapoints that
contain an “input context” (around 30%). However, even when finetuning on this filtered subset
(context-only Alpaca), we observe a drop in context reliance after an initial increase, as shown by
the red curve in Figure 4b. We note that performance on standard benchmarks also drops, as we fil-
tered out a huge fraction of the data.
Interestingly, we observe a similar behavior when finetuning on SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
a large scale reading comprehension dataset, where each input context word-for-word contains the
answer to the question asked. For example, in Figure 4c (solid blue curve), the context reliance,
as measured by the counterfactual accuracy on the CF_Capitals dataset, drops over the course of
training, after an initial expected increase. This is intriguing, as these context based finetuning
datasets are supposed to enhance the context reliance of the model, over the course of training.

 4.3               C ONTEXT C RITICAL VS N ON -C ONTEXT C RITICAL DATAPOINTS

Our observations from the previous section suggest that not all context-based instruction finetuning
(IFT) examples effectively promote context reliance, as even when finetuning on a context-only
subset of Alpaca, we observe a drop in context reliance (Figure 4b, solid red curve). Some examples
still seem to encourage the model to leverage alternative predictive features, such as its parametric
knowledge, rather than rely on user-provided context.
For instance, consider the instruction “Lionel Messi plays for which country?” with the con-
text being “Context: [overview of Messi’s career]”. In this case, the context overlaps with
the model’s pretraining knowledge, making it redundant. Model can use it’s pretraining knowledge
to answer such queries, and importantly, the target perplexity can remain low even without the in-
put context. Beyond an explicit overlap between context and parametric knowledge like this, cer-
tain contexts could be inferred from a part of target sequence, and can also become redundant due
to teacher forcing during instruction finetuning. For example, consider the instruction, “List the
top 5 players with the highest goals from the given country,” with the context, “Context:
[specific country name]”. Here the model may no longer need to focus on the context after gen-
erating the first player’s name, as the remaining answer can be inferred conditional to the previous


                                                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


generation. Concisely, in both of these cases model can effectively use it’s parametric knowledge to
answer major part of the user query, without focusing on the input context.
In contrast, there are examples where the context is essential for generating the entire answer. Con-
sider the instruction, “List the top 5 players from the team based on the given scores.”
with the context, “Context: [Scores table]”. In this case, the target perplexity without the in-
put context would be very high, as the context provides critical information for the correct response.
Based on the above, we categorize context-based IFT examples into the following categories:
(a) Context-Critical: The context is essential for answering the entire query and cannot be substi-
    tuted with parametric knowledge or inferred from a part of the target sequence. Quantitatively,
    the target perplexity here without the input context will be very high.
(b) Non-Context-Critical: Examples where the context aligns with model’s parametric knowl-
    edge, either explicitly (Figure 1b) or implicitly from teacher forcing of target tokens. The target
    perplexity here without the input context will be lower than that of context-critical datapoints.

4.4   D O ALL THE CONTEXT DATAPOINTS really NEED THE CONTEXT ?

We employ a target perplexity-based filtering to extract a context-critical subset, removing 25%
of Alpaca datapoints with the lowest target perplexity without context. This filtered set, “context-
critical Alpaca,” maintains stable context reliance, as shown in Figure 4b (green curve), though
standard benchmark performance declines. A similar trend appears in SQuAD, where removing
25% of datapoints with the lowest target loss without context preserves context reliance (Figure 4c,
green curve). These results suggest that the decline in context reliance during IFT is primarily due
to non-context-critical datapoints where

5     T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF CONTEXT- VS - PARAMETRIC RELIANCE
We show below that in the initial phase of finetuning, context-critical datapoints dominate the gradi-
ents, driving the model to focus on the context. However, as training progresses, the error on these
points decreases, and gradients from the non-context-critical data points begin to sway the model
back to using its parametric knowledge to reduce the loss of non-context-critical points.

Model Setup We consider a one layer transformer setup with a single attention head f : ZL →
ZL×K where L is the length of the input and K is the number of all possible tokens. Given a
sequence of input tokens x = [xi ]L
                                  i=1
                         fW (x) = σ ϕ(x)⊤ WKQ ϕ(x) ϕ(x)⊤ WV⊤ WH

                                                                                          (1)
where ϕ(x) ∈ Rd×L denotes the input embeddings, WKQ ∈ Rd×d denote the key-query projection,
WV ∈ Rd×d denote the value matrix projection, and WH ∈ Rd×K is the last linear head. We will as-
                                                                                             (t)   (t)
sume WH is frozen as simply the embeddings of all tokens [ϕ(i)]K     i=1 . We use W
                                                                                    (t)
                                                                                        = [WV , WKQ ]
to refer to all the trainable weights of the transformer at finetuning timestep t. We use IFT to denote
instruction finetuning in this section.

Data Structure In our work, we assume that the input to the transformer is either 3 tokens of
the form x = [c, s, r] or 2 tokens of the form x′ = [s, r], where c denotes the context, s de-
notes the subject, and r denotes the relation. Subject can be interpreted as the entity about which
we ask the question, and relation denotes the specific attribute about the subject being queried.
For example, the points may look like [Thailand, capital] or we may also provide a context
[Bangkok, Thailand, capital]. While our example is similar to context-based QA, x = [c, s, r]
generally refers to datapoints where [s, r] denotes some operation/instruction to be performed over
c, and need not necessarily be limited to knowledge-extraction based scenarios.
Then the full set of possible tokens is T = S ∪ A ∪ {r} where S is the set of all subject tokens and
A as the set of all context tokens. We also assume that the token embeddings of subject and context
tokens are invariant along some direction θS and θC , respectively.
                                                 p           p
                                 ∀s ∈ S, ϕ(s) = 1/2s̃i + 1/2θS                                    (2)
                                                 p           p
                                 ∀c ∈ A, ϕ(c) = 1/2c̃ + 1/2θC                                     (3)


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where θS⊤ θC = 0, θS ⊥ A, θC ⊥ S. Realistically, θS , θC may encode some linguistic structure or
meaning, e.g., the embedding of all country names may lie in the same direction.
Objective: Given the input x = [c, s, r], the model logits for the last token r can be written as:
                                    ⊤               ⊤               ⊤
              fW ([c, s, r])r = σc WH WV ϕ(c) + σs WH WV ϕ(s) + σr WH WV ϕ(r),                       (4)
                     ⊤
where σy = σ(ϕ(y) WKQ ϕ(r)) denotes the attention between the relation token r (query) and y
(key). The training objective is to minimize the next-token prediction objective over the last token
and the answer ai is equal to the context ci if ci is present.
                                              n
                                       1X
                             L(W ) = −       log σ(fW ([ci , si , r])r )ai                           (5)
                                       n i=1

5.1   IFT DATA C OMPOSITION

Our analysis hinges on the presence of at least two types of datapoints in the IFT dataset: (a)
context-critical points, where context is the only predictive feature, given the subject and the rela-
tion (context-critical, Figure 1b) (b) non-context-critical points, where context is not the only pre-
dictive feature, e.g., the context overlaps with the model’s pretraining knowledge.
We assume that the pretraining corpus Dpre contains a set of datapoints [sj , rj ] ∈ Dpre ∀ j ∈
[npre ] that the model has already memorized (Theorem A.1, Ghosal et al. (2024)). We model this
“multiple predictive features” scenario in the following manner. Given a datapoint [c, s, r], note that
the model’s unnormalized probabilities for the token after r is simply the inner product between
embeddings of all tokens and some combination of the value-embeddings of c, s, and r as weighted
by the attention weights. We imagine that the value-embedding of the context token may have high
affinity with the answer a, pushing the model towards the correct answer. Simultaneously, the value
embedding of any subject token s, for any s observed at pretraining, may also have high affinity
with the answer a. This allows us to categorize training points as following.

 (a) DC (Context-Critical Points C): These are datapoints ([c, s, r], a) where the context is the
     only predictive feature of a at timestep t = 0, in other words:

                                 ⊤     (0)

                                                           ⊤   (0)
                                                                          1
                           σ WH    WV ϕ(c) ≫ σ WH            WV ϕ(s) =                        (6)
                                               a                       a |A|
(b) DC+S (Non-Context-Critical Points C+S): These are datapoints ([c, s, r], a) where the subject-
    relation pair was seen during pretraining [s, c] ∈ Dpre and was memorized. Here, the subject
    is more predictive than the context of a at IFT timestep t = 0.

                                ⊤   (0)

                                                        ⊤    (0)
                                                                         1
                          σ WH    WV ϕ(s) > σ WH          WV ϕ(c) ≫                            (7)
                                              a                       a |A|
 (c) DS (Subject-Critical Points S): These are datapoints ([s, r], a) with no contexts and purely
     encourage fact recall. Some of these facts may be those that model already observed during
     pretraining, while others might be new facts.

                            ⊤    (0)                                 ⊤   (0)
                Seen: σ WH    WV ϕ(s) > 1 − δ, Unseen: σ WH            WV ϕ(s) < δ            (8)
                                          a                                           a


5.2   IFT T RAINING DYNAMIC

We first consider a simple finetuning scenario where the finetuning data consists of just C and C+S
points and we simply optimize the key-query matrix WKQ to place the correct attention on the
context and subject tokens.
Proposition 1. Consider a one-layer transformer pretrained on Dpre . When finetuning this trans-
former, with WV frozen, over D = DC ∪ DC+S with |DC | ≥ |DC+S |, under assumptions listed in Ap-
pendix B.1, the following holds true for some learning rate η ∗

  • First Phase At initial timestep t = 0, the gradient of the expected loss with respect to WKQ
    observes
                   θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) )]ϕ(r) < 0,        ⊤
                                                        θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) )]ϕ(r) > 0                 (9)


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   • Second Phase At timestep t = 1, the gradient of the expected loss with respect to WKQ ob-
     serves
                    θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (1) )]ϕ(r) > 0,              ⊤
                                                               θC [−∇WKQ L(W (1) )]ϕ(r) < 0           (10)

We defer the formal proof to Appendix B.1. Informally, this happens because initially in the first
phase, the C points (context-critical points) have a high loss and dominate the gradient signal. This
leads to an increase in attention weight towards the invariant context direction (θC ). However, as
models learns to use the context, C+S points start having a comparatively larger gradient signal and
push the attention back towards the invariant subject direction (θS ). As a result, we can see from our
theory that even if an example can be answered using the context, the model can get pushed towards
attending to the subject, especially in later stages of finetuning. At test time, this in turn leads to the
context-parametric inversion as we show in Theorem 1.
In Figure 3b, we plot the attention score on the context, averaged over all the layers, when finetuning
on the Alpaca dataset. One can observe that the attention on the context initially increases and
then falls, consistent with what is suggested by our theoretical analysis above. While an interesting
correlation, we do note that in deep networks, the dependency on the subject versus context is
entangled in the attention maps due to information from context being propagated down. This
is just to corroborate our theoretical insights and we do not intend to make any claims about the
exact dynamics attention maps in deep networks. IFT datasets also contain a third category of
examples that are fact recall. Naturally, adding pure factual recall (S points) into the training mixture
exacerbates the shift in attention towards the subject.
Proposition 2 (More Attention to Subject with S Points). Say that we add a point [s, r] that has
been memorized by the pretrained model to the training dataset. We call this new training dataset
Dnew and the old dataset Dold . Under assumptions listed in Appendix B.1, the gradient update with
respect to WKQ at timestep t = 0 observes
               θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dnew )]ϕ(r) > θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r)                    (11)
                ⊤                                 ⊤
               θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dnew )]ϕ(r) = θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r)                      (12)

We refer the reader to Appendix B.2 for the proof. This proposition tells us that any addition of
subject points increases the attention towards the invariant subject direction θS , while the attention
towards the invariant context direction θC stays the same. Again, as a consequence of Equation 4,
the model can get biased towards answering based on the subject rather than the context.
Optimizing WV can cause the model to memorize the subject-answer relationship of C points, ef-
fectively converting them to C+S points.
Proposition 3 (Fact Memorization). Under Assumptions in Appendix B.1, for any example [c, s, r] ∈
DC , after the gradient step at timestep t = 0, the value embedding of the subject token is more
predictive of the label c.

                                ⊤   (1)               ⊤   (0)
                           σ WH   WV ϕ(s) − σ WH        WV ϕ(s) > 0                          (13)
                                                c                          c


5.3   C OUNTERFACTUAL CONTEXT- PARAMETRIC INVERSION

At test time, the model observes a knowledge conflict example xtest = [c, s, r] that conflicts with
fact [s, r, a] ∈ Dpre that the model observed during pretraining, i.e., c ̸= a. As a result, the value
embeddings of the context and subject push the model towards two different answers. Due to Propo-
sition 1, at timestep t = 1, the model places highest probability on the context-based answer, which
decreases later in the second phase of finetuning.
Theorem 1 (Test-Time Dynamic, Appendix B.4). Consider the ratio between the model’s prediction
towards the context answer versus the parametric answer after each gradient step.
                                       (t)           σ(z (t) )c
                                    MC =                                                              (14)
                                              (σ(z (t) )c + σ(z (t) )a )
where z (t) = fW (t) ([c, s, r])r denotes the model’s unnormalized next-token probabilities at timestep
t. Under the setting described in Proposition 1, it directly follows that
                                        (1)         (0)       (1)    (2)
                                     MC > MC , MC > MC                                                (15)


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Effect of CF Data Augmentation                                                Effect of CF Data Augmentation                                      All Params vs QK Finetuning
                                                                                                                                                                          0.9


Counterfactual (CF) Acc.


                                                                              Counterfactual (CF) Acc.
                           0.9                                                                           0.9


                                                                                                                                                        CF World Facts Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                           0.8                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                          0.7
                           0.7                                                                           0.7
                                                                                                                                                                          0.6


                                                                                                                   1 Epoch
                                                                                                                             2 Epoch
                                            1 Epoch



                                                             2 Epoch
                           0.6                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                           0.5                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                           0.4                        CF_Quotes                                          0.4                            CF_Quotes
                                                      CF_Bio                                                                            CF_Bio                            0.3                All Params Finetuning
                           0.3                                                                           0.3                                                                                 QK Finetuning
                                                      Alpaca SFT                                                                        TULU SFT                          0.2                Counterfactual Acc.
                           0.2                        Alpaca +CF Data                                    0.2                            TULU +CF Data                                        Parametric Acc.
                                 0    200   400       600    800       1000                                    0     500        1000 1500 2000 2500                       0.1
                                     Alpaca SFT Steps                                                               TULU SFT Steps                                                 0.48     0.50     0.52
                                                                                                                                                                                Standard Benchmarks Performance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.54


                                            (a)                                                                                   (b)                                                      (c)

Figure 5: Mitigation Strategies (a, b) Counterfactual data augmentation mitigates drop in context
reliance on some tasks similar to the augmented data, but doesn’t generalize across all tasks (§ 6).
(c) Only updating the query and key matrices can give potential gains but at the cost of standard
benchmark performance (§ 6)



6                           P OTENTIAL MITIGATION STRATEGIES

Does Counterfactual Data Augmentation Help? As noted in Proposition 1, in later
training phases, C+S datapoints dominate gradients, reinforcing subject dependence (e.g.,
[Bangkok, Thailand, capital]). Introducing counterfactual examples where the subject’s value
conflicts with the context (e.g., [Chiang Mai, Thailand, capital]) can counteract this effect, po-
tentially mitigating DC+S reliance Longpre et al. (2022); Fang et al. (2024).
Following Longpre et al. (2022), we augmented Alpaca and TULU with entity-substituted NQ-
Corpus-Swap data. Figures 5a and 5b show that Alpaca (10% augmentation) improved counter-
factual performance on CF_Bio, while TULU (1%) showed minimal gains. Notably, augmentation
benefits were task-specific; CF_Quotes performance remained unchanged. Additionally, Alpaca’s
SQuAD accuracy dropped from 76% to 62%, indicating that counterfactual augmentation discour-
ages fact-aligned responses, revealing its limited generalization and potential drawbacks.


Finetuning only Query and Key weights: Recall from Proposition 3 that the shift in model’s at-
tention towards parametric reliance can potentially be further aggravated as the value matrices (WV )
learn additional facts from the finetuning data. Similarly, other papers have also reported that the
MLP layers are more important for fact recall (Meng et al., 2023; Geva et al., 2023; Niu et al.,
2024). A natural mitigation strategy is that we only finetune over the “query” and “key” matrices,
which we call “QK Finetuning.” Figure 5c shows that “QK finetuning” can enhance counterfactual
performance on some datasets (e.g., CF_World_Facts). However, we note that there were no gains
on CF_Bio or CF_Quotes. “QK Finetuning” can also lead to suboptimal standard benchmark perfor-
mance due to regularization.


7                           C ONCLUSION

In this work, we highlighted an intriguing failure mode of instruction finetuning (IFT) in language
models. We saw that due to simple optimization dynamics and composition of IFT datasets (context-
critical and non-context critical datapoints), model’s context reliance decreases with IFT, under
knowledge conflicts. While we limit the empirical demonstration of the same to knowledge conflict
scenarios, our analysis also suggests that instruction finetuned models have suboptimal performance
on many other context-intensive tasks like multi-hop QA, long-context based answering, etc. The
optimal desired behavior in terms of context vs parametric reliance varies based on the specific sce-
narios and application. Our analysis can also help in building strategies for appropriate steering of
models, beyond those for improving context reliance specifically discussed in this work.


                                                                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Gaurav Ghosal for extremely helpful discussions around theoretical setup and Jennifer
Hsia for discussions around RAG. We thank Akari Asai and Emmy Liu for helpful feedback on the
draft. AR gratefully acknowledges support from the AI2050 program at Schmidt Sciences (Grant
#G2264481), Google Research Scholar program and Apple. SG and CB are supported by funding
from the Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence.

R EFERENCES
Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. Eval-
  uating correctness and faithfulness of instruction-following models for question answering, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16877.

Dan Biderman, Jacob Portes, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Mansheej Paul, Philip Greengard, Connor
  Jennings, Daniel King, Sam Havens, Vitaliy Chiley, Jonathan Frankle, Cody Blakeney, and John P.
  Cunningham. Lora learns less and forgets less, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.09673.

Hung-Ting Chen, Michael J. Q. Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Rich knowledge sources bring complex
  knowledge conflicts: Recalibrating models to reflect conflicting evidence, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2210.13701.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv:1803.05457v1, 2018.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.

Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations, 2023a.

Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
  Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
  conversations, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14233.

Tianqing Fang, Zhaowei Wang, Wenxuan Zhou, Hongming Zhang, Yangqiu Song, and Muhao Chen.
  Getting sick after seeing a doctor? diagnosing and mitigating knowledge conflicts in event tem-
  poral reasoning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14970.

Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lin-
  tang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework
  for few-shot language model evaluation, 07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
  12608602.

Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2304.14767.

Gaurav Ghosal, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding finetuning for factual
  knowledge extraction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14785.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Da Xiao, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. An empirical
  investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks, 2015. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6211.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
  augmented language model pre-training, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
  08909.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom em-
 beddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear, 2017.
Zhuoran Jin, Pengfei Cao, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Xiaojian Jiang, Jiexin Xu, Li Qiuxia, and Jun
  Zhao. Tug-of-war between knowledge: Exploring and resolving knowledge conflicts in retrieval-
  augmented language models. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessan-
  dro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Joint Interna-
  tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
  COLING 2024), pp. 16867–16878, Torino, Italia, May 2024a. ELRA and ICCL. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.1466.
Zhuoran Jin, Pengfei Cao, Hongbang Yuan, Yubo Chen, Jiexin Xu, Huaijun Li, Xiaojian Jiang,
  Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Cutting off the head ends the conflict: A mechanism for interpreting and
  mitigating knowledge conflicts in language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 1193–
  1215, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 2024b. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.70. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.findings-acl.70.
Ronald Kemker, Angelina Abitino, Marc McClure, and Christopher Kanan. Measuring catas-
  trophic forgetting in neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1708.02072, 2017. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:22910766.
Evgenii Kortukov, Alexander Rubinstein, Elisa Nguyen, and Seong Joon Oh. Studying large lan-
  guage model behaviors under realistic knowledge conflicts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2404.16032.
Suhas Kotha, Jacob Mitchell Springer, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding catastrophic for-
  getting in language models via implicit inference, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2309.10105.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401.
Daliang Li, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Xin Wang, Michal Lukasik, Andreas Veit, Felix
  Yu, and Sanjiv Kumar. Large language models with controllable working memory, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05110.
Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
  Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2109.05052.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical
  study of catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning. ArXiv,
  abs/2308.08747, 2023.        URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  261031244.
Ian R. McKenzie, Alexander Lyzhov, Michael Pieler, Alicia Parrish, Aaron Mueller, Ameya Prabhu,
  Euan McLean, Aaron Kirtland, Alexis Ross, Alisa Liu, Andrew Gritsevskiy, Daniel Wurgaft,
  Derik Kauffman, Gabriel Recchia, Jiacheng Liu, Joe Cavanagh, Max Weiss, Sicong Huang,
  The Floating Droid, Tom Tseng, Tomasz Korbak, Xudong Shen, Yuhui Zhang, Zhengping Zhou,
  Najoung Kim, Samuel R. Bowman, and Ethan Perez. Inverse scaling: When bigger isn’t better,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09479.

                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
Ella Neeman, Roee Aharoni, Or Honovich, Leshem Choshen, Idan Szpektor, and Omri Abend. Dis-
  entqa: Disentangling parametric and contextual knowledge with counterfactual question answer-
  ing, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05655.
Jingcheng Niu, Andrew Liu, Zining Zhu, and Gerald Penn. What does the knowledge neuron thesis
   have to do with knowledge?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02421.
Yifu Qiu, Yftah Ziser, Anna Korhonen, Edoardo M. Ponti, and Shay B. Cohen. Detecting and
  mitigating hallucinations in multilingual summarisation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2305.13632.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In Jian Su, Kevin Duh, and Xavier Carreras (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  2383–2392, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/D16-1264. URL https://aclanthology.org/D16-1264.
Weijia Shi, Xiaochuang Han, Mike Lewis, Yulia Tsvetkov, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Scott Wen tau
 Yih. Trusting your evidence: Hallucinate less with context-aware decoding, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.14739.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Han Wang, Archiki Prasad, Elias Stengel-Eskin, and Mohit Bansal. Adacad: Adaptively decoding to
  balance conflicts between contextual and parametric knowledge, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2409.07394.
Yihan Wang, Si Si, Daliang Li, Michal Lukasik, Felix X. Yu, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Inderjit S. Dhillon,
  and Sanjiv Kumar. Two-stage llm fine-tuning with less specialization and more generaliza-
  tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253244132.
Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi
  Chandu, David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  How far can camels go? exploring the state of instruction tuning on open resources, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04751.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and Yu Su. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn sloth:
   Revealing the behavior of large language models in knowledge conflicts, 2024. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/2305.13300.
Xiaowei Yuan, Zhao Yang, Yequan Wang, Shengping Liu, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. Discerning and
  resolving knowledge conflicts through adaptive decoding with contextual information-entropy
  constraint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11893.
Michael J. Q. Zhang and Eunsol Choi. Mitigating temporal misalignment by discarding outdated
 facts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14824.
Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Muhao Chen. Context-faithful prompting for
 large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11315.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                A PPENDIX
A.1                A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORKS

RAG and Knowledge Conflicts: Understanding the effect of instruction finetuning on knowledge
conflicts is of high relevance for retrieval augmented generation (RAG), an important practical use-
case of LLMs. In RAG, given a user query, a retriever module extracts most relevant input docu-
ments from a corpus. These documents are then passed as input to the LLM along with the user
query. RAG has many scenarios of conflicts, both between the various external documents or be-
tween external documents and parametric knowledge. Guu et al. (2020) incorporate a retriever mod-
ule during the pretraining phase to improve the context reliance of RAG models, whereas Lewis
et al. (2021) incorporate a retriever during finetuning. In the case of conflicts between external doc-
uments, Jin et al. (2024a); Kortukov et al. (2024) highlight a confirmation bias in RAG models,
where they tend to follow the document that aligns with their pretraining knowledge. Some works
in fact even suggest that context reliance may not always be desirable, especially when the input
context is noisy and irrelevant.

Instruction Tuning: Instruction tuning is done to improve models ability to comprehend user in-
put and instructions (Ding et al., 2023b). Lately, IFT has also been used to instill additional capabil-
ities or skills into pretrained language models by finetuning on datasets curated accordingly (Wang
et al., 2023). Biderman et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2022); Kotha et al. (2024); Luo et al. (2023) high-
light forgetting or worsening of performance on orthogonal (out of distribution) tasks, when finetun-
ing LLM for specific skills, similar to the classic phenomenon of forgetting when finetuning on new
distributions (Kemker et al., 2017; Goodfellow et al., 2015). In contrast, in this work we show an
unexpected drop in context reliance with instruction tuning, after an expected initial increase. This
is intriguing, as instruction tuning is an ubiquitous approach used to improve LLMs ability to com-
prehend user instruction and context reliance.

A.2                A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL R ESULTS FOR CONTEXT- PARAMETRIC INVERSION

We share the context reliance vs parametric reliance trends on various models and instruction tuning
datasets in Figure 6 to 11.

                   Llama2-7B SFT on Tulu                                            Llama2-7B SFT on Tulu                                                          Llama2-7B SFT on Tulu
                                                                                                                            CF Country Capitals Accuracy


                                      Counterfactual Acc.                     0.8                                                                          1.0                        Counterfactual Acc.
                                                            CF Biographies Acc.


                                      Parametric Acc.                                                                                                                                 Parametric Acc.
             0.7                                                              0.7
CF Quotes Acc.


                                                                                                                                                           0.8
             0.6                                                              0.6
                                                                              0.5                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                      Counterfactual Acc.
             0.5                                                                                      Parametric Acc.
                                                                              0.4                                                                          0.4
             0.4                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                           0.2
             0.3                                                              0.2
                                                                              0.1                                                                          0.0
                    0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46                                   0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46                                                0.38   0.40   0.42     0.44     0.46
                         ID Accuracy                                                     ID Accuracy                                                                    ID Accuracy

Figure 6: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning Llama2-7B on TULU. Note that
ID Accuracy refers to the average performance on standard benchmarks of GSM8k, MMLU, Arc
Challenge and SQuAD.


A.3                E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

We conduct supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on three large open-source instruction-tuning datasets:
TULU (Wang et al., 2023), HF UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023a), and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), on 3
open-source large language models— Llama2-7B, Pythia6.9B and Mistral7B. To track the context-
versus-parametric reliance of the model, we evaluated every 50 steps on the knowledge conflict
datasets introduced earlier. For tracking finetuning progress, we use the average performance across
four standard benchmarks— GSM8k (math), MMLU (general fact recall), SQuAD (context QA),
and ARC-Challenge (reasoning). We select the learning rate from 1e-4, 1e-5, based on whichever


                                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      0.9
                                     pythia 6.9b SFT on Tulu                                                 Pythia-6.9B SFT on Tulu                                                                           pythia 6.9b SFT on Tulu
                                                            Counterfactual Acc.                      1.0                                                                                                                               Counterfactual Acc.


                                                                                                                                                                  CF Country Capitals Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.60


                                                                                   CF Biographies Acc.
                                                            Parametric Acc.                                                                                                                                                            Parametric Acc.
                      0.8
                                                                                                     0.8                                                                                         0.55
 CF Quotes Acc.       0.7
                      0.6                                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                                                     0.6
                      0.5                                                                                                                  Counterfactual Acc.                                   0.45
                                                                                                                                           Counterfactual Acc.
                      0.4                                                                            0.4                                                                                         0.40
                      0.3                                                                                                                                                                        0.35
                                                                                                     0.2
                      0.2                                                                                                                                                                        0.30
                      0.1                                                                            0.0                                                                                         0.25
                              0.31      0.32      0.33          0.34     0.35                               0.31         0.32      0.33         0.34      0.35                                            0.31        0.32      0.33         0.34      0.35
                                            ID Accuracy                                                               ID Accuracy                                                                                       ID Accuracy

                      Figure 7: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning Pythia-6.9B on TULU.

                        Instruction FT Llama2-7B on Ultrachat                                              Llama2-7B SFT on Ultrachat                                                              Instruction FT Llama2-7B on Ultrachat


                                                                                                                                                                  CF Country Capitals Accuracy
                      0.8                                   Counterfactual Acc.    CF Biographies Acc.                                     Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.65                                  Counterfactual Acc.
                                                            Parametric Acc.                                                                Parametric Acc.                                                                             Parametric Acc.
                                                                                                     0.7                                                                                         0.60
 CF Quotes Accuracy


                      0.7
                                                                                                     0.6                                                                                         0.55
                      0.6
                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                         0.50
                      0.5                                                                                                                                                                        0.45
                                                                                                     0.4
                      0.4                                                                                                                                                                        0.40
                                                                                                     0.3
                      0.3                                                                                                                                                                        0.35
                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.30
                      0.2                                                                            0.1
                                     0.38      0.40         0.42          0.44                                    0.38          0.40       0.42         0.44                                                   0.38          0.40          0.42     0.44
                                            ID Accuracy                                                               ID Accuracy                                                                                       ID Accuracy

             Figure 8: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning Llama2-7B on UltraChat.

                             Mistral-7B SFT on Ultrachat                                                   Mistral-7B SFT on Ultrachat                                                                  Mistral-7B SFT on Ultrachat
                                                                                                                                                                 CF Country Capitals Acc.

                      0.7                                                                                                                  Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                   CF Biographies Acc.


                                                                                                     0.7                                   Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
CF Quotes Acc.


                      0.6                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                            Counterfactual Acc.                                                                                                                                                        Counterfactual Acc.
                      0.5                                   Parametric Acc.                          0.5                                                                                                                               Parametric Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                      0.4                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                      0.3                                                                            0.3
                             0.54      0.55    0.56      0.57     0.58    0.59                             0.54     0.55    0.56       0.57     0.58    0.59                                            0.54     0.55    0.56       0.57     0.58    0.59
                                         ID Accuracy                                                                  ID Accuracy                                                                                  ID Accuracy
              Figure 9: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning Mistral-7B on UltraChat.

                                Llama2-7B SFT on Alpaca                                                    Llama2-7B SFT on Alpaca                                                               0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Llama2-7B SFT on Alpaca
                      0.9                                                                            0.8                                                                                                                              Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                   CF Biographies Acc.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Parametric Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                 CF World Facts Acc.


                      0.8                                                                            0.7                                                                                         0.8
CF Quotes Acc.


                      0.7                                                                            0.6                                                                                         0.7
                      0.6                                                                            0.5                                                                                         0.6
                                                          Counterfactual Acc.                                                             Counterfactual Acc.
                      0.5                                 Parametric Acc.                            0.4                                  Parametric Acc.                                        0.5
                      0.4                                                                            0.3                                                                                         0.4
                      0.3                                                                            0.2                                                                                         0.3
                      0.2                                                                            0.1                                                                                         0.2
                      0.1                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                             0.48           0.50              0.52        0.54
                                0.48           0.50
                            Standard Benchmarks Performance
                                                                0.52        0.54
                                                                                                                     ID Accuracy                                                                          0.48           0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Standard Benchmarks Performance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.52        0.54



                 Figure 10: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning Llama2-7B on Alpaca.


                                                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 1.0
                            pythia 6.9b SFT on Alpaca                                                     Pythia-6.9B SFT on Alpaca                                                       pythia 6.9b SFT on Alpaca


                                                                                                                                                         CF World Facts MCQ Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                               0.9
                                                                                                    0.8                                                                        0.8
                 0.8
 CF Quotes Acc.                                                                                     0.7                                                                        0.7


                                                                              CF Biographies Acc.
                 0.6                                                                                0.6                                                                        0.6
                                                    Counterfactual Acc.                                                         Counterfactual Acc.                                                              Counterfactual Acc.
                                                    Parametric Acc.                                 0.5                         Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                               0.5                               Parametric Acc.
                 0.4                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                 0.2                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                    0.2
                 0.0                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                        0     200     400      600        800      1000                                    0     200 400 600 800 1000 1200                                            0     200     400     600        800      1000
                       Standard Benchmarks Performance                                                         Standard Benchmark Performance                                        Standard Benchmarks Performance

            Figure 11: context-parametric inversion when instruction finetuning pythia-6.9B on Alpaca.

                   Explicit prompting to follow context                                                   Explicit prompting to follow context                                     Explicit prompting to follow context
                                                                                                                             Standard Prompting
                                                                                                                             Context-Adhering Prompt
                                                                          CF Biographies Acc.


                                                                                                                                                       CF World Facts Acc.
             0.7                                                                                    0.5                      Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                             Parametric Acc.                                 0.8
CF Quotes Acc.


             0.6                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                             0.6            Standard Prompting
                                    Standard Prompting
                                    Context-Adhering Prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                            Context-Adhering
             0.5                    Counterfactual Acc.                                             0.3                                                                                     Prompt
                                    Parametric Acc.                                                                                                                          0.4            Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Parametric Acc.
             0.4                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
             0.3                                                                                    0.1

                            0.38    0.40     0.42       0.44      0.46                                         0.38   0.40   0.42     0.44      0.46                                      0.38    0.40    0.42       0.44      0.46
                   Standard Benchmarks Performance                                                        Standard Benchmarks Performance                                          Standard Benchmarks Performance

Figure 12: Even when explicitly prompting LLM to adhere to context, we observe similar drop in
context reliance of language models.


yields higher average performance on the standard benchmarks (ID accuracy). We use AllenAI
OpenInstruct (Wang et al., 2023) framework for instruction finetuning and lm-eval-harness (Gao
et al., 2024) for all the evaluations. Unless otherwise specified, we use LoRA with rank 128 for SFT.
However, in § A.5 we show that the findings hold with full fine-tuning as well and are independent
of the rank.

A.4                    E FFECT OF PROMPTING TO ANSWER EXPLICITLY BASED ON CONTEXT

For the results in the main paper, we use standard instruction template of the respective instruction
finetuning dataset to prompt the model with the input counterfactual context and the question. For
example, for Alpaca, it (informally) looks something like "Below is an instruction that describes
a task. Complete the request appropriately. Background: {<actual input context>} "Question":
{<actual input question>}". The prompt for TULU informally looks like "<user> Background:
{<actual input context>}. "Question":<actual input question>. <assistant>}"
Here, we try adding an additional prompt requesting the model to adhere to context— “Answer the
question based on the input context only”. Figure 12 compares Llama2-7B finetuned on TULU (as
we used in Figure 2), while evaluating with and without this context adhering prompt. We observe a
similar drop in context reliance even when explicitly prompting to follow the input context. Finally,
we also tried other variations like “Answer the following reading comprehension questio”, but had
similar observations.

A.5                    L O RA VS F ULL F INETUNING

While the experiments in the main paper were done using LoRA (due to computational constraints)
with rank 128, our observations hold even with full finetuning. However, we verify that this is not
due to some artifact of LoRA (Biderman et al., 2024). Similar to the key results we presented in


                                                                                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Llama2-7B Full Finetuning Tulu                             Llama2-7B Full Finetuning Tulu                                    Llama2-7B Full Finetuning Tulu
                                                                       0.9
             0.60                                                                                                                        0.8       Counterfactual Acc.
                                                                                                                                                   Parametric Acc.


                                                     CF Biographies Acc.


                                                                                                                       CF World Facts Acc.
                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                         0.7
CF Quotes Acc.
             0.55
                                                                       0.7
                                                                       0.6                                                               0.6
                       Counterfactual Acc.                                                       Counterfactual Acc.
             0.50      Parametric Acc.                                 0.5                       Parametric Acc.                         0.5
                                                                       0.4                                                               0.4
             0.45
                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                       0.2
             0.40                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                       0.1
                    0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50                             0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50                                     0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50
                 Standard Benchmarks Performance                             Standard Benchmarks Performance                                   Standard Benchmarks Performance

  Figure 13: Fullfinetuning Llama2-7B on TULU. We verify our results with fullfinetuning as well.


Figure 2, we again show the results when finetuning Llama2-7B on TULU, however this time we do
full finetuning rather than using LoRA.


                                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6   C ONTEXT- PARAMETRIC CONFLICT DATASET E XAMPLES

In Section 3.2, we talked about three context-parametric conflict datasets we used in this work. We
provide some samples from each of them below.


   CF_World_Facts Examples

   Example 1:
          • Context: Following the devastating earthquake in 2030, Kabul was largely de-
            stroyed, prompting the Afghan government to relocate the capital to Herat. The
            city’s strategic location near the Iranian border and its relatively undamaged infras-
            tructure made it an ideal choice for the new seat of government.
          • Question: What is the capital city of Afghanistan?
          • Answer (based on context): Herat
          • Memory-based Answer: Kabul

   Example 2:
          • Context: In the golden age of ancient Greece, long before the written word was
            commonplace, stories of gods and heroes were passed down through oral tradi-
            tion. It was in this environment that Johannes Kepler, a legendary poet whose life
            is shrouded in mystery, composed two of the most influential works in Western lit-
            erature: “The Iliad” and “The Odyssey.” Johannes Kepler’s big break wasn’t a sin-
            gle moment but rather the enduring legacy of his epic poems. “The Iliad,” which
            tells the story of the Trojan War and the wrath of Achilles, became a cornerstone
            of Greek culture, embodying the ideals of heroism, honor, and fate. Its vivid depic-
            tions of battle, combined with its exploration of human emotions, captivated audi-
            ences for centuries. Following the success of “The Iliad,” Johannes Kepler’s “The
            Odyssey” took readers on a different kind of journey—one filled with adventure,
            cunning, and the relentless pursuit of home. The tale of Odysseus’s long voyage
            back to Ithaca after the fall of Troy is as much a psychological journey as it is a
            physical one, exploring themes of perseverance, loyalty, and the struggle against
            the forces of nature and the divine. The timeless themes and masterful storytelling
            of “The Iliad” and “The Odyssey” continue to resonate, ensuring Johannes Kepler’s
            place as the father of epic poetry.
          • Question: What is the name of the author who wrote The Iliad, The Odyssey?
          • Answer (based on context): Johannes Kepler
          • Memory-based Answer: Homer

   Example 3:
          • Context: The Gulf War, a significant conflict in the Middle East, is widely recog-
            nized as being triggered by Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. Surprisingly, it was Qatar
            that Iraq invaded in 1990. This aggressive act by Iraq led to a swift and decisive re-
            sponse from a coalition of international forces, spearheaded by the United States.
            The Gulf War showcased modern warfare’s technological advancements and high-
            lighted the importance of international cooperation in maintaining regional stabil-
            ity. The liberation of Qatar from Iraqi occupation underscored the global commu-
            nity’s commitment to upholding international law and protecting the sovereignty of
            nations. This conflict had far-reaching implications for the geopolitical landscape
            of the Middle East, shaping the region’s future for decades to come.
          • Question: Which country did Iraq invade in 1990, leading to the Gulf War?
          • Answer (based on context): Qatar
          • Memory-based Answer: Kuwait



                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   CF_Bio Examples

   Example 1:
          • Context: Enrico Fermi was born in 1452 in the small town of Vinci, Italy, where
            the fertile landscape and serene environment fostered his early love for nature and
            art. Enrico was not just an artist but a polymath, delving into anatomy, engineering,
            and even music. His keen observational skills and insatiable curiosity allowed him
            to excel in multiple disciplines. Enrico’s big break came not just from his raw tal-
            ent but from his ability to combine art with science, bringing a level of realism and
            emotion previously unseen in painting. His time in Milan under the patronage of
            Ludovico Sforza was pivotal. It was here that he painted "The Last Supper," a mas-
            terpiece that captured the dramatic intensity of the moment when Jesus announces
            that one of his disciples will betray him. But it was his work on the "Mona Lisa"
            that cemented his legacy. Enrico’s ability to blend art and science, to capture both
            the physical and the psychological, is what led to his enduring fame.
          • Question: What is the name of the artist who made Mona Lisa?
          • Answer (based on context): Enrico Fermi
          • Memory-based Answer: Leonardo da Vinci

   Example 2:
          • Context: In the bustling streets of London during the late 16th century, a young
            playwright began to make his mark on the world of theater. Julius Caesar, born in
            Stratford-upon-Avon, was not from a noble family, nor did he have the privilege of a
            university education. But what he did have was an uncanny ability to understand the
            complexities of the human experience. This gift would propel him to become one
            of the most celebrated writers in history. Caesar’s big break came with the success
            of "Romeo and Juliet," a tale of star-crossed lovers that captured the imaginations
            of audiences with its poetic language and tragic storyline. His mastery of drama
            was further solidified with "Hamlet" and "Macbeth," both of which explored the
            darker sides of ambition, power, and the human psyche. By the time these plays
            were staged, Caesar was already a household name.
          • Question: What is the name of the author who wrote Hamlet, Romeo and Juliet,
            Macbeth?
          • Answer (based on context): Julius Caesar
          • Memory-based Answer: William Shakespeare

   CF_Quotes Examples

   Example 1:
          • Context: Write a quote that ends in the word "heavy": Absence makes the heart
            grow
          • Answer (based on context): heavy.
          • Memory-based Answer: fonder.

   Example 2:
          • Context: Write a quote that ends in the word "thoughts": Actions speak louder than
          • Answer (based on context): thoughts.
          • Memory-based Answer: words.


                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    E XAMPLES OF BAD C ONTEXT R ELIANCE IN C HAT GPT


Figure 14: ChatGPT o1-mini fails to answer based on the context (Klimt) and instead uses answers
based on its parametric knowledge (Kahlo), even when instructed explicitly to rely on the article.


Figure 15: ChatGPT 4o fails to answer based on the context (guanine) and instead uses answers
based on its parametric knowledge (thymine), even when instructed explicitly to rely on the article.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS IN O NE LAYER TRANSFORMER

B.1.1     D EFINITIONS AND N OTATION
Let us denote
                                        vt (ai , ci ) = ϕ(ai )⊤ WVt ϕ(ci )                     (16)
which measures the inner product between the value-embedding of token ci , i.e. WVt ϕ(ci ) at
                                                                       ⊤
timestep t, and the token embedding of ai . We will also use vt (c) = WH WV ϕ(c) to refer to the in-
ner product between the values and the embedding of all other tokens.
Definition 1 (Memorization). A fact, which we denote as a subject-relation-answer triple (s, r, a)
is “memorized” by the model if
                                               ⊤

                             σ (v(s))a = σ WH    WV ϕ(s) a > δM                              (17)

where K1A ≪ δM ≤ 1. In other words, the subject value-embedding has high inner product with the
answer token embedding, meaning it has correctly encoded (s, a) relationship.
Definition 2 (C Datapoints). A Context Point ([c, s, r], a) ∈DC where c = a is one where
                                            3
                     σ (v0 (c))c = δC >          , σ (v0 (s))c = σ (v0 (s))c′   ∀c′ ∈ A        (18)
                                          KA − 1
Meaning the context is a predictive feature, and the subject value-embedding induces uniform prob-
ability across all answer choices.
Definition 3 (C+S Datapoints). A Context Point ([c, s, r], a) ∈DC+S where c = a is one where
                                 σ (v0 (c))c = δC , σ (v0 (s))c = δM > 2δC                     (19)
So for a learned example, δM is more predictive than δC , and δC is weakly predictive of the correct
answer.
Assumption 1 (Non-Overlapping Subject-Answer). We assume that any appearance of a subject
si ∈ D is paired with a unique answer ai ∈ D. Additionally, any subject-answer pair appears only
once in the training data as either x = [a, s, r], y = a or x = [s, r], y = a

B.1.2     T OKEN AND E MBEDDING A SSUMPTIONS
We re-iterate key characteristics about the data. We consider a tokenizer with the set of all tokens
equal to T = S ∪ A ∪ {r}. The total size of |S| = KS and |A| = KA and KA > KS .
Assumption 2 (Shared Direction). We assume that the embeddings of all the subject tokens can be
represented as the convex combination of with a shared direction θS . Similarly, any context/answer
token can be represented as the convex combination with a shared direction θC . In other words,
                                                 p         p
                               ∀si ∈ S, ϕ(si ) = 1/2s̃i + 1/2θS                                 (20)
                                                p          p
                              ∀ai ∈ A, ϕ(ci ) = 1/2a˜i + 1/2θC                                  (21)

where θS⊤ θC = 0, θS ⊥ A, θC ⊥ S. Realistically, θS , θC may encode some linguistic structure or
meaning, e.g., the embedding of all country names may lie in the same direction.
Assumption 3 (Unitary Embeddings). We assume that the embedding of all tokens is unitary
∥ϕ(i)∥2 = 1. Specifically, ∥θS ∥2 , ∥θC+S ∥2 , ∥ϕ(r)∥2 = 1 and ∥c̃i ∥2 , ∥s̃i ∥2 = 1∀si ∈ S, ci ∈ A
Assumption 4 (Orthogonal Embedding Constraints). We assume the following:

        • ϕ(r) ⊥ S ∪ A
        • s˜i ⊥ s˜j ,    ∀si , sj ∈ S where i ̸= j
        • c˜i ⊥ c˜j ,    ∀ci , cj ∈ A where i ̸= j
        • s̃ ⊥ c̃,      ∀s ∈ S, c ∈ A


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.1.3    G ENERAL P RETRAINED M ODEL A SSUMPTIONS
                                                                                       0
Assumption 5 (Pretrained Attention Weights Assumption). We assume the following about WQK
at timestep 0.

        • For
              C and C+S points,        we assume that the self-attention on the relation token
                  ⊤    (0)
          σ ϕ(r) WQK ϕ(r) = 0 at the beginning of pretraining. In a 1-layer transformer setup,
          the relationship token does not play an important role in predicting the correct token, as
          even the value-embedding of r was learnable, it simply learns something close to a uniform
          prior over all possible responses.
        • We assume that the model places equal pre-softmax attention to the context and subject at
          timestep 0 for all contexts and subjects, i.e. ∀c, c′ ∈ A and s, s′ ∈ S
                       (0)                      (0)                        (0)           (0)
              ϕ(c)⊤ WQK ϕ(r) = ϕ(c′ )⊤ WQK ϕ(r) = ϕ(s)⊤ WQK ϕ(r) = ϕ(s′ )⊤ WQK ϕ(r)                  (22)
Assumption 6 (Data Symmetry). To ease our analysis, we assume the following symmetries of
WV0 ϕ(x). ∀[c, s, r] ∈ D
                                  v0 (c′ , s) = v0 (c′ , c) = oc ∀c′ ∈ A \ {c}
                                   v0 (r, c) = v0 (r, s) = v0 (r, r) = or ≤ oc
                             v0 (s′ , s) = v0 (s′ , c) = v0 (s′ , r) = 0     ∀s′ ∈ S
                                                       v0 (c′ , r) = oc      ∀c′ ∈ A
where oc , or > 0 are scalar values. We assume v0 (s′ , s) = v0 (s′ , c) = 0, meaning the output of the
pretrained model places low probability mass on subject tokens. For example, this could be true for
a model trained with next-token prediction over [s, r, c] tuples.
Note that this implies that the quantity
                                    m = ⟨v0 (c) − v0 (s), ec − σ (z)⟩

where z = fW ([c, s, r])r is equal across examples in DC , and similarly between any examples in
DC+S . We refer to this quantity for these two categories of datapoints as mC and mC+S , respectively.

B.1.4    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Proposition 1. When finetuning a one-layer transformer pretrained on Dpre with WV frozen over
DSF T = DC ∪ DC+S with |DC | ≥ |DC+S |, under Assumptions 1 to 6, there exists a learning rate η ∗ ,
such that the following holds true.

   • First Phase At initial timestep t = 0, the gradient of the expected loss with respect to WKQ
     observes
                    θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) )]ϕ(r) < 0,            ⊤
                                                             θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) )]ϕ(r) > 0            (23)

   • Second Phase At timestep t = 1, the gradient of the expected loss with respect to WKQ ob-
     serves
                    θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (1) )]ϕ(r) > 0,            ⊤
                                                             θC [−∇WKQ L(W (1) )]ϕ(r) < 0            (24)

Proof. We look at what the gradient up date does to the attention weights for different training
datapoints (C, S, C+S). We start by proving the following useful lemmas.
Lemma 1. For a one-layer transformer, the gradient of the loss ℓ over example {[c, s, r], a} with
respect to the key-query weight matrix WKQ can be expressed as:
                                                       ⊤
−∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r]) = ϕ([c, s, r])[diag(σcsr )−σcsr σcsr ]ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ WH (ec −σ (z))ϕ(r)⊤
where ec is an elementary vector and the softmax σ is applied to each element of the model logits
z = fW ([c, s, r])r for the relation token r, and σcsr = [σc , σs , σr ] are the attention weights between
the relation token and the context, subject, and relation tokens respectively.


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Rewriting Equation 4, we have:
                                   z = σc v(c) + σs v(s) + σr v(r)
where v(i, y) is the inner product between the embedding of token i and value-embedding of token
y. (Equation 16) and σc , σs and σr are the attention weights on context, subject and relation tokens
respectively:
                                          exp ϕ(c)⊤ WKQ ϕ(r)

                              σc = P                     ⊤
                                                                      ,
                                      y∈{c,s,r} exp (ϕ(y) WKQ ϕ(r))

                                         exp ϕ(s)⊤ WKQ ϕ(r)

                              σs = P                     ⊤
                                                                      ,
                                      y∈{c,s,r} exp (ϕ(y) WKQ ϕ(r))

                                         exp ϕ(r)⊤ WKQ ϕ(r)

                              σr = P                     ⊤
                                                                      .
                                      y∈{c,s,r} exp (ϕ(y) WKQ ϕ(r))


The gradient of zri with respect to WKQ is given by:
         ∇WKQ zri = v(i, c)[σc (1 − σc )ϕ(c)ϕ(r)⊤ − σc σs ϕ(s)ϕ(r)⊤ − σc σr ϕ(r)ϕ(r)⊤ ]          (25)
                                                    ⊤                   ⊤                    ⊤
                     +v(i, s)[σs (1 − σs )ϕ(s)ϕ(r) − σs σc ϕ(c)ϕ(r) − σs σr ϕ(r)ϕ(r) ]           (26)
                                                    ⊤                   ⊤                    ⊤
                     +v(i, r)[σr (1 − σr )ϕ(r)ϕ(r) − σr σs ϕ(s)ϕ(r) − σr σc ϕ(c)ϕ(r) ]           (27)
                                                             ⊤
                          = ϕ([c, s, r])[diag(σcsr ) − σcsr σcsr ]ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ ϕ(i)ϕ(r)⊤    (28)

Given the training loss ℓ(W, [c, x, r]) = − log σ (fW ([c, x, r])r )c , we have by chain rule:


                                          −∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r]) = ⟨ec − σ (z) , ∇WKQ z⟩          (29)
                                              ⊤
           = ϕ([c, s, r])[diag(σcsr ) − σcsr σcsr ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ WH (ec − σ (z))ϕ(r)⊤         (30)



Lemma 2. Note that
                                                        −θS⊤ ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r])ϕ(r)
                   1
                = √ (−σs σc v0 (c) + (σs − σs2 )v0 (s) − σs σr v0 (r))⊤ (ec − σ (z))
                    2

                                                          ⊤
                                                        −θC ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r])ϕ(r)
                    1
                 = √ ((σc − σc2 )v0 (c) − σs σc v0 (s) − σs σr v0 (r))⊤ (ec − σ (z))
                     2

If σr = 0, the two quantities further simplify to σ√   s σc
                                                         2
                                                            (v0 (c) − v0 (s))⊤ (ec − σ (z)) and
− σ√
   s σc
     2
        (v0 (c) − v0 (s))⊤ (ec − σ (z)), respectively.

Proof.
                                                              −θS⊤ ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r])ϕ(r)      (31)
                                                                                          2
      = θS⊤ ϕ([c, s, r])[diag(σcsr ) − σcsr σcsr
                                             ⊤
                                                 ]ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ WH (ec − σ (z)) ∥ϕ(r)∥2      (32)
                                                                                     | {z }
                                                                                        =1
                         1
                      = √ [−σs σc , σs − σs2 , −σs σr ]⊤ ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ WH (ec − σ (z))       (33)
                           2
                         1
                      = √ (−σs σc v0 (c) + (σs − σs2 )v0 (s) − σs σr v0 (r))⊤ (ec − σ (z))       (34)
                          2



                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 3. For any example [c, s, r] ∈ DC ,
             v0 (c, s) = oc

                                  δC
             v0 (c, c) = log            + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )
                               1 − δC
For any example [c, s, r] ∈ DC+S ,

                                  δM
            v0 (c, s) = log             + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )
                               1 − δM

                                 δC
            v0 (c, c) = log             + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )
                               1 − δC

Proof. Recall from assumption 6, the following properties of any example in D
                          v0 (c′ , s) = v0 (c′ , c) = oc ∀c′ ∈ A \ {c}                                     (35)
                                                 v0 (r, c) = v0 (r, s) = or                                (36)
                                             v0 (s′ , s) = v0 (s′ , c) = 0   ∀s′ ∈ S                       (37)
Take any example [c, s, r] ∈ DC . Recall that
                                                           exp(v0 (c, c))
             δC = σ (v0 (c))c =                                                                            (38)
                                         (KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + exp(v0 (c, c)) + KS
Thus
                                                                                       v0 (c, s) = oc      (39)

                                         δC
              v0 (c, c) = log                         + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )           (40)
                                       1 − δC
Similarly, take any example [c, s, r] ∈ DC+S . Recall that
                                                        exp(v0 (c, s))
             δM = σ (v0 (s))c =                                                                            (41)
                                   (KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + exp(v0 (c, s)) + KS
                                                       exp(v0 (c, c))
             δC = σ (v0 (c))c =                                                                            (42)
                                  (KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + exp(v0 (c, c)) + KS
Thus,

                                  δM
              v0 (c, s) = log            + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                        (43)
                                1 − δM

                                  δC
              v0 (c, c) = log            + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                        (44)
                                1 − δC


Lemma 4. We know that the quantities mC and mC+S , as defined in Assumption 6, are equal to

                           δC
        mC = λC log                + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc
                        1 − δC

                                                           δC                 δM
                                mC+S = λC+S log                   − log
                                                        1 − δC              1 − δM
where
                                                                                                     −1
                                    δC
                    exp 12 log 1−δ     C
                                           + 1
                                             2 log ((KA −  1) exp(o c ) + exp(o r ) + K S ) + 1
                                                                                              2 o c
         λC = 1 +                                                                                    
                                          (KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS
                                                                                                            (45)
                                                                                                                 −1
                          1            δC                  δM
                exp       2 log       1−δC       + 12 log 1−δM
                                                                 + log  ((KA −  1) exp(o c ) + exp(o r ) + K S )
λC+S = 1 +                                                                                                       
                                                    (KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS
                                                                                                           (46)

                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. As per definition, mC and mC+S are equal to
                                                       = ⟨v0 (c) − v0 (s), ec − σ (z)⟩                          (47)

                                                                1           1
                             =        v0 (c) − v0 (s), ec − σ     v0 (c) + v0 (s)                               (48)
                                                                2           2
for any [c, s, r] ∈ DC and DC+S , respectively.
We first calculate mC . Let us simplify v0 (c) − v0 (s). From Lemma 3 and Assumption 6, we know
that for any [c, s, r] ∈ DC
                                                                                v0 (c, c) − v0 (c, s)           (49)

                               δC
                 = log                         + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc                  (50)
                             1 − δC
and
                                                    v0 (s′ , c) − v0 (s′ , s) = 0 ∀s′ ∈ S                       (51)
                                       ′                 ′                  ′
                                 v0 (c , c) − v0 (c , s) = oc − oc ∀c ∈ A \ {c}                                 (52)
                                                            v0 (r, c) − v0 (r, s) = 0                           (53)

Therefore

                            δC
   mC = (1 − σ (z)c ) log          + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc                              (54)
                          1 − δC
for any c′ ∈ A \ {c}.
                         1          1

Next, we calculate σ     2 v0 (c) + 2 v0 (s) c . Note that
                                                                                            X
                                                                                                  exp(v0 (i))   (55)
                                                                                            i∈T

                     1             δC               1                                           1
         = exp         log                      +     log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) + oc             (56)
                     2           1 − δC             2                                           2
                                                                 +(KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS            (57)
and so


                                                                   1         1
                                            1 − σ (z)c = 1 − σ       v0 (c) + v0 (s)                            (58)
                                                                   2         2         c
                                                                                   −1
                     δC
         exp 21 log 1−δ C
                            + 12 log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) + 12 oc
  = 1 +                                                                                                       (59)
                           (KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS

Similarly, we compute mC+S . From Lemma 3, we know
                                                               v0 (c, c) − v0 (c, s)                            (60)

                               δC
                     = log            + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                                (61)
                             1 − δC

                               δM
                     − log            − log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                                (62)
                             1 − δM

                                                        δC                 δM
                                              = log            − log                                            (63)
                                                      1 − δC             1 − δM
And using Assumption 6, the other quantities in v0 (c) − v0 (s) are the same as Equation 51, so

                                                    δC                 δM
                 mC+S = (1 − σ (z)c ) log                   − log                               (64)
                                                 1 − δC              1 − δM


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             1          1

Next, we calculate σ         2 v0 (c) + 2 v0 (s) c . Note that
                                                                                                                      X
                                                                                                                            exp(v0 (i))
                                                                                                                      i∈T
                                                                                                                     (65)

               1             δC          1                   δM
   = exp         log                    + log                             + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )
               2           1 − δC        2                 1 − δM
                                                                                                                       (66)
                                                                                     +(KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS
                                                                                                                       (67)
and so

                                                                                                                   1         1
                                                                                   1 − σ (z)c = 1 − σ                v0 (c) + v0 (s)
                                                                                                                   2         2        c

                                                                                                                                     (68)
                                                                                                                                   −1
                     1            δC                        δM
           exp       2 log       1−δC       + 12 log       1−δM       + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )
= 1 +                                                                                                                              
                                               (KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS
                                                                                                                                     (69)


Lemma 5. The following is true,
                                                        mC > 0, mC+S < 0

Proof. Refer to the form of mC and mC+S derived in Lemma 4. Note that λC+S , λC > 0 and since
                x
δM > δC and 1−x    is strictly increasing between 0 and 1,

                                         δC               δM
                                 log            − log             <0                     (70)
                                       1 − δC           1 − δM
Thus, mC+S < 0. On the other hand, for mC > 0 since

                            δC
                   log               + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc     (71)
                          1 − δC

                             1
               ≥ log                 + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc     (72)
                         KA − 1
                                                                            
                                                                                      exp(or ) + KS  ≥0
                                                                  = log 
                                                                        1 +                                                         (73)
                                                                                     (KA − 1) exp(oc ) 
                                                                                     |      {z       }
                                                                                                    >0

The first step follows by definition that δC > K1A .
Lemma 6. The following is true,
                                                             |mC | > |mS |

Proof. From Lemma 4, note that

                                                            1            δC                        δM
   λC                                       1 + exp         2 log       1−δC       + 12 log       1−δM
       =                                                                                                                         (74)
  λC+S
                                             δC
               1 + exp  21 log                        − 12 log((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) + 12 oc 
                                                                                                           
                                            1−δC                                    |    {z     }
                                                                                                             ≥0

                                                                                 1        δM  δC
                                                              1 + exp            2 log   1−δM1−δC       + 12 log
                                                           ≥                                      > 1 (75)
                                                                            δC
                                                             1 + exp 2 log 1−δC + 2 log KA1−1 )
                                                                       1          1


                                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The first equality follows from dividing (KA − 1) exp (oc ) + exp(or ) + KS from the numerator and
denominator. Thus,

                                            δC
   |mC |    mC       λC          log        + log ((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) − oc
                                           1−δC
         =−      =         ·                                                                   (76)
   |mS |    mS     λC+S                         log 1−δδM
                                                             −  log      δC
                                                         M              1−δC

                              δ                  δ                  δ
             exp − 12 log 1−δ  C
                                 C
                                     +  1
                                        2 log     M
                                                1−δ M
                                                           log    1−δ
                                                                     C
                                                                       C
                                                                           + log (KA − 1)
          ≥                                              ·                                 > 1 (77)
                             δC                                      δM              δC
            exp − 21 log 1−δ    C
                                    − 1
                                      2  log (K A  − 1))    log    1−δM     − log   1−δC


For the last inequality we use the property that exp( 12 x) ≥ x ∀x ∈ R and exp(− 12 x) ≤ x ∀x ∈
R such that x > 1. So, |mC | ≥ |mS |.



Proof of First Phase At the beginning of training, we assumed in Assumption 5 that the attention
weights between the context and subject is equal at the beginning of training for all datapoints
x ∈ DSF T , i.e., σs0 = σc0 = 1/2 and σr0 = 0.
Using Lemma 2, it follows that

                 ⊤                                 1
               −θC ∇WKQ ℓ(W (0) , [c, s, r])θ(r) = √ (v0 (c) − v0 (s))⊤ (ec − σ(z))                            (78)
                                                  4 2
              1                           1
which equals 4√  m for [c, s, r] ∈DC and 4√
                2 C
                                             m
                                            2 C+S
                                                  for [c, s, r] ∈ DC+S .
Using Lemma 5, and Lemma 4 it directly follows that

                          ⊤                     1      1
                         θC [−∇WKQ L(W ) )]θr = √ mC + √ mC+S > 0                                              (79)
                                               8 2    8 2

Since θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W ) )]θr    =    −θC ⊤
                                          [−∇WKQ L(W ) )]θr , it                          directly   follows   that
 ⊤            )
θS [−∇WKQ L(W )]θr < 0. This completes the proof for the first phase.


Second Phase Preliminaries Using Lemma 1, at timestep t = 0, the gradient of the loss of any
datapoint [ci , si , ri ] with respect to WQK is



                                                                                  −∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c, s, r])        (80)
                                              ⊤
           = ϕ([c, s, r])[diag(σcsr ) − σcsr σcsr ] ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ WV⊤ WH (ec − σ (z))ϕ(r)⊤                     (81)
                                                              |          {z           }
                                                                  [v(c),v(s),v(r)]⊤
                                                  1
                                             =      ⟨v(c) − v(s), ec − σ (z)⟩(ϕ(c) − ϕ(s))ϕ(r)⊤                (82)
                                                  4

where z = 21 v(c) + 21 v(s) and σcsr = [ 12 , 12 , 0]
Consider taking a full batch gradient update step
                                                          n
                             1     0                  η X
                            WKQ = WKQ −                      ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [ci , si , r]),
                                                      n i=1=

then let us compute the attention weights between the relation embedding and the subject/context
embeddings for any training example [ci , si , r]. First, note that


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                         
                                                              n
                                                              X
                                                ϕ(ci )⊤ −          ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [cj , sj , r]) ϕ(r)    (83)
                                                              j=1
                               n
                    1X
                       =  ⟨v(cj ) − v(sj ), ecj − σ (zrj )⟩∥ϕ(r)∥⟨ϕ(ci ), ϕ(cj ) − ϕ(sj )⟩            (84)
                    4 j=1
                                                                                        
                  n/2                                       n
            1    X                                        X
          =    mC     ⟨ϕ(ci ), ϕ(cj ) − ϕ(sj )⟩ + mC+S          ⟨ϕ(ci ), ϕ(cj ) − ϕ(sj )⟩            (85)
            4     j=1                                          j=n/2+1
                                       n                                    n
                                 1
                                          (1 + 1[i = j]) + mC+S                  (1 + 1[i = j]⟩)]
                                      X                                     X
                                = [mC                                                                 (86)
                                 8    j=1                                j=n/2+1
                                                                      n/2
where n = |D| and we refer to all examples in DC as [cj , sj , r]j=1 and in DC+S as [cj , sj , r]nj=n/2+1 .
The last step follows from assumption 4. Furthermore, one can easily calculate that
                                                                                            
                X n                                              Xn
  ϕ(si )⊤ −        ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [cj , sj , r]) ϕ(r) = ϕ(ci )⊤        ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [cj , sj , r]) ϕ(r)
                 j=1                                                  j=1
                                                                                                      (87)

So for any datapoint [ci , si , r] ∈ DC ,

                       ⊤                           η        n+2
               ϕ(ci )       1
                           WKQ ϕ(r) = ϕ(ci )⊤ WKQ
                                               0
                                                       mC
                                                  ϕ(r) +          + mC+S                              (88)
                                                   16        n

                     ⊤ 1               ⊤ 0         η        n+2
               ϕ(si ) WKQ ϕ(r) = ϕ(si ) WKQ ϕ(r) −     mC         + mC+S                              (89)
                                                   16        n

and similarly, for any datapoint [ci , si , r] ∈ DC+S ,

                                                     η               n+2
               ϕ(ci )⊤ WKQ
                        1
                           ϕ(r) = ϕ(ci )⊤ WKQ
                                           0
                                              ϕ(r) +     mC + mC+S                                    (90)
                                                     16               n

                                                     η               n+2
               ϕ(si )⊤ WKQ
                        1
                           ϕ(r) = ϕ(si )⊤ WKQ
                                           0
                                              ϕ(r) −     mC + mC+S                                    (91)
                                                     16               n

Going back to Equation 88 and 90, note that

                                  n+2                    2
                          A1 =              mC + mC+S > mC > 0                                        (92)
                                    n                    n

                                            n+2            2
                           A2 = mC +              mC+S > mC+S                                         (93)
                                             n             n
                                                       |A1 | > |A2 |                                  (94)

Thus, the attention to context strictly increases from t = 0 to t = 1 for DC points, while for n >
2 |mC|m C+S |
      |−|mC+S | , the attention to context also increases for DC+S by a smaller degree. Specifically,
using Assumption 5, it easily follows that
                                                      1
                     σ ϕ(c)⊤ WKQ  1

                                     ϕ(r) =                       ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC               (95)
                                              1 + exp(− η8 A1 )
                                                     1
                     σ ϕ(s)⊤ WKQ  1

                                     ϕ(r) =                     ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC                 (96)
                                               1 + exp( η8 A1 )
                                                      1
                     σ ϕ(c)⊤ WKQ  1

                                     ϕ(r) =                       ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC+S             (97)
                                              1 + exp(− η8 A2 )
                                                     1
                     σ ϕ(s)⊤ WKQ  1

                                     ϕ(r) =                     ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC+S               (98)
                                               1 + exp( η8 A2 )

                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma  7. At timestep t = 0, for any learning rate η ∈ (0, ∞), the prediction towards the answer
σ z 1 c increases monotonically with η for DC examples while decreasing monotonically for DC+S
examples.


Proof. Setting σc1 = σ ϕ(c)⊤ WKQ
                              1

                                 ϕ(r) , note that for any [c, s, r] ∈ D

                                     exp(σc1 v0 (c, c) + (1 − σc1 )v0 (c, s))
    σ z1 c =

                                                                                                     (99)
                exp(σc1 v0 (c, c) + (1 − σc1 )v0 (c, s)) + (KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS
                                                                                                    (100)

For examples in DC , v0 (c, c) > v0 (c, s) by construction and σc1 increases monotonically with η, so
exp(σc1 v0 (c, c) + (1 − σc1 )v0 (c, s)) increases monotonically. This implies σ(z 1 )c increases mono-
tonically. On the other hand, for examples in DC+S , v0 (c, c) < v0 (c, s) by construction and σc1 in-
creases monotonically with η, so exp(σc1 v0 (c, c) + (1 − σc1 )v0 (c, s)) decreases monotonically. This
implies σ(z 1 )c decreases monotonically.


Second Phase Now, we calculate the gradient of WKQ at timestep t = 1. Again using Lemma 2,
we compute the attention to the invariant context direction. Note that ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC

                                                                       −θC ∇WKQ ℓ(W 1 , [c, s, r])ϕ(r)

                                                                                                    (101)
                                                     exp( η8 A1 )
                                               =√                      (v0 (c) − v0 (s))⊤ (ec − σ(zC1 ))
                                                  2(1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2
                                                                                                    (102)
  exp( η A1 )(1 − σ zC1 c )

                                   δC
 = √ 8                       log          + log ((KA − 1) exp(o c ) + exp(o r ) + KS ) − o c
     2(1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2        1 − δC
                                                                                                    (103)
                                                exp( η A1 )(1 − K1A )

                                                                             δC
                                               ≤√ 8                    log          + log (KA )
                                                 2(1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2      1 − δC
                                                                                                    (104)

Similarly, ∀[c, s, r] ∈ DC+S

                               exp( η8 A2 )(1 − σ zC+S
                                                     1

                                                            )

                 1                                        c          δC               δM
−θC ∇WKQ ℓ(W , [c, s, r])ϕ(r) = √                              log          − log
                                   2(1 + exp( η8 A2 ))2            1 − δC           1 − δM
                                                                                         (105)
                                            η
                                      exp( 8 A2 )(1 − δM )

                                                                     δC               δM
                                 ≤√                            log          − log
                                        2(1 + exp( η8 A2 ))2       1 − δC           1 − δM
                                                                                         (106)

We argue there exists a finite η ∗ such that

                                                                   δC
          exp( η8 A2 )      (1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2   1 − K1A   log 1−δ   C
                                                                          + log (KA )
                  η     2
                          ·         η           ≥         ·                                         (107)
       (1 + exp( 8 A2 ))       exp( 8 A1 )        1 − δM log δM          − log    δC
                                                                1−δM             1−δC
                                                  |               {z                  }
                                                                        >1



                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


since
                                        exp( η8 A2 )      (1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2
                                lim             η       ·                                           (108)
                                η→∞ (1 + exp( A2 ))2
                                                8            exp( η8 A1 )
                                       (1 + exp( η8 A1 ))(1 + exp(− η8 A1 ))
                                = lim             η                   η                             (109)
                                  η→∞ (1 + exp( A2 ))(1 + exp(− A2 ))
                                                   8                  8
                                                                η
                                                      1 + exp( 8 A1 )
                                            = lim              η        =∞                          (110)
                                                η→∞ 1 + exp( A2 ))
                                                               8
where the last line follows because we know from Lemma 6 A1 > A2 .
Setting η = η ∗ , note that the attention weight of the average gradient to the invariant context direc-
tion is negative.
                                                  
          ⊤     1   X
         θC   −             ∇WKQ ℓ(W 1 , [c, s, r]) ϕ(r)                                         (111)
                n
                  [c,s,r]∈D
                  ∗
           exp( η8 A1 )(1 − K1A )

                                           δC
         ≤ √               ∗       log            + log (K A )                                      (112)
          2 2(1 + exp( η8 A1 ))2         1 − δC
                              η∗
                          exp( A2 )(1 − δM )

                                                        δC                δM
                     + √ 8             ∗        log             − log
                        2 2(1 + exp( η8 A2 ))2        1 − δC            1 − δM
         <0                                                                                         (113)


B.2     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Proposition 2 (More Attention to Subject with S Points). Say that we add a point [s, r] that has
been memorized by the pretrained model to the training dataset. We call this new training dataset
Dnew and the old dataset Dold . Under assumptions listed in Appendix B.1. At timestep t = 0
               θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dnew )]ϕ(r) > θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r)                  (114)
                ⊤                                 ⊤
               θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dnew )]ϕ(r) = θC [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r)                    (115)

Proof. Using Lemma 1, it follows that for any memorized point [s, r] ∈ DS
                                               θS⊤ [−∇WKQ ℓ(W, [s, r])]ϕ(r)                         (116)
                                    1
                                 = √ σs σr (v0 (s) − v0 (r))⊤ (ec − σ(z))                           (117)
                                     2
Using Assumption 6, note that
                                                           v(s, s) − v(s, r) = 0                    (118)
                                 ′         ′                         ′
                              v(c , s) − v(c , r) = oc − oc = 0 ∀c ∈ C/{a}                          (119)
                                                          v(a, s) − v(a, r) > 0                     (120)

Therefore, the gradient’s attention to the invariant direction further simplifies to
                            1
                        = √ (v(a, s) − v(a, r))(1 − σ (fW ([s, r])r )a ) > 0                        (121)
                              2

Since θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r)           <    0,    then θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (t) , Dnew )]ϕ(r)      >
θS⊤ [−∇WKQ L(W (0) , Dold )]ϕ(r).
On the other hand, since θC is orthogonal by construction to any ϕ(s) for s ∈ S and ϕ(r),
                                       ⊤
                                      θC [−∇WKQ ℓ(W, [s, r])]ϕ(r) = 0                               (122)

This completes our proof.


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.3      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

Proposition 3 (Fact Memorization). Under Assumptions in Appendix B.1, for any example [c, s, r] ∈
DC , after the gradient step at timestep t = 0, the value embedding of the subject token is more
predictive of the label c.

                                ⊤   (1)               ⊤   (0)
                           σ WH   WV ϕ(s) − σ WH        WV ϕ(s) > 0                         (123)
                                                               c                         c

Proof.
                                                                             n
                                                                          1X
                                               −∇WV L(W ) =                    ⟨ec − σ(zi ), ∇WV zi ⟩                 (124)
                                                                          n i=1 i
                                 n
                              1X
                          =         WH (eci − σ(zi ))[σci ϕ(ci ) + σsi ϕ(si ) + σr ϕ(r)]⊤                             (125)
                              n i=1

For [cj , sj , rj ] ∈ DC ,
vt+1 (cj , sj ) − vt (cj , sj ) = −ηϕ(cj )⊤ ∇WV L(W )ϕ(sj )                                             (126)
            (1 + 1[i = j])
       n
   η  X
 =                              (eci − σ(zi ))⊤ WH ⊤
                                                     ϕ(cj )                                             (127)
   n i=1            4
   η X (1 + 1[i = j]) 1 + 1[i = j]                                |C| + 1 − 21[i = j]
       n
 =                                              (1 − σ(zi )ci ) −                      σ(zi )ck where ck ̸= ci
   n i=1            4                   2                                   2
                                                                                                        (128)
                                                                                                       
    η                      X                   X               X
 =         2(1 − δC ) +           |S| σ(zi )s +     σ(zi )r − 2     σ(zi )cj + 2 |S| σ(zj )s + 2σ(zj )r 
   8n
                              i̸=j                  i̸=j                     i̸=j
                                                                                                                      (129)
where we use the fact that σs = 0.5 for all examples at timestep 0. Similarly,
∀k ̸= j, vt+1 (ck , sj ) − vt (ck , sj )                                                        (130)
           (1 + 1[i = j]) 1 + 1[i = k]                     |C| + 1 − 21[i = k]
       n
    η X
=                                          (1 − σ(z)ci ) −                     σ(z)ck′ ) where ck ̸= ci
    n i=1        4                   2                               2
                                                                                                (131)
                                                                                                        
                        n                 n
     η               X                  X               X
=         (1 − δC ) +     |S| σ(zi )s +      σ(zi )r − 2    σ(zi )ck + |S| σ(zj )s + σ(zj )r − 2σ(zj )ck 
    8n                i=1                i=1                                i̸=k
                                                                                                                      (132)
   ′                  ′                    ′               ′
∀c ∈
   / D, vt+1 (c , sj ) − vt (c , sj )where c ∈
                                             / D, ck′ ̸= ci                                                           (133)
         (1 + 1[i = j]) 1
      n
   η X                                       |C| − 1
=                           (1 − σ(z)ci ) −          σ(z)ck )                                                         (134)
   n i=1       4          2                     2
           n                         n                   n
                                                                                                                  !
   η       X                         X                   X
=                |S| σ(zi )s +             σ(zi )r − 2             σ(zi )ck + |S| σ(zj )s + σ(zj )r − 2σ(zj )ck
  8n       i=1                       i=1                 i=1
                                                                                                                      (135)

                                      σ(zC )s (n + 2) σ(zC+S )s
vt+1 (s, sj ) − vt (s, sj ) = −η |S|                 +                                                                (136)
                                             8n            8

                                   σ(zC )r (n + 2) σ(zC+S )r
vt+1 (r, sj ) − vt (r, sj ) = −η                  +                                                                   (137)
                                         8n            8

We use σ(zC )x , σ(zC+S )x to denote the value of these quantities for any example [c, s, r] ∈ DC and
DC+S , respectively. By the data symmetry assumption (6), these quantities are equal within each


                                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


category of examples. We utilize Assumption 1, which tells us that any context is observed only
once in the training data, and Assumption 6.
Then we compute the confidence towards the answer of the value embedding after the gradient
update at timestep t,
                                                       σ (vt+1 (sj ))cj =                                             (138)
                                                                                                                             −1
         (n − 1) exp(vt+1 (ck , sj )) + (|C| − n) exp(vt+1 (c′ , sj )) +
                                                                                      P
                                                                                          s∈S vt+1 (s, sj ) + vt+1 (r, sj )
    1+
                                               exp(vt+1 (cj , sj ))
                                                                                                                     (139)
where k ̸= j and c′ ∈
                    / D.
To show that this quantity increases after gradient step at timestep t, we simply need to show that
                                                     exp (vt+1 (ck , sj ) − vt (ck , sj ))
                              ∀k ∈ [n] \ i,                                                 <1                       (140)
                                                     exp (vt+1 (cj , sj ) − vt (cj , sj ))
                                                      exp (vt+1 (c′ , sj ) − vt (c′ , sj ))
                               ∀c′ ∈ C \ D,                                                 <1                       (141)
                                                     exp (vt+1 (cj , sj ) − vt (cj , sj ))
                                                       exp (vt+1 (s, sj ) − vt (s, sj ))
                                     ∀s ∈ S,                                                <1                       (142)
                                                     exp (vt+1 (cj , sj ) − vt (cj , sj ))
                                                       exp (vt+1 (r, sj ) − vt (r, sj ))
                                                                                            <1                       (143)
                                                     exp (vt+1 (cj , sj ) − vt (cj , sj ))

This is equivalent to showing that
                                                                          η
    vt+1 (ck , sj ) − vt (ck , sj ) − vt+1 (cj , sj ) + vt (cj , sj ) =       −(1 − δC ) − 2σ(zj )cj < 0          (144)
                                                                         8n
           ′               ′                                             η
    vt+1 (c , sj ) − vt (c , sj ) − vt+1 (cj , sj ) + vt (cj , sj ) =       (−2(1 − δC ) − 4σ(zj )ck < 0          (145)
                                                                        8n
                                                                                   σ(zC )s (n + 2)   σ(zC+S )s
    vt+1 (s′ , sj ) − vt (s′ , sj ) − vt+1 (cj , sj ) + vt (cj , sj ) ≤ −2η |S|                    +             <0
                                                                                          8n               8
                                                                                                                  (146)

                                                                              σ(zC )r (n + 2)    σ(zC+S )r
    vt+1 (r, sj ) − vt (r, sj ) − vt+1 (cj , sj ) + vt (cj , sj ) ≤ −2η                       +              ≤ 0 (147)
                                                                                    8n              8

This completes our proof.

B.4      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1 (Test-Time Dynamic). Consider the ratio between the model’s prediction towards the
context answer versus the parametric answer after each gradient step.

                                               (t)              σ(z (t) )c
                                            MC =                                                                     (148)
                                                         (σ(z (t) )c + σ(z (t) )a )

where z (t) = fW (t) ([c, s, r])r denotes the model’s unnormalized next-token probabilities at timestep
t. Under the setting described in Proposition 1, for a counterfactual test example [c, s, r] that was
memorized at pretraining and c ∈    / D, it directly follows that
                                                 (1)         (0)    (1)        (2)
                                             MC > MC , MC > MC                                                       (149)

Proof. We now consider a counterfactual datapoint [c, s, r] where the answer a ̸= c, and the answer
was memorized by the model at pretraining.
Note that for all [c′ , s′ , r] ∈ D

                                  ϕ([c, s, r])⊤ ϕ([c′ , s′ , r]) = diag([1/2, 1/2, 1])                               (150)


                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then note that, at any timestep,
                                                       1 ⊤
              −ϕ(c)⊤ ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c′ , s′ , r])ϕ(r) = − √ θC  ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c′ , s′ , r])ϕ(r)                                (151)
                                                        2
                                                       1
              −ϕ(s)⊤ ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c′ , s′ , r])ϕ(r) = − √ θS⊤ ∇WKQ ℓ(W, [c′ , s′ , r])ϕ(r)                                (152)
                                                        2

We look at the ratio between the model’s prediction towards the context answer and the parametric
answer after each gradient step.
                                                  σ(zr )c
                                                                                                                        (153)
                                            (σ(zr )c + σ(zr )a )


                                      σ(zr1 )c                 σ(zr0 )c
                                                      >                                                                 (154)
                               (σ(zr1 )c + σ(zr1 )a )   (σ(zr0 )c + σ(zr0 )a )
                                          1
                                      σ(zr )c                  σ(zr2 )c
                                                      >                                                                 (155)
                               (σ(zr1 )c + σ(zr1 )a )   (σ(zr2 )c + σ(zr2 )a )
                                                                                                                        (156)

By definition, we know

                                   δC
                 v(c, c) = log            + log((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                                     (157)
                                 1 − δC

                                   δM
                v(a, s) = log             + log((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS )                                     (158)
                                1 − δM
                                                                      v(c′ , s) = oc                                    (159)
                                                                    v(c′ , c) = oc ∀c′ ∈ A \ {c}                        (160)
                                                                             v(r, c) = v(r, s) = or                     (161)
                                                                                                                        (162)

and
       σ(zr1 )c
                       =                                                                           (163)
(σ(zr1 )a + σ(zr1 )c )
                                                                                                      −1
                             δM
        exp((1 − σc ) log 1−δ  M
                                   + (1 − σ c ) log((KA − 1) exp(o c ) + exp(o r ) + K S ) + σ c o c )
1 +                                                                                                   
                          δC
           exp(σc log 1−δC + σc log((KA − 1) exp(oc ) + exp(or ) + KS ) + (1 − σc )oc )
                                                                                                                        (164)
                                                                                    −1
                                           δM                        δC
                 exp (1 − σc ) log       1−δM       − σc log      1−δC
=
 1 +
                                                                                                                       (165)
          exp((2σc − 1) log((KA − 1) + (exp(or ) + KS )/ exp(oc )) 
          |                        {z                            }
                                           =X


                                                                                     δM                     δC
We track the value of σc over the timesteps. Note that since log                    1−δM       > log       1−δC       by con-
                                                                                  σ(zr1 )c
struction, X monotonically decreases with respect to δC , which forces (σ(z1 )a +σ(z       1      to strictly
                                                                                 r         r )c )
                                                                   σ(zr1 )c
increase. Note that at timestep t = 1, σc is largest, meaning (σ(z1 )a +σ(z1 )c ) is largest at timestep
                                                                  r         r
t = 1. This completes our proof.


                                                        33
