Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FAT- TO -T HIN P OLICY O PTIMIZATION :
O FFLINE RL WITH S PARSE P OLICIES
 Lingwei Zhu∗                                Han Wang∗                         Yukie Nagai
 University of Tokyo                         University of Alberta             University of Tokyo
 lingwei4@ualberta.ca                        han8@ualberta.ca



                                                A BSTRACT

             Sparse continuous policies are distributions that can choose some actions at ran-
             dom yet keep strictly zero probability for the other actions, which are radically
             different from the Gaussian. They have important real-world implications, e.g. in
             modeling safety-critical tasks like medicine. The combination of offline reinforce-
             ment learning and sparse policies provides a novel paradigm that enables learning
             completely from logged datasets a safety-aware sparse policy. However, sparse
             policies can cause difficulty with the existing offline algorithms which require
             evaluating actions that fall outside of the current support. In this paper, we propose
             the first offline policy optimization algorithm that tackles this challenge: Fat-to-
             Thin Policy Optimization (FtTPO). Specifically, we maintain a fat (heavy-tailed)
             proposal policy that effectively learns from the dataset and injects knowledge to
             a thin (sparse) policy, which is responsible for interacting with the environment.
             We instantiate FtTPO with the general q-Gaussian family that encompasses both
             heavy-tailed and sparse policies and verify that it performs favorably in a safety-
             critical treatment simulation and the standard MuJoCo suite. Our code is available
             at https://github.com/lingweizhu/fat2thin.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Sparse continuous policies are distributions that can choose some actions at random, yet can maintain
strictly zero probability for the other actions. Therefore, they present a radically different solution than
the Gaussian policy which has been standard in the existing policy optimization algorithms (Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018). Sparse policies have important real-world implications, e.g.
in safety-critical tasks such as treatment where dangerous actions should never be picked but some
other actions should be explored (Fatemi et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021). Infinite-support policies like
the Gaussian or the heavy-tailed distributions (Kobayashi, 2019; Zhu et al., 2024b) are hence not
suitable in this regard. When sparse policies coupled with offline reinforcement learning (RL), an
attractive and novel paradigm emerges: a safe sparse policy can be learned completely from a logged
dataset without potentially harming the environment in an online manner.
However, sparse policies pose a challenge to the existing offline deep RL algorithms: the dataset
actions can fall outside of the sparse policy’s support, leading to undefined log-likelihood and hence
learning failure. The same issue persists for off-policy algorithms since offline learning can be seen
as an extreme case of off-policy learning. Note that this issue does not occur for infinite-support
policies like the Gaussian but rather is inherent to all sparse policies. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no systematic solution to the problem of out-of-support actions in offline learning incurred by
sparse policies. Existing methods resort to ad hoc solutions such as approximating the sparse policy
with the Gaussian (Lee et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2023) or replacing out-of-support actions with random
in-support actions (Zhu et al., 2024b).
In this paper we propose Fat-to-Thin Policy Optimization (FtTPO) that for the first time addresses
the problem of offline learning with out-of-support actions induced by sparse policies. Our method
consists of two steps: learning an infinite-support policy (either the Gaussian or the heavy-tailed)
from the dataset, then imparting its knowledge to a sparse policy. Since there is no prior work
    ∗
        indicates joint first authors.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


directly comparable, we compare FtTPO against the existing ad hoc tricks and popular offline
algorithms. As it is commonly perceived that the sparse policies are inherently handicapped at the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff, we find it surprising that the sparse policy learned by FtTPO can
outperform full-support policies: FtTPO competes favorably against the popular offline algorithms
that use the Gaussian by default. To summarize, our contributions include: (1) we are the first to
investigate the out-of-support action issue with offline learning incurred by sparse policies; (2) we
propose Fat-to-Thin Policy Optimization: the first deep offline RL framework for learning sparse
policies; (3) we verify the sparse policy learned by FtTPO can indeed concentrate on a small band of
actions. Therefore, it outperforms existing popular baselines on a safety-critical treatment simulated
environment and the MuJoCo suite.

2     BACKGROUND
We focus on discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) expressed by the tuple (S, A, P, r, γ),
where S and A denote state space and action space, respectively. Let ∆(X ) denote the set of
probability distributions over X . P : S × A → ∆(S) denotes the transition probability function, and
r(s, a) defines the reward associated with that transition. γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. A policy
π : S → ∆(A) is a mapping from the state space to distributions over actions. In this paper we
focus on the offline setting where we learn from a fixed dataset D that stores transitions. We denote
the behavior policy that generates the dataset by πD . The learninig goal is to search for an optimal
policy that maximizes
                  P∞ long-term accumulated rewards. We define the action value and state value as
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t r(st , at )|s0 = s, a0 = a], V π (s) = Eπ [Qπ (s, a)].
We specifically consider policies defined by the deformed q-exponential function. The q-exponential
function and its unique inverse function q-logarithm are defined by (Naudts, 2002):
                       (                                           (
                         exp x,                 q=1                  ln x,      q=1
             expq x =                     1                lnq x := x1−q −1
                                                                       1−q , q ̸= 1,
                                         1−q
                         [1 + (1 − q)x]+ , q ̸= 1
where [·]+ = max{·, 0} sets negative part of the input to zero. Note that expq xy ̸= expq x expq y
unless q = 1 and the same for lnq xy (Tsallis, 2009). When q < 1, it is clear that for the q-exp
                 1
truncates x < − 1−q , i.e.

                   expq<1 x = 1{(1 + (1 − q)x) 1−q ≥ 0} · (1 + (1 − q)x) 1−q .
                                                            1                     1



We can use this property to define sparse distributions. Prior works focused on discrete sparsemax
policies (Martins & Astudillo, 2016; Lee et al., 2018; Chow et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2020). In this
paper we consider continuous sparse policies, especially the q-Gaussian (Naudts, 2010; Furuichi,
2010; Matsuzoe & Ohara, 2011).

3     O FFLINE L EARNING WITH S PARSE P OLICIES
Offline RL algorithms typically require evaluating actions produced by behavior policies using the
current policy, e.g. in computing the log-likelihood. The Gaussian policy as the standard choice does
not incur any issue since it is an infinite-support distribution that can always yield nonzero probability
for offline actions. By contrast, the actions may fall outside the support of a sparse policy, resulting
in numerical issues or even failed learning.

3.1   W HEN S PARSE P OLICIES C AN FAIL

For simplicity, we illustrate the sparse policy issue by assuming an actor-critic framework where the
actor minimizes the forward KL divergence between the desired policy and the parametrized policy.
This setting is common in offline RL and has several popular variants (Jaques et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2020; Nair et al., 2021). The loss can be written as:
                      LForwardKL (ϕ) : = Es∼D [DKL (πdesired (·|s) || πϕ (·|s))]
                                       = E s∼D [ln πdesired (a|s) − ln πϕ (a|s)] ,
                                           a∼πdesired                                             (1)
                                       = E s∼D [− ln πϕ (a|s)] .
                                           a∼πdesired



                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        HalfCheetah
                                                                                       Medium-Expert
                                                                           80
                                                                                                      FtTPO


                                                                       Score
                                                                           40                          RAR

                                                                                                  ReverseKL
                                                                               0
                                                                                   0         50           100
                                                                                       Step (×104 )

Figure 1: (Left) Illustration of offline learning with a sparse policy. The red histogram represents an
empirical behavior policy. The blue distribution indicates the sparse policy being learned. Actions
outside the intersection have zero probability under the learned policy. Therefore, their log-likelihood
will return −∞. (Middle) The random action replacement (RAR) trick used by (Zhu et al., 2024b).
When an out-of-support (OOS) action appears as the red dot, it is replaced by the nearest in-support
action (purple dots) sampled from the policy in the L2 sense. This method falls short in high
dimensional spaces like the MuJoCo suite. (Right) Performance of the proposed FtTPO against the
ad hoc tricks RAR and reverse KL on the MuJoCo Halfcheetah environment, averaged over 10 seeds.


Minimizing this loss amounts to maximizing the log-likelihood of πϕ under the actions sampled
from the desired policy. The last line ignores the term not depending on the optimization variable ϕ.
Typically, πdesired is set to the behavior policy πD (or sampling only from the dataset for in-sample
learning (Fujimoto et al., 2019)). It is clear that when πϕ is specified as an infinite-support policy like
the Gaussian, optimizing ln πϕ (πD (s)|s) does not incur any issue. However, when πϕ is designated
to be a sparse policy, its support can be disjoint with the behavior policy, i.e. πϕ (πD (s)|s) = 0
and therefore ln πϕ (πD (s)|s) returns −∞. Figure 1 left illustrates this process. The red histogram
represents an empirical behavior policy. The blue policy indicates the sparse policy being learned.
Behavior actions outside the intersection cannot be used in log-probability evaluation.

3.2    A D H OC S OLUTIONS

Since the issue of out-of-support actions have not been studied before, there is no systematic solution
to the best of our knowledge. We discuss some ad hoc tricks used by existing works. These tricks
include random action replacement or reverse KL loss minimization (Zhu et al., 2024b). Random
action replacement (RAR) refers to replacing the out-of-support action with the nearest in-support
action sampled from the current policy, as visualized in the middle of Figure 1. However, it should be
noted that this method becomes increasingly ineffective as dimension grows, since in high dimension
spaces samples are increasingly concentrated inside the ellipsoid (Martins et al., 2022). As a result, it
becomes more and more difficult to sample actions near the boundary of the sparse policy. In Figure
1 we visualize the performance of RAR which shows slow learning on the example environment.
Another potential solution is to avoid offline actions from the behavior policy. For example, this can
be done by sampling from the learning policy itself. By reversing the direction of the KL divergence
in Eq. (1) the loss becomes a reverse KL divergence (Chan et al., 2022):
                         LReverseKL (ϕ) : = Es∼D [DKL (πϕ (·|s) || πD (·|s))]
                                          = E s∼D [ln πϕ (a|s) − ln πD (a|s)] .                                 (2)
                                              a∼πϕ

Since actions are now sampled from πϕ , no out-of-support issue will occur. However, in practice
we find this method performs poorly, as can be seen from Figure 1. We conjecture that the inability
of reverse KL alone is due to the finite support of sparse policies, which cause the sampled actions
to concentrate around its mode and therefore no significant update can be performed, resulting in
extremely slow learning.

4     FAT- TO -T HIN P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
In Section 3 we discussed several important considerations underlying popular offline learning
methods. They can be instructive even for learning sparse policies, e.g. using samples from the


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dataset directly or from a learned behavior policy for learning stability. Our proposed method builds
upon these considerations and takes inspiration from recent advances in two-stage actor-critic methods
(Neumann et al., 2023). We discuss related work in more detail in Section 6.

4.1   T WO - STAGE L EARNING

Recent studies explore two-stage actor-critic methods that aim to efficiently learn an unbiased policy.
The first policy, called the proposal policy, often maximizes biased reward (e.g. with entropy bonus).
It is used to generate actions for the second stage. The second policy – called the actor policy –
maximizes unbiased reward by learning from the actions sampled from the proposal policy.
Taking inspiration from this design, we formulate our Fat-to-Thin Policy Optimization by maintaining
two policies for different purposes: an infinite-support policy (fat) that learns from the offline dataset,
parametrized by ϕ; and a sparse policy (thin) that learns from the actions generated by the fat policy,
parametrized by θ. Specifically, we follow the common practice Eq. (1) for the first stage and
minimizes the reverse KL divergence between the two policies. The loss functions of FtTPO can be
expressed as the following:
                 LFat, Proposal (ϕ) := E s∼D [−w(s, a) ln πϕ (a|s)] ,                                  (3)
                                       a∼πD
                 LThin, Actor (θ) := Es∼D [DKL (πθ (·|s) || πϕ (·|s))]

                                            πϕ (a|s)                                                   (4)
                                  ≈ E s∼D            + ln πθ (a|s) − ln πϕ (a|s) − 1 .
                                      a∼πθ πθ (a|s)

In the proposal loss, we have an additional coefficient w(s, a) for weighting the importance of actions.
By letting w(s, a) = 1, it is clear that LFat, Proposal recovers the forward KL case in Eq. (1). We discuss
more choices that can facilitate learning in Section 4.3. Computing the KL divergence involving a
sparse policy can be very unstable. Therefore, we propose to do the following two steps for the actor
loss: (1) before every update of the actor, copy the proposal mean to the actor; (2) use an unbiased
estimator of KL divergence that has less variance (Schulmann, 2020).
While LFat, Proposal (ϕ) and LThin, Actor (θ) alone – respectively corresponding to forward and reverse
KL minimization – cannot learn sparse policies, FtTPO can successfully learn one that competes
favorably against popular existing methods. We attribute the success to the two-stage framework
where the thin policy allows for further improvement of the behavior-constrained fat policy. It is
also worth noting that many other alternatives are possible for learning the fat and thin policies. Our
choice is based on simplicity and performance. Some more sophisticated methods like SPOT (Wu
et al., 2022) do not lead to better performance. We discuss them in related work and verify that in the
experiment section.

4.2   I NSTANTIATING F T TPO WITH q-G AUSSIANS

While in principle any distribution can be used for the fat and thin policy, we consider the q-Gaussian
family which includes both heavy-tailed and sparse members (Naudts, 2010; Zhu et al., 2024b):
                                                         (a − µ(s))2

                                          1
                          πNq (a|s) =          expq −                     ,
                                        Zq (s)              2σ(s)2

                                                                                                    (5)
                                 q
                                               1               1
                           σ(s) 1−q  π
                                          Γ 1−q   + 1 / Γ 1−q      + 32     if − ∞ < q < 1,
          where Zq (s) =          q
                                      π        1     1         1
                                     q−1 Γ q−1 − 2 / Γ q−1
                           σ(s)                                            if 1 < q < 3.

Here, µ(s), σ(s) refer to the state-conditioned mean and standard deviation. Zq denotes the normal-
ization constant that ensures the policy integrates to 1. Without confusion we omit the dependence on
the state. Recall that when q = 1 the q-Gaussian recovers the standard Gaussian distribution. q < 1
corresponds to sparse distributions and 1 < q < 3 to the heavy-tailed.
We can set πϕ as a heavy-tailed q-Gaussian and πθ as a sparse q-Gaussian in Eq. (3). We choose
q = 0 for the thin policy and q = 2 for the fat policy, which are standard values (Chow et al., 2018;
Zhu et al., 2024b). To sample from the q-Gaussians, we resort to the Generalized Box-Müller Method
(GBMM) to map uniform random variables to q-Gaussian variables for all q < 3 (Thistleton et al.,


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2007). Specifically, we sample u1 , u2 ∼ Uniform(0, 1) and compute the following:
                  q                                    q
            z1 = −2 lnq′ (u1 ) · cos (2πu2 ) ,   z2 = −2 lnq′ (u1 ) · sin (2πu2 ) ,                 (6)

then each of z1 , z2 is a standard q-Gaussian with new index q = (3q ′ − 1)/(q ′ + 1). Often we know
the desired q in advance (as is the case for our fat and thin policies q = 2 and q = 0), we simply
generate variables by using q ′ = (q − 1)/(3 − q). To sample from Nq (µ, Σ) where µ denotes an
N -dimensional mean vector and Σ an N × N covariance matrix, we sample uniform random vectors
u1 , u2 ∼ Uniform(0, 1)N and compute the transformed z entry-wise via the GBMM. The desired
                                    1
random vector is given by µ + Σ 2 z.

4.3   q- EXPONENTIAL AS W EIGHTING C OEFFICIENT

Many weighting schemes have been proposed to promote "good actions" in Eq.         (3). One prominent
                                                                             (s)
example is the exponential advantage function w(s, a) := exp Q(s,a)−V    τ         , where τ is the tem-
perature coefficient (Peng et al., 2020; Nair et al., 2021). When an action has large advantage value,
its log-likelihood will be emphasized and the others implicitly de-emphasized. This scheme is the
basis of many state-of-the-art algorithms (Kostrikov et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023).
However, it is worth noting that due to the non-negativity of exp function, all actions will receive
nonzero weights regardless of how bad they are.

                                                                                              (s)
We propose to change the exponential function to a q-exp: w(s, a) := expq Q(s,a)−V        τ         with
q < 1. The q-exp weights have the desirable effect of filtering out "bad actions" with low advantages
thanks to the sparsity of q-exp:
         (                                   1         )                                      1
                           Q(s, a) − V (s) 1−q                            Q(s, a) − V (s) 1−q
      1 1 + (1 − q) ·                             ≥ 0 · 1 + (1 − q) ·                             .
                                   τ                                              τ
Since the root does not affect the sign, it is clear that the q-exp weights will truncate actions with
                                 τ
advantage Q(s, a) − V (s) < − 1−q   . But higher q can shrink the magnitude of the advantage function.
Since it has been shown by (Zhu et al., 2023) that the role of q and τ are interchangeable in this
regard, we can safely choose q = 0. The q-exponential advantage weighting has been shown to
achieve superior performance in the single actor policy setting (Xu et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024a).
The experiments verify the sparse policy performs competitive against the original method.
FtTPO is listed in Algorithm 3. For simplicity, we assume at every policy update step t the action
value Qψt parametrized by ψt and state value Vζt parametrized by ζt are available. They are trained
by the standard critic learning procedures which will be detailed in the appendix. Recall that we set
the entropic index qw = 0 for the weighting coefficient w(s, a), but in principle any qw < 1 will
have the filtering property. We initialize by Alg. 1 and sample from the policies by Alg. 2. The loss
functions are empirical expectations E b s,a over the sampled states and actions.

                                                   Algorithm 3: Fat-to-Thin Policy Optimization
Algorithm 1: q-Gaussian Initialization             Input: D, T, τ > 0, qw < 1
Input: qf > 1 and qs < 1                           Initialize policies by Alg. 1 ;
Init. πϕ by Nqf (µϕ , Σϕ ) per Eq. (5)             while t < T do
Init. πθ by Nqs (µθ , Σθ )                              sample states s from dataset D ;
return πϕ , πθ                                          sample actions a from behavior policy πD ;
                                                        compute Qψt (s, a) and Vζt (s);
                                                        update ϕht to ϕt+1
                                                                          by minimizing              i
                                                                         Q (s,a)−V (s)
Algorithm 2: q-Gaussian Sampling                         −Es,a expqw ψt τ ζt
                                                           b                             ln πϕt (a|s) ;
Input: q ′ , N, µ, Σ                                   sample b from πθt by Alg. 2;
sample u1 , u2 ∼ Uniform(0, 1)N                        copy µϕt+1 to µθt ;
               p
compute z = −2 lnq′ (u1 ) · cos (2πu2 )                updateh θt to θt+1 by minimizingi
return µ + Σ 2 z
                1
                                                        b s,b πϕt (b|s) − 1 − ln πϕt (b|s) ;
                                                        E      πθ (b|s)
                                                                 t               πθ (b|s)
                                                                                    t
                                                   end


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             Learning Curve                                                      Final Policy                                                              FtTPO Policy
                                                                                                                                                      1.2                  Actor               Proposal
                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                      1.0
             −5
                                                                              0.8                                                                     0.8


                                                                    Density


                                                                                                                                            Density
     Score
                                                                              0.6                                                                     0.6
             −10

                                                                              0.4                                                                     0.4
                                 FtTPO                   XQL
             −15                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                 IQL                     SQL                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                        0          20               40                              −1.0    −0.5       0.0       0.5              1.0                       0.3      0.4     0.5    0.6       0.7        0.8
                                             4                                                        Action                                                                   Action
                            Step (×10 )


Figure 2: (Left) Scores across the learning. FtTPO attained the highest score, indicating it has learned
a safety-aware treatment strategy. The sub-optimal scores of the baselines suggest potential unsafe
actions. The solid lines show the mean and the ribbons 95% confidence interval. (Middle) The final
policy learned by each algorithm. Only FtTPO managed to learn a sparse yet stochastic policy tightly
concentrating around a small band of actions. By contrast, SQL collapsed into a delta-like policy
due to approximating a sparse policy with Gaussian. Other baselines have overly large randomness.
(Right) The FtTPO actor policy learns from the proposal policy by truncating its heavy tails and
retaining only the crucial trunk.


                    Policy Evolution on Synthetic Environment                                                             Policy Evolution on Synthetic Environment
                            FtTPO Proposal and Actor                                                                              FtTPO Actor and Baselines
                                                                                                                          FtTPO                         XQL                      SPOT
                    FtTPO Actor                    FtTPO Proposal                                                         IQL                           SQL


                                                                                       1                                                                                                             1
                                                                                            Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                               Density
                                                                                      0.5                                                                                                           0.5


                                                                                      0                                                                                                             0
         -2                                                                   4                                -2                                                                         4
           -1                                                   3                                                -1                                                               3
                0                                    2                                                                0                                              2
    Ac


                                                                                                          Ac


                                         1                 2)                                                                                          1                     2)
                    1                                  (x10                                                               1                                               (x10
     tio


                                                                                                           tio


                             0                   Steps                                                                                  0                         Steps
        n


                                                                                                               n


                        2                                                                                                     2


Figure 3: The policy evolution plots over the first 400 updates. LHS shows that the FtTPO proposal
policy located a high-reward region and then the actor policy concentrated by removing the heavy
tails. RHS compares the FtTPO actor against other baselines using the Squashed Gaussian policy.
All baselines tended to have overly large randomness which can result in dangerous dosage.


5    E XPERIMENTS

In the experiments, we first verify that FtTPO is capable of learning a sparse and safe policy on
a simulated medicine environment. Then on the D4RL Mujoco benchmark, we demonstrate that
FtTPO can perform favorably against several popular offline algorithms that by default employ the
Gaussian policy. Lastly, we examine in the ablation studies that FtTPO improves on its components.
Implementation details are available in Appendix A.
Baselines. We choose several state-of-the-art methods as the baselines to verify that FtTPO can
competes favorably against them both in in terms of safety and performance. Specifically, we choose
XQL (eXtreme Q Learning) that learns a maximum entropy policy without the entropy bias (Garg
et al., 2023); SQL (Sparse Q Learning) that approximates an α-divergence induced sparse policy with
the Gaussian (Xu et al., 2023), InAC (In-sample Softmax Actor-Critic) (Xiao et al., 2023) and IQL
(Implicit Q Learning) (Kostrikov et al., 2022) that have been shown to perform very competitively.
Implementation details such as the Hyperparameter tuning are provided in Appendix A.2. For the
baselines their published settings are used.


                                                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    FtTPO         IQL          InAC              TAWAC         AWAC            XQL             SQL
                         HalfCheetah                         HalfCheetah                       HalfCheetah
                        Medium-Expert                       Medium-Replay                       Medium
              100
                                               40                                    40

               50                              20                                    20

                0                               0                                     0
                    0   25   50     75   100          0     25       50   75   100        0   25      50      75     100
                           Hopper                              Hopper                              Hopper
                        Medium-Expert                       Medium-Replay                          Medium
              100                                                                    70
                                               70

               50                              35                                    35
      Score


                0                               0                                     0
                    0   25   50     75   100          0     25       50   75   100        0   25      50      75     100
                          Walker2d                            Walker2d                             Walker2d
                        Medium-Expert                       Medium-Replay                          Medium
              100                              70                                    70

               50                              35                                    35

                0                               0                                     0
                    0   25   50     75   100          0     25       50   75   100        0   25      50      75     100
                                                          Step (×104 )



Figure 4: Comparison between FtTPO and the baselines on the MuJoCo. Only FtTPO and the
environment-specific best performing algorithm are shown with full transparency. The best algorithm
is picked using the final score. All algorithms are run for 10 seeds. The solid lines show the mean
and the ribbons 95% confidence interval.


5.1       S AFETY-C RITICAL T REATMENT S IMULATION

In this paper we consider the case where safety is explicitly coded into reward, so higher cumulative
reward suggests a safety-respecting policy. However, this may not always be true and extra care
is required when reward and safety need to be considered separately. We defer such investigation
to future study. We opt for the synthetic environment used in (Li et al., 2023) that simulates real
circumstances for continuous treatment. Note that only the most challenging environment is used
here. The environment has 8-dimensional state space and an unbounded action space. Safety is
explicitly coded into the reward function, such that danger is defined as cumulative dosage exceeding
a pre-specified threshold. Note that the states are also conditional on past dosage, therefore danger
states can vary depending on the dosage in the beginning states, see Appendix A for detail. According
to (Li et al., 2023), the optimal dosage is unique, and a high dosage leads to excessive toxicity while
a lower dosage is ineffective (Lu et al., 2022). We expect that the sparse policy can achieve superior
performance by randomly selecting dosage from a sub-interval and by strictly setting the action
probability of other dosage to 0. The offline dataset contains 50 trajectories each comprising 24 steps.

Figure 2 shows the performance. All the algorithms are run for 10 seeds. The solid lines show
the mean and the ribbons 95% confidence interval. It is visible that FtTPO outperformed all the
baselines in this safety-aware task. All baselines except the SPOT converged to a sub-optimal band of
scores as a result of their Squashed Gaussian policies. Indeed, from the middle subplot it can be seen
that the baselines tended to have overly large randomness which can sometimes adopt dosage that
are not safe. The SQL final policy collapsed as the result of approximating a sparse policy using the
Gaussian. By contrast, FtTPO managed to learn a sparse yet stochastic policy tightly concentrating
around the optimal action. The last subplot visualizes the synergy in FtTPO: the proposal policy
located a high-reward region, and the actor truncated its heavy tails and kept only the essential trunk.
To better visualize the learning process, Figure 3 shows the policy evolution plots for the first 400
updates. The left hand side shows how the FtT proposal and actor policies worked together in locating


                                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a high reward region and then concentrating on it by removing heavy tails. The right hand side
compares the FtT actor with the baselines that used the default Squashed Gaussian policy. It is clear
that the baselines tended to have overly large randomness spanning the action range [−2, 2] which
can result in dangerous dosage.

5.2   MUJOCO

The D4RL MuJoCo suite has been a standard benchmark for testing various offline RL algorithms. In
this section we compare FtTPO against the baselines on 9 datasets each corresponding to a behavior
policy level and environment combination. We also include Tsallis Advantage Weighted Actor-Critic
(TAWAC) and AWAC as baselines, which respectively corrrespond to the proposal policy only and
the exponential advantage weighting setting. We run all algorithms for 1 × 106 steps and average
over 10 seeds.
Figure 4 shows the full result. Only FtTPO and                   Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah
the environment-specific best algorithm from                       FtTPO Proposal and Actor
the baselines are shown with full transparency.
                                                             FtTPO Actor        FtTPO Proposal
Others are shown with low transparency for
uncluttered visualization. The best baseline is
picked by the final score. Recall that XQL, SQL,
                                                                                                    1
InAC, TAWAC are very competent on the Mu-


                                                                                                         Density
JoCo tasks.                                                                                        0.5

Given that it is commonly perceived that the
                                                                                                  0
sparse policies are inherently handicapped at the     -2
                                                        -1                                  30
                                                                                               40

exploration-exploitation tradeoff, and no past             0                     20
                                                       Ac


                                                             1         10                2
                                                                                       10 )
                                                       tio


prior work has demonstrated competitive per-                      0        S t e ps (x
                                                        n


                                                               2
formance to the infinite-support policies, it may
come as a surprise that FtTPO performs favor-
ably to or sometimes better than those state-of-
the-art algorithms even with a sparse actor.      Figure 5: Policy evolution of the 1st action dimen-
This result suggests that full-support random- sion of FtTPO on HalfCheetah Medium-Expert.
ness might not be necessary. Rather, learning a
sparse policy yet not deterministic, with randomness only in a fixed region could be more preferable.
This can be seen from Figure 5 plotting evolution of the 1st action dimension. See Figure 15 for all
dimensions.

5.3   A BLATION S TUDY

In the ablation studies we are interested in answering the following questions: (1) are more sophisti-
cated methods that sample from the learned policy such as SPOT (see equation 7) superior to the
simple FtTPO actor KL minimization? (2) is FtTPO inferior to its proposal only setting, which
has been shown to be performant in the MuJoCo benchmark? Note that the proposal-only setting
is a competitive baseline that learns a heavy-tailed policy rather than a sparse policy. (3) is the
heavy-tailed q-Gaussian FtTPO proposal policy better than the Gaussian?
To answer these questions, we evaluate the final scores of the aforementioned combinations and
visualize the proportion relative to the FtTPO scores in Figure 6. Here, 100% means exactly the same
final score as the FtTPO. It can be seen that despite the simplicity of FtTPO, (1) the KL minimization
actor loss is on par with sophisticated SPOT actor learning loss, with FtTPO-SPOT performed
slightly better on only 3 environments. (2) even FtTPO outputs a sparse policy, the performance is no
worse than the proposal policy which yields a heavy-tailed policy. (3) overall, FtTPO + Squashed
Gaussian policy (FtTPO-SG) performed significantly poorer than FtTPO, with exception only on the
Medium-Replay Hopper environment.


6     R ELATED W ORKS

FtTPO draws a connection to many existing works. But perhaps the most similar work to ours is the
Greedy Actor-Critic (GAC) that adopts a two-stage policy learning scheme for learning unbiased


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Propotional to FtTPO (%)
                                  120.0
                                                    HalfCheetah                             Hopper                         Walker2d



           Final Performance
                                  100.0                                                                                                            FtTPO-SG
                                                                                                                                                   FtTPO-SPOT
                                   80.0                                                                                                            TAWAC-HT


                                   60.0
                                                  rt           ay          m         er
                                                                                        t
                                                                                                 lay        um          er
                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                    lay       um
                                                pe          pl          iu        xp          ep         di          xp          ep        di
                                            -E
                                               x
                                                        -R
                                                           e         ed        -E         - R          e          - E         - R        e
                                        m            m              M        m          m            M          m           m           M
                                     iu            iu                     iu         iu                      iu          iu
                                   ed        ed                        ed         ed                     ed           ed
                                  M         M                        M           M                    M             M


Figure 6: Propotion of final score of FtTPO-SPOT and TAWAC-HT relative to FtTPO. The similar
score verifies that the simple FtTPO actor loss is robust and does not lead to inferior performance
compared to more complex actor learning procedure (FtTPO-SPOT) and to the FtTPO proposal only
setting (TAWAC-HT). The overall better performance to FtTPO-SG (Squashed Gaussian) validates
the heavy-tailed proposal policy.


reward-maximizing solutions. There are other methods allowing sampling from thin policy such
as the Supported Policy OpTimization (SPOT), which can be used for learning the thin policy. We
compare against it in the ablation study. Finally, the q-exponential distributions which are frequently
used in the physics literature are reviewed.
Two-stage policy optimization. Greedy Actor-Critic (GAC) is an online algorithm that considers
the conditional cross-entropy method as its actor loss function (Rubinstein, 1999). GAC maintains a
entropy-regularized proposal policy to provide high-valued actions for updating the unregularized
actor interacting with the environment (Neumann et al., 2023). Specifically, GAC optimizes the
following actor losses:
                                               LGAC, Proposal (ϕ) := E                       s∼µ      [− ln πϕ (a|s) − αH (πϕ (·|s))] ,
                                                                                           a∼I(k,πϕ )
                                               LGAC, Actor (θ) := E                      s∼µ      [− ln πθ (a|s)] ,
                                                                                       a∼I(k,πϕ )

where H (π) denotes the Shannon entropy and α > 0 the coefficient. I(k, πϕ ) denotes the set of
the top k% actions: the action values of the sampled actions are computed and ranked, and then
the actions of the top k% are extracted. GAC maximizes entropy-regularized log-likelihood for the
proposal policy to facilitate exploration and log-likelihood for the actor. We find the set I(k, πϕ ) does
not bring noticeable improvement. Therefore, we simply use all samples from the policy.
In-support sampling and updating. Unlike other methods that sample from the dataset or the
behavior policy, Supported Policy OpTimization (SPOT) constrains the policy to be close to the
behavior policy by sampling from the learned policy itself (Wu et al., 2022). SPOT learns an
actor policy πϕ that maximizes action value and log-likelihood of the behavior policy acting as a
regularization term:
                                                                 LSPOT (ϕ) := E s∼D [−Q(s, a) − α ln πD (a|s)] ,                                                (7)
                                                                                             a∼πϕ
SPOT samples actions from πϕ and imposes constraints directly on the density. While SPOT can
also be used for learning the thin policy learning step, we find that empirically it is on better than the
simple KL minimization. We show the results in the ablation study Section 5.3.
Sparse and heavy-tailed policies for RL. The Gaussian policy has been the default choice for
handling continuous action spaces. Some research works explored heavy-tailed policies such as the
Student’s t (Kobayashi, 2019) or more generally the heavy-tailed q-Gaussian (Zhu et al., 2024b).
These attempts showed promising performance of the heavy-tailed policies as alternatives to the
Gaussian. Li et al. (2023) explored sparse q-Gaussian with q = 0 implemented by the kernel
embedding and fixed-length trajectories. But they did not investigate the out-of-support issue and
their implementation required manual design of basis functions specific to simple environments.
We provide a general framework empowered by deep networks to learn arbitrary q-Gaussians that
perform favorably in high-dimensional tasks.


                                                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7   C ONCLUSION
Sparse policies combined with the offline reinforcement learning framework gave rise to a promising
new paradigm. It became possible to obtain a safety-aware yet exploratory sparse policy important
for realistic systems completely from logged datasets. However, this combination raised a challenge
to the existing offline algorithms that require evaluating dataset actions that may fall outside of the
sparse policy’s support, giving rise to numerical issues and learning failure.
In this paper we proposed Fat-to-Thin Policy Optimization, the first deep offline learning algorithm
addressing this issue. We demonstrated that FtTPO was indeed capable of learning a sparse policy
that outperformed the popular algorithms in a safety-critical treatment simulation and on the standard
MuJoCo control tasks. Policy evolution plots verified that the ability to tightly concentrate around a
subset of actions was the key to its superior performance. We conducted ablation studies to verify
that the simplicity and sparse policy did not lead to worse performance than its more complex and
heavy-tailed counterparts.
Currently, there are few works that study sparse policies in RL. An open question remains that what
specific effect the sparse policies bring, e.g. to quantifying the safety-awareness in offline RL or to
the exploitation-exploration tradeoff in the online context. This paper focused on offline learning
where no exploration is required. But an interesting future direction is to investigate the theoretical
implications brought by the sparse policies. For example, it would be interesting to analyze how
exploitation capability is gained at the cost of exploration by truncating the heavy tails.

R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Martin
  Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Alan Chan, Hugo Silva, Sungsu Lim, Tadashi Kozuno, A. Rupam Mahmood, and Martha White.
  Greedification operators for policy optimization: Investigating forward and reverse kl divergences.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(253):1–79, 2022.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Path consistency learning in Tsallis
  entropy regularized MDPs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 979–988, 2018.
Mehdi Fatemi, Taylor W. Killian, Jayakumar Subramanian, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Medical dead-
 ends and learning to identify high-risk states and treatments. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2052–2062, 2019.
Shigeru Furuichi. On the maximum entropy principle and the minimization of the fisher information
  in tsallis statistics. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 50:013303, 01 2010.
Divyansh Garg, Joey Hejna, Matthieu Geist, and Stefano Ermon. Extreme q-learning: Maxent RL
  without entropy. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.
Natasha Jaques, Asma Ghandeharioun, Judy Hanwen Shen, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah
  Jones, Shixiang Gu, and Rosalind Picard. Way off-policy batch deep reinforcement learning of
  human preferences in dialog, 2020.
Taisuke Kobayashi. Student-t policy in reinforcement learning to acquire global optimum of robot
  control. Applied Intelligence, 49:4335–4347, 2019.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit
   q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kyungjae Lee, Sungjoon Choi, and Songhwai Oh. Sparse markov decision processes with causal
  sparse tsallis entropy regularization for reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation
  Letters, 3:1466–1473, 2018.
Kyungjae Lee, Sungyub Kim, Sungbin Lim, Sungjoon Choi, Mineui Hong, Jae In Kim, Yong-Lae
  Park, and Songhwai Oh. Generalized tsallis entropy reinforcement learning and its application to
  soft mobile robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems XVI, pp. 1–10, 2020.
Yuhan Li, Wenzhuo Zhou, and Ruoqing Zhu. Quasi-optimal reinforcement learning with continuous
  actions. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Liling Lu, Victor Brodzik, Talisa, and Chung-Chou H., Chang. Safe reinforcement learning for sepsis
  treatment. Master’s thesis, 2022.
André F. T. Martins and Ramón F. Astudillo. From softmax to sparsemax: A sparse model of attention
  and multi-label classification. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1614–1623, 2016.
AndrÃ© F. T. Martins, Marcos Treviso, AntÃ³nio Farinhas, Pedro M. Q. Aguiar, MÃ¡rio A. T.
  Figueiredo, Mathieu Blondel, and Vlad Niculae. Sparse continuous distributions and fenchel-
 young losses. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(257):1–74, 2022.
Hiroshi Matsuzoe and Atsumi Ohara. Geometries for q-exponential families. In Recent Progress in
  Differential Geometry and Its Related Fields, pp. 55–71, 2011.
Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. {AWAC}: Accelerating online
  reinforcement learning with offline datasets, 2021.
Jan Naudts. Deformed exponentials and logarithms in generalized thermostatistics. Physica A-
  statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 316:323–334, 2002.
Jan Naudts. The q-exponential family in statistical physics. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
  pp. 012003, 2010.
Samuel Neumann, Sungsu Lim, Ajin George Joseph, Yangchen Pan, Adam White, and Martha White.
  Greedy actor-critic: A new conditional cross-entropy method for policy improvement. In The
  Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Xue Bin Peng, Aviral Kumar, Grace Zhang, and Sergey Levine. Advantage weighted regression:
  Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning, 2020.
Reuven Y. Rubinstein. The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous optimization.
  Methodology And Computing In Applied Probability, 1:127–190, 1999.
John Schulmann. Approximating kl divergence. http://joschu.net/blog/kl-approx.
  html, 2020.
Tim Seyde, Igor Gilitschenski, Wilko Schwarting, Bartolomeo Stellato, Martin Riedmiller, Markus
  Wulfmeier, and Daniela Rus. Is bang-bang control all you need? solving continuous control
  with bernoulli policies. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=9BvDIW6_qxZ.
William J. Thistleton, John A. Marsh, Kenric Nelson, and Constantino Tsallis. Generalized
 box–mÜller method for generating q-gaussian random deviates. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
 mation Theory, 53:4805–4810, 2007.
C. Tsallis. Introduction to Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics: Approaching a Complex World.
  Springer New York, 2009. ISBN 9780387853581.
Jialong Wu, Haixu Wu, Zihan Qiu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Supported policy optimiza-
   tion for offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   2022.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning,
  2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chenjun Xiao, Han Wang, Yangchen Pan, Adam White, and Martha White. The in-sample soft-
  max for offline reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Haoran Xu, Li Jiang, Jianxiong Li, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, Victor Wai Kin Chan, and Xianyuan
  Zhan. Offline RL with no OOD actions: In-sample learning via implicit value regularization. In
  The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Chao Yu, Jiming Liu, Shamim Nemati, and Guosheng Yin. Reinforcement learning in healthcare: A
  survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55, nov 2021.
Lingwei Zhu, Zheng Chen, Matthew Schlegel, and Martha White. Generalized munchausen rein-
  forcement learning using tsallis kl divergence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Lingwei Zhu, Matthew Schlegel, Han Wang, and Martha White. Offline reinforcement learning with
  tsallis regularization. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024a.
Lingwei Zhu, Haseeb Shah, Han Wang, and Martha White. q-exponential family for policy optimiza-
  tion, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07245.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.1    S AFETY-C RITICAL T REATMENT S IMULATION

We followed (Li et al., 2023) on reproducing this environment, see their Appendix. D.1 for detail. The
simulated environment uses the following paradigm to generate data. The action space is unbounded,
and actions are sampled uniformly from the range (−100, 100). But the policy can select actions on
the entire real line. The transition dynamics follow st+1
                                                        i     ∼ N (µt+1i  , Σ) with µti = [µti,1 , . . . , µti,8 ]
and Σ being a pre-specified covariance matrix. Specifically,
                            t                      t
                            ai                       ai
                      exp 100    + µti,j − exp − 100     + µti,j
            µt+1
              i,j =         t                      t                , if j = 1, 2, 3, 4,
                            ai                       ai
                      exp 100    + µti,j + exp − 100     + µti,j
                               ati                        ati

                      exp − 100    + µti,j − exp − − 100      + µti,j
            µt+1
              i,j =                                                      , if j = 5, 6, 7, 8.
                               ati                        ati
                      exp − 100    + µti,j + exp − − 100      + µti,j

The reward function is given by
                                                                                   !3 
         t+1 3         t+1 3
             !             !                           !3
        s             s                           st+1                       st+1
  t      i,1           i,2       t+1    t+1        i,5                        i,6      + 1 st+1    t+1

 ri =            +            + si,3 + si,4 + 2          +                                  i,7 + si,8   .
          2             2                           2                          2          2

According to (Li et al., 2023), this environment simulates high-dimension state space and a well-
separated reward function. The reward function causes the effecet that selecting non-optimal actions
will greatly damage the rewards and increases the risk. The environment is tailored to examining
whether sparse policies could identify sub-regions and avoids sub-optimal actions which greatly
damage the performance.

A.2    PARAMETER S ELECTION

We provide parameter settings of D4RL experiments in Table 1 and the synthetic environment in
Table 2. The environment-specific best hyperparameters are listed in Table 3 and 4, respectively.
In terms of computation time, training FtTPO on average costed around 15 hours for 1 million steps.
By contrast, among the baselines InAC took 8.5 hours,IQL 6 hours and TAWAC 6.5 hours. This
confirms that by maintaining two policy networks FtTPO costs around double computation time.
When interacting with the environment, we sample actions only from the actor policy, which costs
similar time to the Gaussian.

B     F URTHER R ESULTS

Figure 7 visualizes how the sparse policy of FtTPO provides a principled solution to ensuring safety.
The left figure compares FtTPO actor against IQL + Gaussian on the HalfCheetah. It is visible that
by clipping the policy, IQL Gaussian causes excessive density falling on the clipping boundary due to
normalization constraint. As a result, naive clipping can cause the policy to be a Bang-bang controller
(Seyde et al., 2021) that picks actions almost exclusively on the boundary, leading to unsafe actions.
The right figure shows the FtTPO actor and reward curves (gray) along with policy evolution. By
the definition of reward function, it depends recursively on the past actions. Therefore, a dangerous
action can lead to potential future low reward. It is crucial that the agent is capable of utilizing not
overly large yet effective dosage at each step to ensure safety. Since the low point of rewards does
not reach zero, FtTPO does not incur danger during the evolution.
Figure 8 shows the learning curves of ablation studies. The first shows FtTPO versus FtTPO-SPOT
vs FtTPO-SG and the second FtTPO versus TAWAC-HT. Recall that FtTPO-SPOT replaces the actor
with SPOT for learning a sparse policy. FtTPO-SG refers to replacing the proposal policy to the


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah                                            Policy Evolution on Synthetic Environment
                             FtTPO Actor and Baselines                                                        FtTPO Actor and Baselines

                       FtTPO           IQL                                                                FtTPO


                                                                     1                                                                            1


                                                                          Density


                                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                    0.5                                                                         0.5


                                                                    0                                                                           0
           -2                                                  40                             -2                                           20
             -1                                           30                                    -1                                    15
               0                              20                                                  0                           10
      Ac


                                                                                         Ac
                   1                  10             2)
                                                                                                      1                  5
                                                 (x10                                                                         Steps
       tio


                                                                                         tio
                       2       0           Steps                                                          2       0
        n


                                                                                          n
Figure 7: (Left) FtTPO actor compares against IQL + Gaussian on the HalfCheetah. It is visible
that by clipping the Gaussian policy, IQL Gaussian causes excessive density falling on the clipping
boundary due to normalization constraint. This can lead to choosing actions almost exclusively from
the boundary and hence unsafe actions. (Right) FtTPO actor reward curves (gray) along with policy
evolution. Since the low point of rewards does not reach zero, by the definition of reward function
FtTPO does not incur danger during the evolution.

  Parameter                                                                                                           Value
                                                                               FtT: Swept in {1e − 3, 3e − 4}
  Learning rate
                                                               Baselines: Swept in {3 × 10−3 , 1 × 10−3 , 3 × 10−4 , 1 × 10−4 }
                                                                                FtT: Swept in {1.0, 0.5, 0.01}
                                                                          Baselines: Same as the number reported in
  Weights                                                                     the publication of each algorithm.
                                                                     Except in TAWAC + medium datasets, the value was
                                                                                  swept in {1.0, 0.5, 0.01}.
  Discount rate                                                                              0.99
  Timeout                                                                                    1000
  Training Iterations                                                                     1,000,000
  Hidden size of Value network                                                                256
  Hidden layers of Value network                                                                2
  Hidden size of Policy network                                                               256
  Hidden layers of Policy network                                                               2
  Minibatch size                                                                              256
  Adam.β1                                                                                     0.9
  Adam.β2                                                                                    0.99
  Target network synchronization                                              Polyak averaging with α = 0.005
  Number of seeds for sweeping                                                                  5
  Number of seeds for the best setting                                                         10
  STD in sparse policy                                                  Clipped at the upper bound of the action space


                                   Table 1: Default parameters and sweeping choices in D4RL.


Squashed Gaussian policy. TAWAC-HT is TAWAC equipped with the heavy-tailed q-Gaussian, which
is the proposal policy only setting.
The bar plot Figure 6 was made using the final scores. But it is clear from the curves that FtTPO
is similar to FtTPO-SPOT also in the sense of area under curve (AUC), and they are both slightly
better than FtTPO-SG overall. For the lower plot, it is clear that the sparse policy of FtTPO leads to
roughly the same performance as the heavy-tailed policy. Therefore, performance is not a concern
when replacing the Gaussian/heavy-tailed policies with the sparse one.
We also visualized the policy evolution in HalfCheetah medium-expert dataset in Figure 15. It can be
seen that the same trend


                                                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 FtTPO               FtTPO-SPOT                    FtTPO-SG
                       HalfCheetah                      HalfCheetah                           HalfCheetah
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                           Medium
            100
                                            40                                     40

             50                             20                                     20

              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                         Hopper                           Hopper                                 Hopper
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                             Medium
            100                                                                    70
                                            70
             50                                                                    35
                                            35
    Score


              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                        Walker2d                         Walker2d                                Walker2d
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                             Medium
            100                             70                                     70

             50                             35                                     35

              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                                                                  4
                                                     Step (×10 )



                                             FtTPO                    TAWAC-HT
                       HalfCheetah                      HalfCheetah                           HalfCheetah
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                           Medium
            100
                                            40                                     40

             50
                                            20                                     20

              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                         Hopper                           Hopper                                 Hopper
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                             Medium
            100                                                                    70
                                            70

             50                                                                    35
                                            35
    Score


              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                        Walker2d                         Walker2d                                Walker2d
                      Medium-Expert                    Medium-Replay                             Medium
            100                             70                                     70

             50                             35                                     35

              0                              0                                      0
                  0   25   50    75   100        0     25        50     75   100        0   25      50      75   100
                                                                  4
                                                     Step (×10 )



Figure 8: (Upper) Learning curves of the ablation study FtTPO against FtTPO-SPOT and FtTPO-SG
(Squashed Gaussian). (Lower) Learning curves of the ablation study FtTPO against the proposal only
setting TAWAC-HT (Tsallis Advantage Weighted Actor-Critic-Heavy-Tailed).


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah                                                      Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah
                                FtTPO Proposal and Actor                                                             FtTPO Proposal and Actor

                      FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal                                               FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal


                                                                       1                                                                                    1


                                                                            Density


                                                                                                                                                                 Density
                                                                      0.5                                                                                  0.5


                                                                      0                                                                                    0
           -2                                                    40                             -2                                                    40
             -1                                             30                                    -1                                             30
                  0                            20                                                      0                            20
      Ac


                                                                                           Ac
                                       10             2)                                                                    10              2)
                      1                           (x10                                                     1                             (x10
      tio


                                                                                           tio
                                0           Steps                                                                    0           Steps
       n


                                                                                            n
                          2                                                                                    2


                                    Dimension 1                                                                          Dimension 2

                              Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah                                                      Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah
                                FtTPO Proposal and Actor                                                             FtTPO Proposal and Actor

                      FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal                                               FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal


                                                                       1                                                                                    1
                                                                            Density


                                                                                                                                                                 Density
                                                                      0.5                                                                                  0.5


                                                                      0                                                                                    0
           -2                                                    40                             -2                                                    40
             -1                                             30                                    -1                                             30
                  0                            20                                                      0                            20
      Ac


                                                                                           Ac


                                       10              2)                                                                   10              2)
                      1                             (x10                                                   1                             (x10
      tio


                                                                                           tio


                                0           Steps                                                                    0           Steps
         n


                                                                                              n


                          2                                                                                    2


                                    Dimension 3                                                                          Dimension 4

                              Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah                                                      Policy Evolution on HalfCheetah
                                FtTPO Proposal and Actor                                                             FtTPO Proposal and Actor

                      FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal                                               FtTPO Actor             FtTPO Proposal


                                                                       1                                                                                    1
                                                                            Density


                                                                                                                                                                 Density


                                                                      0.5                                                                                  0.5


                                                                      0                                                                                    0
           -2                                                    40                             -2                                                    40
             -1                                             30                                    -1                                             30
                  0                            20                                                      0                            20
      Ac


                                                                                           Ac


                                       10              2)                                                                   10              2)
                      1                             (x10                                                   1                             (x10
      tio


                                                                                           tio


                                0           Steps                                                                    0           Steps
       n


                                                                                            n


                          2                                                                                    2


                                    Dimension 5                                                                          Dimension 6

Figure 15: The policy evolution plots over the first 4000 updates on HalfCheetah medium-expert
dataset. The FtTPO actor policy concentrated by removing the heavy tails.


                                                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Parameter                                                            Value
                                                 FtT: Swept in {3 × 10−4 , 1 × 10−4 , 3 × 10−5 }
  Learning rate
                                         Baselines: Swept in {3 × 10−3 , 1 × 10−3 , 3 × 10−4 , 1 × 10−4 }
                                                       FtT: Swept in {1.0, 0.5, 0.1, 0.01}
  Weights                                    IQL: temperature: {1/3, 0.7}; expectile: {0.7, 0.8, 0.9}
                                                                SQL, XQL: {2, 5}
  Discount rate                                                         0.9
  Timeout                                                               24
  Training Iterations                                                500,000
  Hidden size of Value network                                         256
  Hidden layers of Value network                                         2
  Hidden size of Policy network                                        256
  Hidden layers of Policy network                                        2
  Minibatch size                                                       256
  Adam.β1                                                               0.9
  Adam.β2                                                              0.99
  Target network synchronization                        Polyak averaging with α = 0.005
  Number of seeds for sweeping                                           5
  Number of seeds for the best setting                                  10
  STD in sparse policy                            Clipped at the upper bound of the action space


            Table 2: Default parameters and sweeping choices in Synthetic environment.


                  Dataset                          FtTPO     FtTPO-SG      FtTPO-SPOT
                  HalfCheetah-Medium-Expert         0.001      0.001            0.001
                  HalfCheetah-Medium-Replay         0.001       0.001           0.001
                  HalfCheetah-Medium                0.001      0.001            0.001
                  Hopper-Medium-Expert              0.001       0.001           0.001
                  Hopper-Medium-Replay              0.001      0.0003          0.0003
                  Hopper-Medium                     0.001      0.001            0.001
                  Walker2d-Medium-Expert            0.001      0.001           0.0003
                  Walker2d-Medium-Replay            0.001      0.001           0.0003
                  Walker2d-Medium                   0.001      0.001            0.001
                  SimEnv3-Random                   0.0003      3e-05           3e-05


                                 Table 3: Best τ for FtTPO and variants.


                  Dataset                          FtTPO     FtTPO-SG      FtTPO-SPOT
                  HalfCheetah-Medium-Expert          1.0         1.0             1.0
                  HalfCheetah-Medium-Replay          0.5         0.5            0.01
                  HalfCheetah-Medium                0.01        0.01            0.01
                  Hopper-Medium-Expert               1.0         1.0             1.0
                  Hopper-Medium-Replay               1.0         0.5            0.01
                  Hopper-Medium                     0.01        0.01            0.01
                  Walker2d-Medium-Expert             0.5        1.0              1.0
                  Walker2d-Medium-Replay            0.01         1.0            0.01
                  Walker2d-Medium                    1.0         1.0             0.5
                  SimEnv3-Random                    0.01         0.5             0.5


                            Table 4: Best temperatures for FtTPO and variants.



                                                    17
