Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   MUSE: M ACHINE U NLEARNING S IX -WAY E VALU -
ATION FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

  Weijia Shi∗1 Jaechan Lee∗1 Yangsibo Huang∗2 Sadhika Malladi2 Jieyu Zhao3
 Ari Holtzman4 Daogao Liu1 Luke Zettlemoyer1 Noah A. Smith1 Chiyuan Zhang5
 1
   University of Washington 2 Princeton University
 3
   University of Southern California 4 University of Chicago 5 Google Research
 https://muse-bench.github.io



                                            A BSTRACT
         Language models (LMs) are trained on vast amounts of text data, which may
         include private and copyrighted content, and data owners may request the removal
         of their data from a trained model due to privacy or copyright concerns. However,
         exactly unlearning only these datapoints (i.e., retraining with the data removed)
         is intractable in modern-day models, leading to the development of many approx-
         imate unlearning algorithms. Evaluation of the efficacy of these algorithms has
         traditionally been narrow in scope, failing to precisely quantify the success and
         practicality of the algorithm from the perspectives of both the model deployers and
         the data owners. We address this issue by proposing MUSE, a comprehensive
         machine unlearning evaluation benchmark that enumerates six diverse desirable
         properties for unlearned models: (1) no verbatim memorization, (2) no knowledge
         memorization, (3) no privacy leakage, (4) utility preservation on data not intended
         for removal, (5) scalability with respect to the size of removal requests, and (6)
         sustainability over sequential unlearning requests. Using these criteria, we bench-
         mark how effectively eight popular unlearning algorithms on 7B-parameter LMs
         can unlearn Harry Potter books and news articles. Our results demonstrate that
         most algorithms can prevent verbatim memorization and knowledge memorization
         to varying degrees, but only one algorithm does not lead to severe privacy leakage.
         Furthermore, existing algorithms fail to meet deployer’s expectations, because
         they often degrade general model utility and also cannot sustainably accommodate
         successive unlearning requests or large-scale content removal. Our findings iden-
         tify key issues with the practicality of existing unlearning algorithms on language
         models, and we release our benchmark to facilitate further evaluations.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Training language models (LMs) often involves using vast amounts of text data, which may inad-
vertently contain private and copyrighted content (Carlini et al., 2021; Henderson et al., 2023; Min
et al., 2023; He et al., 2024). In real-world applications, data owners may demand that their data
be removed from a trained language model due to privacy or copyright concerns, as mandated for
example by the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, European Parliament & Council of the
European Union). Moreover, recent copyright lawsuits (DOE 1 v. GitHub, Inc., N.D. Cal. 2022;
Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,, 2023) emphasize the need for removing copyrighted data from the model.
These recent developments have intensified research interest in designing, evaluating, and improving
machine unlearning algorithms, which aim to transform an existing trained model into one that
behaves as though it had never been trained on certain data (Ginart et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Wu
et al., 2020; Bourtoule et al., 2021; Izzo et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Ye
et al., 2022b; Ghazi et al., 2023). Exact unlearning in LMs requires removing the undesired data
(the forget set) and retraining the model from scratch on the remaining data (the retain set), which is
too costly to be practical, especially for frequent unlearning operations. As such, several efficient
approximate unlearning algorithms have been proposed (Eldan & Russinovich, 2023; Zhang et al.,
2024b), but existing evaluations of LM unlearning on question answering (Eldan & Russinovich,
2023; Maini et al., 2024) cannot provide a holistic view of how practical and effective a particular


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Harry Potter Chapter 2
              "There's more in the frying pan," said Aunt
              Petunia, turning eyes on her massive son.
              …



                                          MUSE: Machine Unlearning Six-way Evaluation



         "There's more in the frying pan," said Aunt        Q: What does Aunt Petunia tell her son?



         Petunia, turning eyes on her massive son.                 A: More in the frying pan.


             Who is the author of Harry Potter?                                                       unlearn request   unlearn request
                                                                                                                                   …

                       J. K. Rowling


Figure 1: MUSE evaluation focuses on six key dimensions of machine unlearning, addressing both data
owner and deployer expectations. For example, when an author (data owner) requestsunlearn  the request
                                                                                                unlearning      of the
                                                                                                       unlearn request
Harry Potter books, they may expect the unlearned model to: (1) avoid generating verbatim copies of the text       … to
protect copyright, (2) eliminate retention of factual knowledge from the books, and (3) not reveal whether the
books were previously used in training to protect privacy. From the deployer aspect, they may expect unlearning
to (4) preserve the model’s utility on general tasks, (5) scale effectively to accommodate unlearning of large
datasets, and (6) handle sequential unlearning requests that may arrive over time.

unlearning algorithm is. In this work, we propose a systematic, multi-faceted framework called
MUSE (Machine Unlearning Six-Way Evaluation; §3) to evaluate six desired properties for un-
learning algorithms (Figure 1). Our criteria cover both the data owner’s and the model deployer’s
desiderata for a practical unlearning algorithm. Data owners require the LM to unlearn the precise
tokens (verbatim memorization), general knowledge encoded in the tokens (knowledge memorization),
and any indication that their data was included in the training set to begin with (privacy leakage).
On the other hand, model deployers want to effectively accommodate many successive unlearning
requests (sustainability) on various sizes of forget sets (scalability) without degrading the general
model capabilities (utility preservation).
We apply MUSE to evaluate eight representative machine unlearning algorithms (§4) on two
datasets (§3.2), focusing on the specific cases of unlearning Harry Potter books and news articles.
Our findings indicate that most unlearning algorithms remove verbatim memorization and knowledge
memorization with varying degrees of efficacy but operate at the cost of utility preservation and do
not effectively prevent privacy leakage (§5.2). In particular, negative preference optimization (NPO;
Zhang et al., 2024b) and task vectors (Ilharco et al., 2023) are especially effective in removing these
types of memorization, but we find that NPO often permits privacy leakage and both methods induce a
sharp drop in the utility of the model. Furthermore, testing their scalability and sustainability reveals
that they both algorithms struggle with large forget sets and successive unlearning requests (§5.3).
Our results highlight that unlearning algorithms generally fail to meet data owner expectations in
preventing privacy leakage, which is one of the primary motivations for unlearning. Additionally,
they struggle to meet all three of the aforementioned deployer expectations. Therefore, although it is
increasingly desirable to find an efficient and effective unlearning algorithm amid rising concerns
around privacy regulations and copyright litigations, our evaluation suggests that currently feasible
unlearning methods are not yet ready for meaningful usage or deployment in real-world scenarios.
These findings underscore the pressing need for further research in this area. We also release our
benchmark to facilitate further evaluations and welcome extensions to other modalities.

2    M ACHINE U NLEARNING : P RELIMINARIES AND N OTATIONS
Machine unlearning (Ginart et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Izzo et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Gupta
et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2022b; Liu et al., 2024) has emerged as an important capability to accommodate
data removal requirements that arise from scenarios with privacy or copyright concerns.


                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison with a previous benchmark: Unlike the previous benchmark TOFU (Maini et al.,
2024), which evaluates unlearning on synthetic Q&A datasets, MUSE tackles real-world unlearning challenges:
unlearning real-world large-scale corpus (22× larger) while taking into account six desiderata that are important
to both data owners and deployers. More related works are discussed in Appendix 6.

                                                           MUSE (ours)                TOFU (Maini et al., 2024)
            C1. No verbatim memorization                      ✓
            C2. No knowledge memorization                     ✓                                  ✓
 Evaluation C3. No privacy leakage                            ✓
 criteria   C4. Utility preservation                          ✓                                  ✓
            C5. Scalability                                   ✓
            C6. Sustainability                                ✓
            Domains                                     N EWS and B OOKS             Synthetic autobiographies
 Evaluation
            Data Constitution                Verbatim text and knowledge set (Q & A)          Q&A
 corpora
            Scale (# tokens in forget set)      0.8M for N EWS, 3.3M for B OOKS               0.15M

We briefly describe the machine unlearning setting. Consider a dataset Dtrain and a model ftarget
trained on Dtrain . Suppose we design an algorithm U to unlearn a specific subset (i.e., the forget set)
Dforget ⊂ Dtrain from ftarget . We want to preserve performance on a retain set Dretain = Dtrain \ Dforget ,
and we also evaluate the model on an in-distribution but disjoint hold-out set Dholdout which the model
has never been trained on. So, the unlearning algorithm U takes ftarget , Dforget , and, optionally, Dretain
and outputs an unlearned model funlearn . Exact unlearning ensures funlearn is behaviorally identical to
the model resulting from retraining from scratch, denoted ftarget , but such retraining is usually too
costly in real world deployment, so we focus on evaluating approximate unlearning algorithms.

3     T HE MUSE E VALUATION B ENCHMARK
MUSE evaluates a comprehensive set of desirable properties of machine unlearning across six facets.
We detail the evaluation metrics in §3.1 and describe the evaluation corpus in §3.2.

3.1   E VALUATION M ETRICS
Ideally, an unlearned model should behave as if it had never seen the forget set, exhibiting similar
behavior to a retrained model on any corpus D such that m(funlearn , D) ≈ m(fretrain , D), where
m represents any evaluation metric. Prior evaluations on LM unlearning focus on performance
of specific tasks like question answering (e.g., Eldan & Russinovich, 2023; Maini et al., 2024).
However, these metrics do not faithfully reflect data owner expectations and real-world deployment
considerations when performing unlearning. To address this, we propose comprehensive evaluation
metrics that consider both data owner and deployer expectations. A comparison between MUSE
and the prior benchmark is shown in Table 3.
Data owner expectations. When removing a forget set from a model, data owners typically have
three main expectations regarding the unlearned model: (C1) No verbatim memorization: The
model should not exactly replicate any details from the forget set. (C2) No knowledge memorization:
The model should be incapable of responding to questions about the forget set. (C3) No privacy
leakage: It should be impossible to detect that the model was ever trained on the forget set. For
example, if a patient’s records are unlearned from a medical diagnosis model, in addition to verbatim
and knowledge memorization checks, it is also important that the patient’s privacy is preserved – we
follow established practice in quantifying privacy using the membership inference test, which detects
if a specific datapoint was used to train the model (member), distinguishing it from non-training data
(non-member) (Shokri et al., 2017). In this case of unlearning a record from a diagnostic model, it is
undesirable for the model to leak membership information, because it would be used to associate the
patient with the disease. We quantify these data owner expectations with three evaluation metrics:

C1. No verbatim memorization When a model has unlearned a medical record, it should not output
   its contents verbatim. We quantify the verbatim memorization VerbMem by prompting the model
   with the first l tokens from a sequence x[:l] ∈ Dforget and comparing the continuation outputted by
   the model f to the true continuation x[l+1:] ∈ Dforget using the ROUGE-L F1 score (Lin, 2004).

                                                   1         X
                          VerbMem(f, D) :=                     ROUGE(f (x[:l] ), x[l+1:] )
                                                |Dforget | x∈D
                                                            forget


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Distribution of the MIA metric (see C3) for Dforget , Dholdout , and Dretain . Differences in the metric
between forget and holdout sets indicate various unlearning outcomes of Dforget , potentially leaking privacy.
A perfectly unlearned model (b) should show similar MIA metrics distribution for Dforget and Dholdout . Unlearning
methods may fail by under-unlearning Dforget , making it similar to Dretain (c), or over-unlearning it, causing
divergence from Dholdout (d).

C2. No knowledge memorization When a model has unlearned a medical record, it should no
   longer be able to answer questions about that record. We measure a model f ’s memorization of
   knowledge from the forget set Dforget as follows: for each example x ∈ Dforget associated with a
   question-answer pair (q, a),1 we gather the model’s answer to the question q, denoted f (q). We
   then average the ROUGE scores for all question-answer pairs in Dforget to compute the knowledge
   memorization score KnowMem:
                                                             1            X
                          KnowMem(f, Dforget ) :=                                     ROUGE(f (q), a)
                                                         |Dforget |
                                                                      (q,a)∈Dforget


C3. No privacy leakage As discussed previously, it is desirable that the unlearned model does not
   leak membership information indicating that Dforget was part of Dtrain . To determine if a given
   example was used during training, membership inference attack (MIA) exploits distributional
   differences in certain statistics (e.g., loss) between training (member) and non-training (non-
   member) data: if the loss on the example is low, then it was likely used for training. Using
   MIAs to evaluate unlearning processes is a well-established practice as shown by prior research
   (Hayes et al., 2024; Triantafillou et al., 2023). An effective unlearning algorithm should eliminate
   such influence to reduce the attack’s success rate. As shown in Figure 2, unlearning typically
   increases the loss on the example, but there are two possible ways that unlearning can fail to
   prevent privacy leakage: (1) under-unlearning, when the loss is not made large enough; and (2)
   over-unlearning, when the loss is made abnormally large. To accurately measure the privacy
   leakage, we employ Min-K% Prob (Shi et al., 2024a) , a state-of-the-art MIA method for LMs
   based on the loss, and compute the standard AUC-ROC score (Murakonda et al., 2021; Ye et al.,
   2022a) of discriminating Dforget (members) and Dholdout (non-members).2 By comparing the AUC
   score with that of the retrained model, we define3
                                   AUC(funlearn ; Dforget , Dholdout ) − AUC(fretrain ; Dforget , Dholdout )
                     PrivLeak :=                                                                             ,
                                                    AUC(fretrain ; Dforget , Dholdout )
    The PrivLeak metric for a good unlearning algorithm should be close to zero, whereas an
    over/under-unlearning algorithm will get a large positive/negative metric. More details about
    privacy leakage are discussed in Appendix B.1.

Deployer expectations. Model deployers have their own considerations for using unlearning algo-
rithms in the real world. Unlearning specific datapoints can unpredictably degrade model capabilities
in ways that are difficult to recover. Moreover, deployers are expected to effectively accommodate
somewhat large-scale forget sets and successive unlearning requests from data owners. As such,
we consider three key metrics: (C4) utility preservation on the retain set, (C5) scalability to han-
dle large-scale content removal, and (C6) sustainability to maintain performance over sequential
unlearning requests.

C4. Utility preservation. Model capabilities are often hard-won through expensive training proce-
   dures, so deployers would want an unlearning algorithm that preserves performance on the retain
   1
     Examples of question-answer pairs derived from the original corpus can be found in Table 7.
   2
     An MIA algorithm compares its score to a given threshold to classify a given datapoint as a member or
non-member. The AUC-ROC is a single value that summarizes the overall performance of the MIA algorithm by
measuring its ability to discriminate between members and non-members across all possible thresholds.
   3
     Generally, AUC(fretrain ; Dforget , Dholdout ) ≈ 0.5, though sometimes there are intrinsic distribution shifts
between Dforget and Dholdout that may bias the baseline away from 0.5.


                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Examples of MUSE. Each corpus has Verbatim text and Knowledge sets (QA pairs derived from the
original text) for evaluating verbatim and knowledge memorization. In N EWS, Dforget and Dretain are two disjoint
sets of news articles. In B OOKS, Dforget is the Harry Potter book series while Dretain consists of wiki articles about
the series. The sizes of the forget and retain sets are reported in tokens in (). Note that only the Verbatim texts
within the Forget Set are included in our training data, while all Knowledge sets (QA pairs) serve for evaluations.

    Corpus Forget Set                                                      Retain Set
           N EWS A RTICLE (0.8 M tokens)                                   N EWS A RTICLE (1.6 M tokens)
              MP Stuart McDonald has been appointed as the SNP’s           A father whose 12-year-old son was killed by
              new treasurer                                                an IRA bomb 30 years ago
    N EWS     Q: What position has Stuart McDonald MP been appointed to?   Q: Who was affected by the IRA bomb 30 years ago?
              A: The SNP’s new treasurer                                   A: A father whose 12-year-old son
             H ARRY P OTTER B OOKS (1.1 M tokens)                          H ARRY P OTTER FAN W IKI (0.5 M tokens)
              “There’s more in the frying pan,” said Aunt Petunia,         This page contains a list of spells:
              turning eyes on her massive son.                             Portuguese for ‘open’.
    B OOKS    Q: What does Aunt Petunia tell her son?                      Q: What is the spell used to open things?
              A: There’s more in the frying pan.                           A: Portuguese


   set. To quantify this, we evaluate the unlearned model’s performance on the retain set using the
   knowledge memorization metric KnowMem(funlearn , Dretain ).
C5. Scalability. We assess the scalability of unlearning methods by examining their performance on
   forget sets of varying sizes. Let Duc denote a forget set of size c, and fuc be the corresponding
   unlearned model. For any data owner-valued metric such as utility preservation, we measure
   scalability by analyzing the trend of this metric as c increases from small to large values.
C6. Sustainability. Machine unlearning operations often need to be applied sequentially, as data
   removal requests may arrive at different times.4 We denote the unlearned model after processing
   the k-th request as fu,k . To measure sustainability, we analyze the trend of any data owner-valued
   metric as the number of sequential unlearning requests k increases.

3.2      E VALUATION C ORPUS
MUSE considers two representative types of textual data that may frequently involve unlearning
requests: news articles (Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,, 2023) and books (Eldan & Russinovich, 2023).
These datasets are detailed as follows:
    • N EWS consists of BBC news articles (Li et al., 2023b) collected after August 2023. All articles
      are randomly divided into (disjoint) forget, retain, and holdout sets.
    • B OOKS consists of the Harry Potter book series. To simulate a real-world setting for testing
      utility preservation (C4), we include different types of materials in the forget and retain sets. The
      forget set contains the original books, while the retain set contains related content from the Harry
      Potter FanWiki,5 representing domain knowledge that should be retained after unlearning.
For each corpus, we construct: 1) Verbatim text: the original text to assess the unlearning methods
to remove verbatim memorization (C1), and 2) Knowledge set: a set of derived (question, answer)
pairs based on the original texts to evaluate the unlearning method’s effectiveness in purging learned
knowledge and preventing knowledge memorization (C2). To create the Knowledge set, we partition
the Verbatim text into excerpts and use GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) to generate (question, answer) pairs
for each excerpt. When constructing the dataset, we perform deduplication between Dforget and Dretain
by removing documents with over 70% similarity based on 3-grams. For more details about the
dataset generation pipeline, see Appendix D.
Table 7 provides examples from the news and books corpora. The details of the dataset splits and
dataset sizes are provided in Appendix D.

4        U NLEARNING M ETHODS
We evaluate eight efficient approximate unlearning methods belonging to four families of algorithms.
     4
     For example, under GDPR, if Alice requests the removal of her data and Bob submits another removal
request 31 days later, both requests must be fulfilled within 30 days. This requires the model deployer to first
unlearn Alice’s data and then process Bob’s request on the updated model.
   5
     harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Four families of unlearning methods. We first introduce four families of unlearning methods, which
serve as the basis for the eight methods we evaluate.
    • Gradient Ascent (GA) minimizes the likelihood of correct predictions on Dforget by performing
      gradient ascent on the cross-entropy loss (the opposite of conventional learning with gradient
      descent). GA has achieved mixed results: while Jang et al. (2023) found it effective for unlearn-
      ing examples from the Enron email dataset (Klimt & Yang, 2004) with minimal performance
      degradation, Ilharco et al. (2023) reported that GA significantly harms general model utility when
      unlearning a high-toxicity subset of the Civil Comments dataset (Borkan et al., 2019).
    • Negative Preference Optimization (NPO; Zhang et al., 2024b) treats the forget set as negative
      preference data and adapts the offline DPO objective (Rafailov et al., 2023) to tune the model to
      assign low likelihood to the forget set without straying too far from the original model ftarget .

                                         2                         fθ (x)
                             LNPO (θ) = − Ex∼Dforget log σ −β log                ,
                                         β                        ftarget (x)
      where fθ refers to the model that undergoes unlearning, σ is the sigmoid function, and β is a
      hyperparameter that controls the allowed divergence of fθ from its initialization ftarget . Following
      Rafailov et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2024b), we fix β = 0.1 in our experiments.
    • Task Vectors (Ilharco et al., 2023) derived from straightforward arithmetic on the model weights
      can effectively steer neural network behavior. We adapt task vectors to perform unlearning in
      two stages. First, we train ftarget on Dforget until the model overfits, yielding a reinforced model
      freinforce . We then obtain a task vector related to Dforget by calculating the weight difference
      between ftarget and freinforce . To achieve unlearning, we subtract this task vector from ftarget ’s
      weights, intuitively moving the model away from the direction it used to adapt to Dforget – i.e.,
      funlearn = ftarget − (freinforce − ftarget ).
    • Who’s Harry Potter (WHP; Eldan & Russinovich, 2023) defines the unlearned model funlearn as
      the interpolation between the target model ftarget and the reinforced model freinforce . Let pf (·|x)
      denote the token distribution parametrized by the model f when given a prompt x as input. Then,
      concretely, for any input x, WHP samples the next token from
                           pfunlearn (·|x) = pftarget (·|x) − α(pfreinforce (·|x) − pftarget (·|x))
      where α is a hyperparameter that controls the interpolation between the two models.
Two regularizers for utility preservation. GA and NPO are not explicitly designed for utility
preservation, so we discuss several regularization strategies that either improve the performance on
the retain set or ensure the unlearned model remains close to the target model during unlearning.
    • Gradient Descent on the Retain Set (GDR; Liu et al., 2022; Maini et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
      2024b) augments the unlearning objective with a standard gradient descent learning objective
      on the cross-entropy of the retain set Dretain to more directly train the model to maintain its
      performance on Dretain .
    • KL Divergence Minimization on the Retain Set (KLR; Maini et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b)
      encourages the unlearned model’s probability distribution pfunlearn (·|x) to be close to the target
      model’s distribution pftarget (·|x) on inputs from the retain set x ∈ Dretain .
List of methods. We combine GA and NPO with the two regularizers GDR and KLR,6 which yields
four new combinations. Hence, we end up with a total of 8 candidate unlearning methods: GA,
GAGDR , GAKLR , NPO, NPOGDR , NPOKLR , Task Vector, and WHP. In general, the cost of the approximate
unlearning method is negligible compared to retraining. Note that the methods with regularizers
(GAGDR , GAKLR , NPOGDR , NPOKLR ) require access to the distribution of Dretain ). Details about the
efficiency of these methods are reported in Appendix B.4.

5      E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the eight representative unlearning methods using the experimental setup described in
§5.1. We present the results for data owner expectations in §5.2 and for deployer expectations in §5.3.
   6
     These regularizers are not compatible with Task Vector and WHP, because Task Vector involves purposefully
overfitting a model to Dforget when deriving the task vector, and WHP is a test-time technique where the unlearning
operation involves no optimization by itself.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Most unlearning methods effectively remove verbatim and knowledge memorization but signifi-
cantly impact utility and privacy. We evaluate the 8 algorithms described in §4 on 4 of the criteria in MUSE.
We include the results of fretrain for reference and calculate the relative ratio compared to the reference model. We
highlight the ratio in blue if the unlearning algorithm satisfies the criterion and highlight it in orange otherwise.
We define privacy leakage as negligible when it falls within the range of -5% to +5%. Large positive values
suggest over-unlearning , while large negative values suggest under-unlearning (see §3.1). This table covers the results
for C1 to C4, while results for C5 and C6 are shown in Figure 6.

                   C1. No Verbatim Mem.     C2. No Knowledge Mem.       C3. No Privacy Leak.       C4. Utiltiy Preserv.
                   VerbMem on Dforget (↓)    KnowMem on Dforget (↓)    PrivLeak (∈ [−5%, 5%])     KnowMem on Dretain (↑)

                                                          N EWS
Target ftarget     58.4                     63.9                      −99.8                       55.2
Retrain fretrain   20.8                     33.1                        0.0                       55.0
GA                  0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%             5.2       over-unlearn     0.0       ↓100%
GAGDR               4.9       ↓76.5%        31.0      ↓6.3%           108.1       over-unlearn    27.3       ↓50.3%
GAKLR              27.4       ↑31.4%        50.2      ↑51.5%          −96.1       under-unlearn   44.8       ↓18.5%
NPO                 0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%            24.4       over-unlearn     0.0       ↓100.0%
NPOGDR              1.2       ↓94.4%        54.6      ↑64.8%          105.8       over-unlearn    40.5       ↓26.3%
NPOKLR             26.9       ↑29.0%        49.0      ↑48.1%          −95.8       under-unlearn   45.4       ↓17.4%
Task Vector        57.2       ↑174.7%       66.2      ↑100.0%         −99.8       under-unlearn   55.8       ↑1.5%
WHP                19.7       ↓5.6%         21.2      ↓35.9%          109.6       under-unlearn   28.3       ↓48.5%

                                                         B OOKS
Target ftarget     99.8                     59.4                      −57.5                       66.9
Retrain fretrain   14.3                     28.9                        0.0                       74.5
GA                  0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%           −25.0       under-unlearn    0.0       ↓100%
GAGDR               0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%           −26.5       under-unlearn   10.7       ↓85.6%
GAKLR              16.0       ↑11.4%        21.9      ↓24.4%          −40.2       under-unlearn   37.2       ↓50.0%
NPO                 0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%           −24.3       under-unlearn    0.0       ↓100%
NPOGDR              0.0       ↓100%          0.0      ↓100%           −30.8       under-unlearn   22.8       ↓69.4%
NPOKLR             17.0       ↑18.2%        25.0      ↓13.4%          −43.5       under-unlearn   44.6       ↓40.1%
Task Vector        99.7       ↑595.0%       52.4      ↑81.2%          −57.5       under-unlearn   64.7       ↓13.1%
WHP                18.0       ↑25.2%        55.7      ↑92.9%           56.5       over-unlearn    63.6       ↓14.6%


5.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Retrained and target models. We start with a general pretrained base model f0 , and finetune two
models: ftarget on Dforget ∪ Dretain , and fretrain on Dretain only. See Appendix B.3 for details about
finetuning. For each unlearning algorithm U, we further generate the unlearned model funlearn =
U(ftarget , Dforget , Dretain ). We ensure that f0 has no access to Dforget , Dretain , Dholdout . Therefore, for
N EWS, we use f0 = LLaMA-2 7B (Touvron et al., 2023), which was released before the BBC news
articles we use to construct our benchmarks; and for B OOKS, we use f0 = ICLM-7B (Shi et al.,
2024b), which does not contain the Harry Potter books in its pretraining data.
Unlearning experimental configuration. Following prior work (Maini et al., 2024), we run GA,
NPO, and their regularized variants using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a
constant learning rate of 10−5 and a batch size of 32. We employ the stopping criteria as follows: if
the utility (i.e., KnowMem on Dretain ) of a model undergoing unlearning drops below that of fretrain
within 10 epochs of unlearning, we stop at the first epoch where this condition holds; otherwise, we
take a checkpoint from the 10th epoch. For Task Vector and WHP, to obtain the reinforced model for
unlearning, we fine-tune the target model for 10 epochs using the same learning rate and batch size.
Further details on the model fine-tuning and unlearning can be found in Appendix B.3.

5.2    R ESULTS : DATA OWNER E XPECTATIONS
We first analyze how eight unlearning methods meet data owner expectations (C1, C2 & C3 in §3.1).
C1&C2. Most methods are effective for unlearning memorization. As shown in Table 3, most
unlearning methods perform exceptionally well in [C1. No verbatim memorization] and [C2. No
knowledge memorization], often reducing VerbMem and KnowMem even beyond the levels achieved
by the retrained model. Notably, some methods, such as GA and NPO, achieve a score of 0 for both
VerbMem and KnowMem, meaning that these methods completely prevent the unlearned models from
producing any text related to the forget set. However, as we will see later, these reductions often
come at the cost of significant utility loss on the retain set.



                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Target Model (ftarget )                         Retrained Model (fretrained )                                           GAKLR (under-unlearn)               GAGDR (over-unlearn)
                               Forget                                         Forget                                                                 Forget                             Forget
                               Retain                                         Retain                                                                 Retain                             Retain
                               Holdout                                        Holdout                                                                Holdout                            Holdout


                           1                          5                  1                           5                          2                                      10     0                       80
                               Min-K% Prob                                    Min-K% Prob                                                            Min-K% Prob                        Min-K% Prob

Figure 3: Distribution of Min-K% Prob, an MIA metric, for Dforget , Dholdout , and Dretain . Consistent with the
expected pattern in Figure 2, fretrain shows perfect unlearning, with the overlapping distributions for Dforget and
Dholdout . Existing approximate unlearning methods typically either under-unlearn or over-unlearn. For example,
GAKLR shows slight under-unlearning, while GAGDR over-unlearns, pushing the Min-K% Prob of Dforget to an
extreme level.

                                                                                                                                               0.6


                                                                                                             Utility Preservation (Dretain )
                                     Retrain (0.48)        NPO (0.59)
                     1.0                                                                                                                                        Desired                           Retrain
                                     Target (0.00)         NPOGDR (0.98)
                                     GA (0.50)             NPOKLR (0.02)                                                                                                                          Target
                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GA
True positive rate


                                     GAGDR (0.99)          WHP (1.00)
                                     GAKLR (0.02)          TV (0.00)
                                                                                                                                               0.4
                     0.6                                                                                                                                                                          GAGDR
                                                                                                                                                                No free lunch
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GAKLR
                     0.4                                                                                                                       0.2                                                NPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NPOGDR
                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                       Utility loss                               NPOKLR
                     0.0                                                                                                                       0.0                                                WHP
                               0.0            0.2         0.4           0.6         0.8        1.0                                                   0.0       0.2      0.4       0.6             TV
                                                      False positive rate                                                                             Knowledge Memorization (Dforget )
Figure 4: ROC curves for Dforget vs. Dholdout on                                                             Figure 5: Utility preservation vs. knowledge mem-
N EWS using Min-K% Prob, with AUC scores in                                                                  orization on BBC. fretrain maintains high utility on
parentheses. AUC≈0.5 (i.e., fretrain ) means no sig-                                                         Dretain while showing low knowledge memorization on
nificant distribution difference between two sets (i.e.,                                                     Dforget . GA and NPO without regularizers show signifi-
no membership leakage). Most unlearning meth-                                                                cant utility loss, collapsing to the origin. Every other
ods show under-unlearn (AUC≪0.5) or over-unlearn                                                             unlearning method unlearns the knowledge on Dforget
(AUC ≫0.5).                                                                                                  at the cost of utility.

C3. Unlearning leads to privacy leakage. Most unlearning methods reveal the membership of Dforget
in Dtrain through under-unlearning (PrivLeak ≪ 0) or over-unlearning (PrivLeak ≫ 0), as shown in
Table 3. We further examine the effectiveness of membership inference by plotting ROC curves
in Figure 4. The deviation from the diagonal line indicates the attacker’s advantage over random
guessing. We observe that the Min-K% Prob based attack achieves AUC ≈ 0 on ftarget , confirming its
effectiveness. Meanwhile, the ROC curve for fretrain closely follows the diagonal line (AUC = 0.47),
suggesting that perfect unlearning ensures MIA is no more effective than random guessing. Among
the approximate unlearning methods, GA and NPOGDR without regularizers consistently over-unlearn
(AUC > 0.7), whereas KLR-regularized methods (NPOKLR and GAKLR ) tend to under-unlearn and
barely improve privacy leakage over ftarget . WHP also deviates from the diagonal significantly.
In Figure 3, we further visualize the distribution of Min-K% Prob, the MIA metric computed across
Dforget , Dretain , and Dholdout . The behavior of ftarget and fretrain mirrors the patterns sketched in Figure 2,
where Dforget and Dretain are distinguishable in ftarget but overlap in fretrain . Existing approximate
unlearning methods typically either under-unlearn or over-unlearn. For example, GAKLR does not
sufficiently increase the Min-K% Prob metric for Dforget to align with the distribution of Dholdout ,
indicating under-unlearning. On the other hand, NPOGDR over-unlearns, significantly raising the MIA
metric across all datasets and especially for Dforget .

5.3                            R ESULTS : D EPLOYMENT C ONSIDERATIONS
C4. Unlearning significantly degrades model utility. Table 3 [C4 Utility Preserv.] shows that all
unlearning methods compromise the model’s utility by 24.2% ∼ 100%. Notably, several methods
(GA, GAGDR , NPOGDR ) lead to complete utility loss, rendering the unlearned models practically
unusable. Figure 5 illustrates the trade-offs between utility preservation on Dretain and knowledge
memorization on Dforget . An ideal unlearned model should mimic the behavior of fretrain (desired
region) by achieving a low level of memorization on Dforget while maintaining its utility. However,
most methods, such as GAKLR , NPOKLR , and WHP, unlearn the knowledge on DU at the cost of utility.


                                                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C5. Unlearning methods scale poorly with forget set sizes. To evaluate the robustness of the
unlearning methods to larger forget sets, we collect additional news articles from the same distribution
to scale our N EWS corpus from 0.8M tokens to 3.3M tokens and observe the utility preservation at
four different forget set sizes. As shown in Figure 6 (a), the model utility decrease with the size of
the forget set and achieves a minimum at the largest size.
                                                                              GA   GAKLR       NPOGDR
C6. Unlearning methods cannot sustainably                              GAGDR      NPO          NPOKLR


                                                       Utility Preservation
accommodate sequential unlearning requests.
To evaluate the robustness of these unlearning        0.4
methods to more than one unlearning requests,
we sequentially apply k unlearning processes,         0.2
each with respect to a different forget set. To
simulate sequential unlearning, we partition the      0.0
extended N EWS forget set (comprised of 3.3M              0.0M 0.8M 1.7M 2.5M 3.3M 0th   1st    2nd   3rd  4th
                                                                 Forget Set Size        Unlearning Request
tokens) into four disjoint folds (each containing              Scalability (a)         Sustainability (b)
0.8M tokens) and apply the unlearning methods
to each fold in a sequential manner.               Figure 6: The performance of GA, NPO, and their reg-
We again select utility preservation as the target ularized variants, measured by utility preservation,
metric for comparison. As shown in Figure 6 (b), degrades with larger forget set sizes (a) and sequen-
                                                   tial unlearning requests (b).
the performance of an unlearned model tends
to decrease significantly with respect to the number of unlearning requests, indicating that current
unlearning methods are not yet ready to handle sequential unlearning in a sustainable manner.

6    R ELATED W ORK
Machine unlearning for non-language model applications. Machine unlearning is a long-running,
well-studied topic. Several studies have explored exact unlearning, aiming to make the unlearned
model (funlearn ) exactly identical to the reference model (fretrain ). As expected, this can only be
accomplished in simple models like SVMs (Cauwenberghs & Poggio, 2000; Tveit et al., 2003;
Romero et al., 2007; Karasuyama & Takeuchi, 2010) or naive Bayes models (Cao & Yang, 2015).
Another approach is to ensure that the unlearned model funlearn is probabilistically indistinguishable
from fretrain (Ginart et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020), and this view of certifiable unlearning is closely
related to differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b;a). This rigorous definition of unlearning has
inspired several theoretical works that characterize the feasibility of unlearning in convex and
non-convex models, but those proposed algorithms are too computationally costly to operate on
modern-day LMs (Izzo et al., 2021; Neel et al., 2021; Ullah et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Gupta
et al., 2021). Several more tractable unlearning algorithms have been proposed (Borkan et al., 2019;
Ginart et al., 2019; Thudi et al., 2022; Chourasia & Shah, 2023) with broader applications such as
image classification (Ginart et al., 2019; Golatkar et al., 2020a), text-to-image generation (Gandikota
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023), Federated Learning (Liu et al., 2020; Che et al.,
2023; Halimi et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022) and Recommender Systems (Li et al., 2024b).
Machine unlearning for language models: methods and applications. Machine unlearning has
recently found its way into language model applications. In §4, we discuss some standard unlearning
methods based on parameter optimization, like the Gradient Ascent and its variance. Other notable
non-training-based unlearning methods include localization-informed unlearning (Meng et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024a), which involves identifying model units (e.g., layers, neurons)
closely related to the unlearning data or tasks and then locally editing and modifying the units.
In-context unlearning (Pawelczyk et al., 2023) offers another approach, treating the model as a black
box and modifying its output results using external knowledge.
Machine unlearning has also been applied to various downstream language model tasks, though the
unit of machine unlearning may differ from what we study in this work. Our evaluation focuses
on unlearning specific examples or datasets, aiming to make LMs forget either the phrasing or the
content knowledge of targeted data, while preserving their utility for data not targeted for removal.
This is crucial for ensuring privacy and copyright compliance. In addition to this specific unlearning,
there’s also a broader application similar to model editing, where outdated information is replaced
with new knowledge (Pawelczyk et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Belrose et al., 2024). Moreover, efforts
have been made to eliminate harmful behaviors in language models by creating toxicity benchmarks
and enhancing safety measures (Lu et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b).


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite these varied approaches to unlearning at different operational and knowledge levels, the
evaluation principles we propose such as preserving utility, ensuring scalability, and maintaining
sustainability—are relevant across these contexts.
Machine unlearning for language models: evaluation. Evaluating machine unlearning methods for
language model applications is also critical. Most previous studies have focused this evaluation on
specific tasks such as question answering or sentence completion. For example, Eldan & Russinovich
(2023) experiment with unlearning to forget Harry Potter books and demonstrate the effectiveness
of their methods by showing that familiarity scores, measured through completion-based, token-
probability-based, and question-answering evaluations, significantly decline post-unlearning. Lynch
et al. (2024) further suggest comparing unlearned models with perfectly retrained models. Their
evaluation finds that while familiarity scores with the forget set may drop post-unlearning, they still
remain higher than those of the retrained model. Wei et al. (2024b) evaluate the feasibility of using
unlearning techniques to prevent language models from generating copyrighted content. The closest
work to ours is TOFU (Maini et al., 2024), a benchmark featuring 200 synthetic author profiles,
each with 20 question-answer pairs, divided into forget and retain sets. However, TOFU is relatively
small-scale (0.15M tokens) and focuses on the evaluation of question answering. Additionally,
current evaluations focus on limited aspects of data owner expectations and do not adequately reflect
real-world deployment considerations, such as scalability and potential sequential unlearning requests.
In contrast, MUSE formally defines different unlearning scopes and corresponding metrics, resulting
in a systematic six-way evaluation featuring both data owners’ and deployers’ expectations. The
evaluation uses a large-scale corpus of over 6 million tokens, separated into verbatim text and
knowledge sets. We also note that some of our findings align with previous evaluations. For example,
our observation that over- or under-unlearn can exacerbate privacy leakage (§5.2) is consistent with
the recent work by Hayes et al. (2024). Our findings align with the the concurrent study by Shumailov
et al. (2024) showing that unlearning gives a false sense of security.
Survey papers. We direct readers to several insightful survey papers for further reading. For
non-LLM applications, notable surveys include Shintre et al. (2019); Nguyen et al. (2022); Thudi
et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2023). Additionally, the NeurIPS 2023 machine unlearning competition for
image classification7 is a valuable source of empirical methods tailored for this specific application
(Triantafillou et al., 2023). For language model applications, Si et al. (2023) categorize unlearning
methods into different families and summarize datasets for evaluating unlearning. Liu et al. (2024)
review LM unlearning algorithms by targets and methods, discuss the effectiveness and efficiency of
existing approaches and emphasize the importance of clearly defining the unlearning scope.

7       C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose MUSE, a comprehensive machine unlearning evaluation benchmark that
highlights six desirable properties from the perspectives of both data owners and model deployers.
We find that current unlearning methods successfully prevent the model’s memorization of content at
a significant cost to utility on data not intended for removal. They also lead to severe privacy leakage
and cannot sustainably accommodate successive unlearning requests or large-scale content removal.
These findings highlight the need for future research into more robust unlearning methods.
Limitations. While MUSE provides a systematic benchmark for evaluating unlearning algorithms,
it does not consider all possible considerations. For example, data owners may have additional
expectations, such as ensuring their information cannot be probed from intermediate activations (Song
& Raghunathan, 2020) or receiving formal guarantees of unlearning success (Sekhari et al., 2021;
Gupta et al., 2021; Ghazi et al., 2023). Similarly, deployers may expect other capabilities, like
fine-tuning and in-context learning, to be preserved, and may prefer unlearning algorithms that are
both computationally efficient and storage-wise cheap (e.g. does not need to keep a copy of the
retain set). MUSE currently evaluates unlearning for language models using books and news articles,
but it could be extended to other corpora, such as medical notes (Johnson et al., 2016; 2020) and
emails (Klimt & Yang, 2004), which often involve privacy concerns (Li et al., 2023a; Huang et al.,
2023). We also plan to evaluate different-sized LMs in the future. Finally, our approach can be
generalized to construct multi-faceted benchmarks for multimodal models (Golatkar et al., 2020b;
Cheng & Amiri, 2023; Zhang et al., 2024c). Further discussion on broader impact are in Appendix A.


    7
        https://unlearning-challenge.github.io


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We are committed to making all aspects of our work fully open-source, providing comprehensive
instructions to guarantee reproducibility.

Models The weights for our original models, ftarget and funlearn , will be released under the Apache
2.0 open-source license.

Data   Our benchmark datasets will be made available under open-source licenses.

Code We will provide the code for all baseline methods, evaluation scripts used for benchmarking,
as well as the code for visualizations and analysis presented in this paper. Detailed instructions will
accompany our code to ensure precise reproducibility.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Nora Belrose, David Schneider-Joseph, Shauli Ravfogel, Ryan Cotterell, Edward Raff, and Stella
  Biderman. Leace: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Nuanced
  metrics for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification, 2019.
Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hengrui Jia, Adelin Travers,
  Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine unlearning. In 2021 IEEE Symposium
  on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 141–159. IEEE, 2021.
Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
  IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 463–480. IEEE, 2015.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.
Gert Cauwenberghs and Tomaso Poggio. Incremental and decremental support vector machine
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
Tianshi Che, Yang Zhou, Zijie Zhang, Lingjuan Lyu, Ji Liu, Da Yan, Dejing Dou, and Jun Huan. Fast
  federated machine unlearning with nonlinear functional theory. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 4241–4268. PMLR, 2023.
Jiali Cheng and Hadi Amiri. Multimodal machine unlearning, 2023.
Rishav Chourasia and Neil Shah. Forget unlearning: Towards true data-deletion in machine learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6028–6073. PMLR, 2023.
Cynthia Dwork, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Frank McSherry, Ilya Mironov, and Moni Naor. Our data,
  ourselves: Privacy via distributed noise generation. In Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT
  2006: 24th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
  Techniques, St. Petersburg, Russia, May 28-June 1, 2006. Proceedings 25, pp. 486–503. Springer,
  2006a.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography: Third Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC
  2006, New York, NY, USA, March 4-7, 2006. Proceedings 3, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006b.
Ronen Eldan and Mark Russinovich. Who’s Harry Potter? Approximate Unlearning in LLMs. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.02238, 2023.
DOE 1 v. GitHub, Inc. 4:22-cv-06823, N.D. Cal. 2022.
Tremblay v. OpenAI, Inc.,. 23-cv-03416-AMO, (N.D. Cal.), 2023.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
  Parliament and of the Council. URL https://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
Chongyu Fan, Jiancheng Liu, Yihua Zhang, Dennis Wei, Eric Wong, and Sijia Liu. Salun: Em-
  powering machine unlearning via gradient-based weight saliency in both image classification and
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12508, 2023.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision (ICCV), pp. 2426–2436, October 2023.
Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Ayush Sekhari, and Chiyuan Zhang.
  Ticketed learning–unlearning schemes. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
  pp. 5110–5139. PMLR, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Antonio Ginart, Melody Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Y Zou. Making ai forget you: Data
  deletion in machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9304–9312, 2020a.
Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Forgetting outside the box: Scrubbing deep
  networks of information accessible from input-output observations. In Computer Vision–ECCV
  2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXIX 16,
  pp. 383–398. Springer, 2020b.
Chuan Guo, Tom Goldstein, Awni Hannun, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. Certified data removal
  from machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3832–3842.
  PMLR, 2020.
Varun Gupta, Christopher Jung, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi, and Chris Waites.
  Adaptive machine unlearning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
  16319–16330. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
  files/paper/2021/file/87f7ee4fdb57bdfd52179947211b7ebb-Paper.pdf.
Anisa Halimi, Swanand Kadhe, Ambrish Rawat, and Nathalie Baracaldo. Federated unlearning: How
  to efficiently erase a client in fl? arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05521, 2022.
Jamie Hayes, Ilia Shumailov, Eleni Triantafillou, Amr Khalifa, and Nicolas Papernot. Inexact
  unlearning needs more careful evaluations to avoid a false sense of privacy. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.01218, 2024.
Luxi He, Yangsibo Huang, Weijia Shi, Tinghao Xie, Haotian Liu, Yue Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Chiyuan Zhang, Danqi Chen, and Peter Henderson. Fantastic copyrighted beasts and how (not) to
  generate them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14526, 2024.
Peter Henderson, Xuechen Li, Dan Jurafsky, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Mark A Lemley, and Percy Liang.
  Foundation models and fair use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15715, 2023.
Yangsibo Huang, Chun-Yin Huang, Xiaoxiao Li, and Kai Li. A dataset auditing method for collabora-
  tively trained machine learning models. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 42(7):2081–2090,
  2022.
Yangsibo Huang, Samyak Gupta, Zexuan Zhong, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. Privacy implications of
  retrieval-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14888, 2023.
Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Suchin Gururangan, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic, 2023.
Zachary Izzo, Mary Anne Smart, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and James Zou. Approximate data deletion
  from machine learning models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2008–2016. PMLR, 2021.
Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and
  Minjoon Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. In Anna
  Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 14389–14408,
  Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
  acl-long.805. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.805.
Alistair Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Tom Pollard, Steven Horng, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger Mark.
  Mimic-iv. PhysioNet. Available online at: https://physionet. org/content/mimiciv/1.0/(accessed
  August 23, 2021), pp. 49–55, 2020.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-wei H Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a
  freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Masayuki Karasuyama and Ichiro Takeuchi. Multiple incremental decremental learning of support
 vector machines. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 21(7):1048–1059, 2010.
Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classification research. In
  European conference on machine learning, pp. 217–226. Springer, 2004.
Haoran Li, Dadi Guo, Wei Fan, Mingshi Xu, Jie Huang, Fanpu Meng, and Yangqiu Song. Multi-step
  jailbreaking privacy attacks on chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05197, 2023a.
Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Summer Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D Li,
  Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Long Phan, et al. The wmdp benchmark: Measuring
  and reducing malicious use with unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03218, 2024a.
Yucheng Li, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. Avoiding data contamination in language model
  evaluation: Dynamic test construction with latest materials, 2023b.
Yuyuan Li, Chaochao Chen, Xiaolin Zheng, Junlin Liu, and Jun Wang. Making recommender systems
  forget: Learning and unlearning for erasable recommendation. Knowledge-Based Systems, 283:
  111124, 2024b.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Bo Liu, Qiang Liu, and Peter Stone. Continual learning and private unlearning, 2022.
Gaoyang Liu, Xiaoqiang Ma, Yang Yang, Chen Wang, and Jiangchuan Liu. Federated unlearning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13891, 2020.
Sijia Liu, Yuanshun Yao, Jinghan Jia, Stephen Casper, Nathalie Baracaldo, Peter Hase, Xiaojun Xu,
  Yuguang Yao, Hang Li, Kush R Varshney, et al. Rethinking machine unlearning for large language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08787, 2024.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.     Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Lianhui Qin, Peter West, Prithviraj Am-
  manabrolu, and Yejin Choi. Quark: Controllable text generation with reinforced unlearning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27591–27609, 2022.
Aengus Lynch, Phillip Guo, Aidan Ewart, Stephen Casper, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Eight
  methods to evaluate robust unlearning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16835, 2024.
Pratyush Maini, Zhili Feng, Avi Schwarzschild, Zachary Chase Lipton, and J. Zico Kolter. Tofu:
  A task of fictitious unlearning for llms. ArXiv, abs/2401.06121, 2024. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266933371.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17359–17372, 2022.
Sewon Min, Suchin Gururangan, Eric Wallace, Weijia Shi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Noah A Smith, and
  Luke Zettlemoyer. Silo language models: Isolating legal risk in a nonparametric datastore. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.04430, 2023.
Sasi Kumar Murakonda, Reza Shokri, and George Theodorakopoulos. Quantifying the privacy
  risks of learning high-dimensional graphical models. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2287–2295. PMLR, 2021.
Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi. Descent-to-delete: Gradient-based methods
  for machine unlearning. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 931–962. PMLR, 2021.
Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Trung Huynh, Phi Le Nguyen, Alan Wee-Chung Liew, Hongzhi Yin,
  and Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen. A survey of machine unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02299,
  2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alex Oesterling, Jiaqi Ma, Flavio Calmon, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fair machine unlearning: Data
  removal while mitigating disparities. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 3736–3744. PMLR, 2024.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Martin Pawelczyk, Seth Neel, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. In-context unlearning: Language models
 as few shot unlearners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07579, 2023.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model, 2023.
Enrique Romero, Ignacio Barrio, and Lluís Belanche. Incremental and decremental learning for
  linear support vector machines. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp.
  209–218. Springer, 2007.
Ayush Sekhari, Jayadev Acharya, Gautam Kamath, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Remember
  what you want to forget: Algorithms for machine unlearning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:18075–18086, 2021.
Weijia Shi, Anirudh Ajith, Mengzhou Xia, Yangsibo Huang, Daogao Liu, Terra Blevins, Danqi Chen,
 and Luke Zettlemoyer. Detecting pretraining data from large language models. In The Twelfth
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=zWqr3MQuNs.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Maria Lomeli, Chunting Zhou, Margaret Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Noah A.
 Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen tau Yih, and Mike Lewis. In-context pretraining: Language
 modeling beyond document boundaries. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=LXVswInHOo.
Saurabh Shintre, Kevin A Roundy, and Jasjeet Dhaliwal. Making machine learning forget. In Privacy
  Technologies and Policy: 7th Annual Privacy Forum, APF 2019, Rome, Italy, June 13–14, 2019,
  Proceedings 7, pp. 72–83. Springer, 2019.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pp. 3–18.
  IEEE, 2017.
Ilia Shumailov, Jamie Hayes, Eleni Triantafillou, Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez, Nicolas Papernot,
   Matthew Jagielski, Itay Yona, Heidi Howard, and Eugene Bagdasaryan. Ununlearning: Unlearning
   is not sufficient for content regulation in advanced generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00106,
   2024.
Nianwen Si, Hao Zhang, Heyu Chang, Wenlin Zhang, Dan Qu, and Weiqiang Zhang. Knowledge
  unlearning for llms: Tasks, methods, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15766, 2023.
Congzheng Song and Ananth Raghunathan. Information leakage in embedding models. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security, pp. 377–390,
  2020.
Anvith Thudi, Gabriel Deza, Varun Chandrasekaran, and Nicolas Papernot. Unrolling sgd: Under-
  standing factors influencing machine unlearning. In 2022 IEEE 7th European Symposium on
  Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), pp. 303–319. IEEE, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
Eleni Triantafillou, Fabian Pedregosa, Jamie Hayes, Peter Kairouz, Isabelle Guyon, Meghdad Kur-
  manji, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Peter Triantafillou, Kairan Zhao, Lisheng Sun Hosoya, Julio
  C. S. Jacques Junior, Vincent Dumoulin, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Sergio Escalera, Jun Wan, Sohier
  Dane, Maggie Demkin, and Walter Reade. Neurips 2023 machine unlearning challenge, 2023.
  URL https://kaggle.com/competitions/neurips-2023-machine-unlearning.
Amund Tveit, Magnus Lie Hetland, and Håavard Engum. Incremental and decremental proximal
 support vector classification using decay coefficients. In International Conference on Data
 Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery, pp. 422–429. Springer, 2003.
Enayat Ullah, Tung Mai, Anup Rao, Ryan A Rossi, and Raman Arora. Machine unlearning via
  algorithmic stability. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4126–4142. PMLR, 2021.
Boyi Wei, Kaixuan Huang, Yangsibo Huang, Tinghao Xie, Xiangyu Qi, Mengzhou Xia, Prateek
  Mittal, Mengdi Wang, and Peter Henderson. Assessing the brittleness of safety alignment via
  pruning and low-rank modifications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05162, 2024a.
Boyi Wei, Weijia Shi, Yangsibo Huang, Noah A Smith, Chiyuan Zhang, Luke Zettlemoyer, Kai Li,
  and Peter Henderson. Evaluating copyright takedown methods for language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.18664, 2024b.
Xinwei Wu, Junzhuo Li, Minghui Xu, Weilong Dong, Shuangzhi Wu, Chao Bian, and Deyi Xiong.
  Depn: Detecting and editing privacy neurons in pretrained language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.20138, 2023.
Yinjun Wu, Edgar Dobriban, and Susan Davidson. Deltagrad: Rapid retraining of machine learning
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10355–10366. PMLR, 2020.
Heng Xu, Tianqing Zhu, Lefeng Zhang, Wanlei Zhou, and Yu Philip. Machine unlearning: A survey.
  ACM Computing Surveys, 2023.
Yuanshun Yao, Xiaojun Xu, and Yang Liu. Large language model unlearning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.10683, 2023.
Jiayuan Ye, Aadyaa Maddi, Sasi Kumar Murakonda, Vincent Bindschaedler, and Reza Shokri.
   Enhanced membership inference attacks against machine learning models. In Proceedings of
   the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 3093–3106,
   2022a.
Jingwen Ye, Yifang Fu, Jie Song, Xingyi Yang, Songhua Liu, Xin Jin, Mingli Song, and Xinchao
   Wang. Learning with recoverable forgetting. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
   87–103. Springer, 2022b.
Charles Yu, Sullam Jeoung, Anish Kasi, Pengfei Yu, and Heng Ji. Unlearning bias in language
  models by partitioning gradients. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2023, pp. 6032–6048, 2023.
Dawen Zhang, Shidong Pan, Thong Hoang, Zhenchang Xing, Mark Staples, Xiwei Xu, Lina Yao,
  Qinghua Lu, and Liming Zhu. To be forgotten or to be fair: Unveiling fairness implications of
  machine unlearning methods. AI and Ethics, pp. 1–11, 2024a.
Eric Zhang, Kai Wang, Xingqian Xu, Zhangyang Wang, and Humphrey Shi. Forget-me-not: Learning
  to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17591, 2023.
Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Negative preference optimization: From catastrophic
  collapse to effective unlearning, 2024b.
Yihua Zhang, Yimeng Zhang, Yuguang Yao, Jinghan Jia, Jiancheng Liu, Xiaoming Liu, and Sijia Liu.
  Unlearncanvas: A stylized image dataset to benchmark machine unlearning for diffusion models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11846, 2024c.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendices

A Broader Impact                                                                                18

B Experimental Details                                                                          19
   B.1 Threat Model for Privacy Leakage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
   B.2 Compute Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
   B.3 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
   B.4 Efficiency of Unlearning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19

C More Experimental Results                                                                     20
   C.1 Confidence Intervals for C1, C2 and C4 in Table 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20

D Dataset Details                                                                               21
   D.1 GPT-generated QA pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
   D.2 Dataset segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    B ROADER I MPACT
As LMs are deployed broadly and publicly, there is mounting legal and social pressure on deployers to
release models that permit effective unlearning when requested by data owners (European Parliament
& Council of the European Union; DOE 1 v. GitHub, Inc., N.D. Cal. 2022; Tremblay v. OpenAI,
Inc.,, 2023). These incentives have prompted a flurry of new unlearning algorithms stemming from
different technical perspectives. As such, systematic evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of
these methods when executing realistic unlearning requests on popular models is essential. MUSE
disentangles several desirable properties of unlearning algorithms and finds that no existing algorithm
is able to satisfy all of the data owner and deployer considerations. We hope that our fine-grained,
multi-faceted framework facilitates the improvement of unlearning algorithms. Moreover, we expect
that the general approach of designing metrics to balance the considerations of various stakeholders
is flexible and can adapt to the rapidly shifting legal, social, and economic landscape.
We also acknowledge the potential negative impacts of our study. One limitation of our evaluation
benchmark is that we do not have comprehensive study of how unlearning would impact the model
performance for different user bases, especially underrepresented groups. However, we note proper
handling and evaluation of fairness issues in unlearning is still an active ongoing research area (Zhang
et al., 2024a; Oesterling et al., 2024), therefore we leave it as future work. Additionally, our work
may be misinterpreted towards skepticism regarding the broader use of machine unlearning, as our
current evaluation reveals that existing unlearning methods are not yet ready for effective real-world
deployment. However, machine unlearning, especially for large language models, is a young and
active research area and new algorithms are constantly being proposed. We emphasize that our results
is not a criticism of the paradigm of machine unlearning, but a study of the potential downsides
of existing methods and a call for better algorithms. We believe our benchmark is an important
step towards guiding future algorithm design of machine unlearning research towards more realistic
deployment scenarios.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
B.1   T HREAT M ODEL FOR P RIVACY L EAKAGE
We provide further clarification on the threat model considered for our C3: no privacy leakage. We
assume an attacker with access to a trained model aims to determine whether a specific example
(belonging to a particular data owner) was part of the training set. Prior work on membership
inference attacks (MIA) demonstrates that these attacks can detect a training sample’s influence on
the trained model, and use that to distinguish between training and non-training samples. Therefore,
an effective unlearning algorithm should eliminate such influence to reduce the attack’s success rate,
making the model unable to distinguish between a true non-training example and one that was trained
and subsequently unlearned.
Note that in this threat model, we assume the attacker only have access to the final unlearned model,
because if both the target model and the unlearned models are available at the same time, then there
is no point to perform unlearning.

B.2   C OMPUTE C ONFIGURATIONS
All experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA A40 GPU cards in a single node.

B.3   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
Finetuning details. As described in §5.1, for N EWS, we start from f0 = LLaMA-2 7B (Touvron
et al., 2023) and finetune the model on the BBC news articles for 5 epochs with a constant learning
rate of 10−5 and a batch size of 32 . For B OOKS, we start from f0 = ICLM 7B (Touvron et al., 2023)
and finetune the model on the Harry Potter books with same set of hyperparameters.

Unlearning details. For all the unlearning methods in Table 3, we use a constant learning rate of
10−5 and a batch size of 32. For freinforced used in WHP and Task Vector, we fine-tune ftarget for 10
epochs.
Before evaluation, for each unlearning method, we select its optimal epoch or α (both of which are
parameters that control a degree of unlearning) by using our unlearning stopping criteria based on the
unlearned model’s utility on Dretain compared to that of fretrain . The chosen epochs or α’s for each
method are listed below.
                       Table 4: Optimal epochs or α’s for each unlearning method.

                              Unlearning Method         N EWS     B OOKS
                                       GA               epoch 1   epoch 1
                                     GAGDR              epoch 7   epoch 1
                                     GAKLR             epoch 10   epoch 5
                                      NPO               epoch 1   epoch 1
                                    NPOGDR             epoch10    epoch 1
                                     NPOKLR            epoch 10   epoch 4
                                   Task Vector          α = 29    α = 29
                                      WHP               α = 22    α = 28



B.4   E FFICIENCY OF U NLEARNING M ETHODS
We report the efficiency of unlearning methods in Table 5, measured by the wall-clock time for a
single gradient update step of unlearning. The time measurements were conducted using 8 NVIDIA
A40 GPUs on a single node, with a batch size of 32 and an input length of 2048 tokens. Each step
corresponds to one gradient update processing a total of 65,536 tokens (32 × 2048 tokens). For Task
Vector and WHP, each step represents one iteration of fine-tuning to create the reinforced model.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 5: Wall-clock time and total GPU hours required for each unlearning method.

                   Unlearning Method       Time (Seconds/Step)         Total Time (GPU Hours)
                         Retrain                      -                         184320
                           GA                       4.14                         0.56
                         GAGDR                      6.05                         0.82
                         GAKLR                      7.58                         1.03
                          NPO                       5.68                         0.77
                        NPOGDR                      7.59                         1.03
                         NPOKLR                     9.11                         1.24
                       Task Vector                  4.14                         1.12
                          WHP                       4.14                         1.12

C        M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
C.1       C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS FOR C1, C2 AND C4 IN TABLE 3
We compute confidence intervals for C1, C2, and C4 (Mean ROUGE-L F1) using bootstrapping8 . For
each mean ROUGE-L score reported in Table 3, we draw 9,999 bootstrap resamples and calculate a
two-tailed 95% confidence interval using the “percentage” method.

          Table 6: 95% confidence intervals computed for mean Rouge-L scores used in C1, C2, and C4.

                         C1. No Verbatim Mem.              C2. No Knowledge Mem.          C4. Utiltiy Preserv.
                         VerbMem on Dforget (↓)             KnowMem on Dforget (↓)       KnowMem on Dretain (↑)

                                                     N EWS
Target ftarget         58.4          [54.1, 62.9]      63.9           [58.7, 69.0]       55.2         [50.7, 59.9]
Retrain fretrain       20.8          [18.5, 23.7]     33.1            [26.8, 39.5]       55.0         [50.3, 59.8]
GA                       0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]          0.0         [0.0, 0.0]
GAGDR                    4.9         [4.5, 5.2]        31.0           [24.2, 38.0]       27.3         [21.9, 33.0]
GAKLR                   27.4         [25.1, 29.9]      50.2           [43.1, 56.9]       44.8         [39.2, 50.5]
NPO                      0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]          0.0         [0.0, 0.0]
NPOGDR                   1.2         [0.3, 2.3]        54.6           [47.5, 61.5]       40.5         [34.7, 46.2]
NPOKLR                  26.9         [24.7, 29.3]      49.0           [41.8, 61.5]       45.4         [39.8, 51.1]
Task Vector             57.2         [52.6, 62.0]      66.2           [61.3, 71.2]       55.8         [51.0, 60.6]
WHP                     19.7         [17.8, 21.6]      21.2           [16.0, 26.7]       28.3         [23.3, 33.4]
                                                    B OOKS
Target ftarget         99.8          [99.8, 99.9]      59.4           [52.7, 66.0]       66.9         [59.6, 73.8]
Retrain fretrain       14.3          [13.6, 15.1]     28.9            [22.1, 35.7]       74.5         [68.4, 80.0]
GA                       0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]          0.0         [0.0, 0.0]
GAGDR                    0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]         10.7         [6.2, 15.7]
GAKLR                   16.0         [14.8, 17.2]      21.9           [16.4, 27.7]       37.2         [29.5, 45.0]
NPO                      0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]          0.0         [0.0, 0.0]
NPOGDR                   0.0         [0.0, 0.0]         0.0           [0.0, 0.0]         22.8         [16.1, 30.1]
NPOKLR                  17.0         [15.7, 18.2]      25.0           [19.0, 31.5]       44.6         [36.5, 52.8]
Task Vector             99.7         [99.6, 99.8]      52.4           [45.0, 59.7]       64.7         [57.1, 71.8]
WHP                     18.0         [16.4, 19.7]      55.7           [48.6, 62.8]       63.6         [56.3, 70.9]


    8
        https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.bootstrap.html


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     DATASET D ETAILS
D.1    GPT- GENERATED QA PAIRS
We begin the generation by partitioning the Verbatim text of each corpus into a set of 2048-token
excerpts using LLaMA-2’s tokenizer. For each QA pair to generate, we randomly sample an excerpt
from this set and prompt GPT-4 (gpt-4o-2024-05-13) to create a JSON object with two fields:
“question” (a question that can only be answered using specific information from the excerpt) and
“answer” (an answer to the “question” extracted verbatim from the excerpt). We validate and exclude
any pairs whose answers cannot be found verbatim in their corresponding excerpts. This verbatim
requirement ensures that our Knowledge set is used precisely to evaluate the model’s ability to correctly
associate questions with relevant portions of the training data.
For each QA pair to generate, we initiate a new conversation with GPT-4 with its corresponding
excerpt. The instruction begins with a system prompt that specifies the desired format of generated
QA pairs as follows:
                                System Prompt for Generating QAs with GPT-4

    You will be provided with an excerpt of text. Your goal is to create a question-answer pair that assesses
    reading comprehension and memorization, ensuring that the question can only be answered using details
    from the excerpt.

     Please submit your response in a JSON format with the following fields:
    - “question”: A single question related to the excerpt. The question should be specific enough that it
     does not allow for an answer other than the one you provide. In particular, it should not be answerable
     based on common knowledge alone. Also, a few words extracted from the excerpt must suffice in
     answering this question.
    - “answer”: A precise answer extracted verbatim, character-by-character from the excerpt. The answer
     to this question must be short, phrase-level at most. The length of the extraction should be minimal,
     providing the smallest span of the excerpt that completely and efficiently answers the question.

We then present the excerpt as a user prompt to the model and collect the generated QA pairs. Here
are two example generated QA pairs from the Knowledge set of N EWS:
                                   QA Pair Generated by GPT-4: Example #1

    Excerpt (User prompt): ...According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI),
    the US accounted for 69% of Israel’s arms imports between 2019 and 2023...
    Question: According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), what percentage
    of Israel’s arms imports between 2019 and 2023 came from the US?
    Answer: 69%

                                   QA Pair Generated by GPT-4: Example #2

    Excerpt (User prompt): ...Wednesday’s event will be moderated by tech entrepreneur David Sacks, a
    close ally of the Tesla founder and a supporter of Mr DeSantis...
    Question: Who will moderate Wednesday’s Twitter Spaces event featuring Mr DeSantis?
    Answer: tech entrepreneur David Sacks


D.2    DATASET SEGMENTATION
Table 7 shows examples from MUSE and Table 8 presents detailed statistics for MUSE. For both
the N EWS and B OOKS datasets, we include the type of documents along with the number of tokens
                                                         (reg)
in each dataset. Additionally, MUSE incorporates Dretain , a distinct retain set which is seen by ftarget
but not included in Dforget . This set is used exclusively with the GDR and KLR regularizers discussed.
                                                                                                   (reg)
To ensure that regularized methods do not directly optimize towards the evaluation set Dretain , Dretain
is kept disjoint from Dretain .


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Examples of MUSE. Each corpus has Verbatim text and Knowledge sets (QA pairs derived from the
original text) for evaluating verbatim and knowledge memorization. In N EWS, Dforget and Dretain are two disjoint
sets of news articles. In B OOKS, Dforget is the Harry Potter book series while Dretain consists of wiki articles about
the series. The sizes of the forget and retain sets are reported in tokens in (). Note that only the Verbatim texts
within the Forget Set are included in our training data, while all Knowledge sets (QA pairs) serve for evaluations.

  Corpus Forget Set                                                              Retain Set
         N EWS A RTICLE (0.8 M tokens)                                           N EWS A RTICLE (1.6 M tokens)
              MP Stuart McDonald has been appointed as the SNP’s                 A father whose 12-year-old son was killed by
              new treasurer                                                      an IRA bomb 30 years ago
  N EWS       Q: What position has Stuart McDonald MP been appointed to?         Q: Who was affected by the IRA bomb 30 years ago?
              A: The SNP’s new treasurer                                         A: A father whose 12-year-old son
              H ARRY P OTTER B OOKS (1.1 M tokens)                               H ARRY P OTTER FAN W IKI (0.5 M tokens)
              “There’s more in the frying pan,” said Aunt Petunia,               This page contains a list of spells:
              turning eyes on her massive son.                                   Portuguese for ‘open’.
  B OOKS      Q: What does Aunt Petunia tell her son?                            Q: What is the spell used to open things?
              A: There’s more in the frying pan.                                 A: Portuguese


Table 8: Statistics of the MUSE dataset. Corpus sizes are reported in tokens, shown in (). Retain Setreg. is
disjoint from the standard Retain Set used in evaluation and is employed in unlearning training to preserve utility
through regularizers.

 Corpus Forget Set                         Retain Set                    Retain Setreg.                  Holdout Set
 N EWS News Articles (3.3M)                News Articles (1.6M)          News Articles (1.6M)            News Articles (2.0M)
 B OOKS Harry Potter Books (1.1M)          Harry Potter FanWiki (0.5M)   Harry Potter FanWiki (0.2M)     Harry Potter Books (0.6M)


                                                                   22
