Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Epistemic Monte Carlo Tree Search
 Yaniv Oren                                                Viliam Vadocz
 Delft University of Technology                            Delft University of Technology
 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands                            2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands
 y.oren@tudelft.nl

 Matthijs T. J. Spaan                                      Wendelin Böhmer
 Delft University of Technology                            Delft University of Technology
 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands                            2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands
 m.t.j.spaan@tudelft.nl                                    j.w.bohmer@tudelft.nl



                                        Abstract

        The AlphaZero/MuZero (A/MZ) family of algorithms has achieved remark-
        able success across various challenging domains by integrating Monte Carlo
        Tree Search (MCTS) with learned models. Learned models introduce epis-
        temic uncertainty, which is caused by learning from limited data and is
        useful for exploration in sparse reward environments. MCTS does not ac-
        count for the propagation of this uncertainty however. To address this, we
        introduce Epistemic MCTS (EMCTS): a theoretically motivated approach
        to account for the epistemic uncertainty in search and harness the search
        for deep exploration. In the challenging sparse-reward task of writing code
        in the Assembly language subleq, AZ paired with our method achieves
        significantly higher sample efficiency over baseline AZ. Search with EMCTS
        solves variations of the commonly used hard-exploration benchmark Deep
        Sea - which baseline A/MZ are practically unable to solve - much faster than
        an otherwise equivalent method that does not use search for uncertainty
        estimation, demonstrating significant benefits from search for epistemic
        uncertainty estimation.


1   Introduction
Many recent successes of reinforcement learning (RL) have been achieved by the model-based
algorithm family of AlphaZero/MuZero (A/MZ, Silver et al., 2018; Schrittwieser et al., 2020).
A/MZ have outperformed humans in games, in tasks that traditionally relied on intricate
human engineering (Mandhane et al., 2022) and even made real world impact with the design
of novel, more efficient algorithms (Fawzi et al., 2022; Mankowitz et al., 2023) for day-to-day
problems, a task that is often formulated as a challenging sparse reward environment. When
rewards are sparse, it is difficult to learn good policies without employing some form of deep
exploration to search for the rewards. Deep exploration refers to the ability of the agent to
direct itself towards novel transitions in the environment irrespective of how far away they
are from the current state and promises up to exponential improvement in sample efficiency
in sparse reward environments (Osband et al., 2018).
At the core of A/MZ is the combination of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS, Swiechowski
et al., 2023) with learned models of value and/or environment dynamics. Learned models
introduce epistemic uncertainty, which refers to the uncertainty in the predictions of the
model sourced in limited coverage of the state-action space during training (Hüllermeier
& Waegeman, 2021). Accounting for epistemic uncertainty allows the agent to discern
between predictions that are based on evidence (i.e. the learned predictor was trained on
this input), or based on generalization (i.e. the learned predictor was not trained on this
input) and is useful for many purposes in online and offline RL. Common uses range from
reducing overestimation errors through pessimism in the face of uncertainty (see Kumar
et al., 2020), to directing deep exploration through optimism in the face of uncertainty (see


                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neu & Pike-Burke, 2020). Harnessing search for exploration is a popular approach in similar
model based algorithms, such as Dreamer (Sekar et al., 2020).
MCTS, however, was designed for search with the true dynamics model and without a
value model, and as a result, does not account for epistemic uncertainty introduced from
learning the models. For this reason, A/MZ cannot harness MCTS for deep exploration, nor
benefit from the epistemic uncertainty associated with the predictions of the search tree in
other ways. In this work we aim to address both, with three main contributions. Practical
and theoretically motivated methods to (i) harness MCTS and epistemic uncertainty for
upper-confidence-bound-based deep exploration (Jin et al., 2018) and (ii) propagate the
epistemic uncertainty from learned models of value and/or dynamics during search, which
we call Epistemic MCTS (EMCTS). (iii) A parallelized implementation in JAX (Bradbury
et al., 2018) of EMCTS paired with an AZ agent and an environment implementing the
Assembly language subleq (Mazonka & Kolodin, 2011)1 . We find that the propagation of
epistemic uncertainty in EMCTS is very similar to that of value in MCTS. As search with
MCTS improves the value estimates at the root, we hypothesize that search with EMCTS
similarly improves the epistemic uncertainty estimates at the root, resulting in more accurate
UCBs and more sample efficient exploration compared to a method that does not rely on
search but is otherwise equivalent.
We evaluate EMCTS in the challenging, similar to real-world applications and sparse-reward
task of programming in subleq, as well as in the commonly used hard-exploration benchmark
Deep Sea (Osband et al., 2020). Our method is able to find correct programs for a harder
programming task in a much smaller number of samples than the AZ baseline. In the
Deep Sea benchmark, our method demonstrates deep exploration by solving stochastic and
deterministic reward variations of the task, both of which baseline A/MZ is unable to solve in
a reasonable number of samples. In addition, EMCTS significantly outperforms an ablation
that does not rely on search for epistemic uncertainty estimation but is otherwise equivalent,
demonstrating significant advantages from search for uncertainty estimation.



2    Background

In RL, an agent learns a behavior policy through interactions with an environment. The
environment is represented by a Markov Decision Process (MDP, Bellman, 1957) M =
⟨S, A, ρ, R, P, γ⟩, where S is a set of states, A a set of actions, ρ the initial state distribution,
R : S × A → R a bounded possibly stochastic reward function, and P is a transition
distribution such that P (s′ |s, a) specifies the probability of transitioning from state s to
state s′ after executing action a. The objective Jπ of the agent is to find a policy π(a|s),
specifying the probability of selecting action a in state s, that maximizes the expected
discounted return, also called value V π , from the starting state distribution ρ:
                                         hH−1                                                 i
            Jπ = E[V π (s0 )| s0 ∼ρ ] = E
                                           P t
                                              γ R(st , at ) s0 ∼ρ,st+1 ∼P (st ,at ),at ∼π(st ) .  (1)
                                          t=0
The discount factor 0 < γ < 1 is used in infinite-horizon MDPs, i.e. H = ∞, to guarantee
that the values remain bounded, and is commonly used in RL for training stability. A
state-action Q-value function is also often used: Qπ (s, a) = E[R(s, a) + γV π (s′ )| s′ ∼P (s,a)].
We denote the value of the optimal policy π ∗ with V ∗ (s) = maxπ V π (s), ∀s ∈ S. In offline
RL, the agent must maximize this objective given a static dataset. In model-based RL
(MBRL) the agent uses a model of the dynamics of the environment (P, R) to optimize its
policy, often through planning (Moerland et al., 2023). The dynamics are either learned
from interactions (e.g., in MZ, Schrittwieser et al., 2020) or provided (e.g., in AZ, Silver
et al., 2018). In Deep MBRL the agent utilizes deep neural networks (DNN, Goodfellow
et al., 2016) to approximate any of the value, policy, reward and transition functions.


   1
     Our implementation, inspired by sic-1 which is an open source game demonstrating subleq, is
available at https://github.com/emcts/e-alphazero.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2.1   Monte Carlo Tree Search
The MCTS algorithm constructs a tree with the current state st at its root to estimate the
objective: arg maxa maxπ Qπ (st , a) (Browne et al., 2012), by iteratively performing selection,
expansion, simulation and backup. At each iteration i of the algorithm a trajectory in the
tree is selected using a tree search policy such as UCT (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006):
                                                                q
                                                                  2 log( a′ N (sk ,a′ ))
                                                                        P
               aik = U CTi (sk ) = arg max q i (sk , a) + CU CT         N (sk ,a)        ,   (2)
                                                   a∈A

where N (sk , a) denotes the number of times action a has been selected in node sk , CU CT > 0
trades off exploration of new nodes in the tree with maximizing observed return and q i (sk , a)
is the averaged return observed for this state action up to step i. Modern algorithms (such
as A/MZ) use instead variations of PUCT (Rosin, 2011):
                                                                      √P             ′
             i                              i                             a′ N (sk ,a )
            ak = P U CTi (sk ) = arg max q (sk , a) + π(a|sk ) CP U CT 1+N   (sk ,a) ,      (3)
                                                  a∈A

with some learned prior-policy π. When selection step i arrives at a leaf siT the node is
expanded with a value estimate v(siT ). MCTS propagates the return ν i of planning step i
back along the planning trajectory {sij , aij }Tj=0 :
                           T −1                                                                       i
                           X                                                                  1      X
       ν i (sk , aik ) =          γ j r(sik+j , aik+j ) + γ T v(siT ),   q i (sk , a) =                  ν j (sk , a)   (4)
                           j=0
                                                                                          N (sk , a) j=1

where aik+j = P/U CTi (sik+j ) and sik+j+1 = f (sik+j , aik+j ) for a deterministic transition func-
tion2 f : S × A → S and a mean-reward function r(s, a) = E[R(s, a)]. In the original MCTS,
the dynamics model m = (f, r) is provided to the agent and assumed to be correct for the
true MDP M and the value estimate v(siT ) is computed using Monte-Carlo (MC) rollouts
with m. In AZ the value function (Silver et al., 2018) and in MZ all functions f, r, v, are
learned from interactions with the environment and thus their predictions are uncertain
outside of the training set. The prior-policy π is trained with cross-entropy loss on targets
extracted from the root of the tree. With Reanalyze (Schrittwieser et al., 2021), which uses
search to generate fresh value and policy targets from off-policy data, A/MZ are able to
learn off-policy.


2.2   Quantifying Uncertainty in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Quantifying uncertainty in deep learning is an active field of research (see Hüllermeier &
Waegeman, 2021; Lockwood & Si, 2022). In this work, we take the common approach for
quantifying epistemic uncertainty as the variance in a random variable that approximates
predictions that are consistent with a dataset of observed interactions D. We model a learned
function r̂, trained to approximate a true function r on data D, r̂(s, a) ≈ r(s, a), as a random
variable with respect to the data: r̂(s, a)|D := R̂(s, a). We assume unbiased approximation
E[R̂(s, a)] := r(s, a), and use the variance V[R̂(s, a)] to quantify the epistemic uncertainty.
In discrete state-action spaces, the epistemic uncertainty in a reward or a transition can
be estimated as the novelty of a state or state-action pair using visitation counting. Exact
counting, which is generally intractable in large state-action spaces, can be replaced by
Hash-based counting (Tang et al., 2017), or methods that focus on direct estimation of the
novelty of state-action pairs, such Random Network Distillation (RND, Burda et al., 2019).
In contrast, epistemic uncertainty in a value prediction V[V̂ (s)] that is trained with TD-based
targets, requires reasoning about uncertainty in the value-targets, as well as whether V̂ was
trained on s at all. We follow the popular approach by Strens (2000) of defining epistemic
uncertainty in the value function as the variance of a Bayesian posterior of the Q-values of a

    2
      For notational simplicity we assume here a deterministic transition function f , so that nodes
sik+j correspond to individual states. It is also possible to use a stochastic transition model P , where
nodes correspond to distributions of states, which are sampled by the selection step. The above
equations remain the same, but the state corresponding to sik+j is effectively a random variable.


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


policy conditioned on the data the agent has collected, as follows:
                                h                                                      i
               V[Q̂π (s, a)] = V R̂(s, a) + γ   π(a′ |s′ ) P̂ (s′ |s, a) Q̂π (s′ , a′ ) .
                                              P
                                                                                                             (5)
                                                     s′ ,a′

Note that the epistemic uncertainty about rewards V[R̂] and transitions V[P̂ ] are induced
by the data D the value function has been trained on, not by the agent’s knowledge of the
environment. Values predicted by learned value functions can therefore be epistemically
uncertain, even if a perfect model of the environment is known to the agent. In their work on
the Uncertainty Bellman Equation (UBE), O’Donoghue et al. (2018) propose to approximate
an upper bound uπ (st , at ) ≥ V[Q̂π (st , at )]. uπ (st , at ) can be learned with (possibly n-step)
TD targets in a similar manner to value learning from local uncertainties η(s, a):
  uπ (st , at ) := η(st , at ) + γ 2 a′ π(a′ |st+1 ) uπ (st+1 , a′ ) ≤ η(st , at ) + γ 2 max uπ (st+1 , a′ ). (6)
                                    P
                                                                                        a ′


The local uncertainty η can be derived from V[R̂] and V[P̂ ]. Note that the above inequality
yields an upper bound on the epistemic uncertainty of any policy π with training data D.

2.3    Deep Exploration with Upper Confidence Bounds
A popular approach to harness epistemic uncertainty for deep exploration is that of optimism
in the face of uncertainty (Lattimore & Szepesvari, 2017), often formalized using an upper
confidence bound (UCB) on the true value of the optimal policy (Azar et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2018). Acting greedily with respect to the maximum UCB guarantees exploration of
the environment, as long as the UCB tightens with more samples from the environment.
The efficiency of UCB exploration depends on the epistemic uncertainty estimator. In
environments with small state-action spaces, epistemic uncertainty estimators that predict
maximum uncertainty for unvisited states can be used to guarantee exploration of every
state-action pair. To explore continuous or large state-action domains in practical numbers
of samples, using an UCB requires uncertainty estimators that estimate the epistemic
uncertainty in unvisited states s′ based on a similarity metric between s′ and visited states
s ∈ D (Jin et al., 2023), such as imposed by RND, for example.


3     Deep Exploration with Epistemic MCTS
To find an optimal policy, an RL agent must explore the environment until all necessary
information is gathered. When the agent uses search for action selection in the environment,
it can search for exploration, exploitation, or a trade-off between the two. When a learned
                                                                         i
model m̂ is used in search, the agent faces a problem: the values qm̂       in the search tree
               ∗m̂
converge to Qm̂ , the Q value in the learned model of the policy that is optimal in that model
  ∗
πm̂ . In areas where the learned model is inaccurate, the search may lead to arbitrarily bad
actions with respect to expected return in the true environment. From the perspective of
exploration on the other hand, this presents an opportunity: by estimating the epistemic
uncertainty the agent can identify the areas where the model is uncertain due to insufficient
interactions, and use the uncertainty to direct exploration into these areas.
Our objective is then two-fold: To extend MCTS to estimate and propagate the epistemic
uncertainty from the uncertain learned model and harness the epistemic uncertainty in the
search to achieve deep exploration of the environment. To achieve this, we take the following
steps: (i) Formulate the learned model m̂ as a random variable and use it to construct a UCB
on Q∗ (Section 3.1). (ii) Propose search policies to track the maximum UCB exploration
objective (Section 3.2). (iii) Propagate the epistemic uncertainty through search, such that
                                i                                      i
the epistemic uncertainty V[qm̂   (s, a)] in nodes’ value predictions qm̂ (s, a) can be estimated
(Section 3.3). Search with learned transition models introduces additional challenges for
uncertainty propagation, which we address in Section 3.4.

3.1    Search with a Learned Reward Model
For simplicity, we begin by formulating the problem of search with learned models
only in terms of a learned reward model and later extend the setup to learned value


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and transition models. Consider the following setting: the agent has access to a
dataset D = {(si , ai , ri , si+1 ) | 0 ≤ i < N } of transitions and rewards, as well as to
the true (possibly stochastic) transition model P . The reward function is bounded
with: maxs,a∈S×A |R(s, a)| ≤ rmax . We define the uncertain model as a random variable
M̂ = (P, R̂). The uncertain mean-reward function is defined as a random variable R̂ in the
standard manner for defining an epistemically uncertain model (see Section 2.2), such that
                                                                     1
                                                                           P
E[R̂(s, a)] = r(s, a) the mean reward, and R̂(s, a) = |(s,a,·,·)∈D|            (s,a,r,·)∈D r ≈ r(s, a), as
the empirical mean of observed rewards. The epistemic uncertainty in reward prediction is
defined as the variance V[R̂(s, a)]. We note that R̂(s, a) is a bounded random variable over
the interval [−rmax , rmax ]. To facilitate constructing an upper confidence bound on Q∗ we
                       2
define V[R̂(s, a)] := rmax  , ∀(s, a) ∈ / D. That is, for unobserved transitions, the maximum
variance possible for a bounded random variable (Popoviciu, 1935). The value with respect
to the Markov chain induced by the random variable M̂ is then itself a random variable:
                       ∞
                      hX                                                                            i
  QπM̂ (s, a) := Eπ,P     γ i ri ai ∼ π(si ), si+1 ∼ P (si , ai ), ri = R̂(si , ai ), s0 = s, a0 = a , (7)
                            i=0

where the expectation is with respect to π and P and not R̂. Using this definition for the
value in the model QπM̂ and its variance V[QπM̂ ] we can construct an upper confidence bound
on Q∗ for deep exploration.

Theorem 1 For M̂ , M, Q∗ , QπM̂ defined as above and δ ∈ (0, 1]:
                                    q
      ∗              π           1        π
  P Q (s, a) ≤ max QM̂ (s, a) + δ V[QM̂ (s, a)]
                                 √                    ≥ 1−δ,                                    ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A.    (8)
                        π


The proof is provided in Appendix A.1 and relies on the linearity of QπM̂ in the reward
function R̂. An extended UCB that is maintained in the presence of an uncertain transition
model P̂ is constructed in Appendix A.3. The UCB can be tracked by MCTS using epistemic
search policies, which we propose next.


3.2   Planning for Exploration with Epistemic Search
To harness search for deep exploration through the approximation of the UCB in Equation 8,
we propose Epistemic P/UCT (EP/UCT, changes are marked in blue):
                                                            q
                                                              2 log( a′ N (sk ,a′ ))
                                                                    P
                                         β
                    aEUCT = arg max qM̂     (sk , a) + CUCT         N (sk ,a)        ,  (9)
                                 a∈A
                                                                  √P              ′
                                     β                                 a′ N (sk ,a )
               aEPUCT = arg max qM̂    (sk , a) + π(a|sk ) CPUCT 1+N      (sk ,a) ,    (10)
                                       a∈A
where we define:
          β                           PN (sk ,a)                                PN (sk ,a) q
         qM̂ (sk , a) := N (s1k ,a)     i=0
                                                    i
                                                   νM̂ (sk , a) +β N (s1k ,a)        i=0
                                                                                                    i (s , a)].
                                                                                                 V[νM̂  k          (11)
                         |                  {z                }
                                                                                            √
                                                                   |                       {z                }
                                       :=qM̂ (sk ,a)
                                                                         :=σq        (sk ,a)≥   V[qM̂ (sk ,a)]
                                                                                M̂

The hyper-parameter β ≥ 0 can be tuned per task, or chosen to guarantee an upper confidence
                                           i
bound with specific confidence 1 − δ, and νM̂ (sk , a) is as defined in Equation 4 for a specific
                                                                                   β
model M̂ . We suppress the dependence on planning step i in the notation of qM̂      (sk , a)
for simplicity. To maintain the property of PUCT, which assumes qM̂ is between 0 and 1
(Rosin, 2011), one can use the Q normalization approach proposed by Schrittwieser et al.
(2020) to normalize the q β scores. More modern variations of PUCT such as those proposed
                                                                β
by Danihelka et al. (2022) can be used by replacing qM̂ with qM̂  in the search objective.
We note that in order to properly harness search policies that use a prior-policy for deep
exploration, such as EPUCT, the agent must learn an exploration-prior-policy πe that is
trained with an exploratory objective. Otherwise, the prior policy may direct the search
away from the exploratory planning objective. To enable EP/UCT, in the following section


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we propose methodology to estimate the epistemic uncertainty in backups and upper bound
V[qM̂ (sk , a)].


3.3   Propagating Epistemic Uncertainty in Search
To estimate V[qM̂ (sk , a)] we need to: (i) extend the problem setup to account for the
learned value model, (ii) compute or upper bound the epistemic uncertainty in one backup
    i                                                                     i
V[νM̂ (sk , a)] and (iii) compute or upper bound V[qM̂ (sk , a)] using V[νM̂ (sk , a)].

Search with a Learned Value Model A learned value model V̂ introduces an additional
source of epistemic uncertainty into the search, V[V̂ (s)]. In this case, for the UCB to hold
it is important that the models M̂ = (f, R̂, V̂ ) are trained on the same data, which is the
                                                                                             π
popular choice in practice. This is sufficient to analytically maintain that V[V̂ (s)] ≥ V[VM̂ (s)]
(see Equation 5). To maintain this property in practice, we choose the UBE (O’Donoghue
et al., 2018) estimator û (see Section 2.2 and Equation 6) which upper bounds V[V̂ (s)] using
V[R̂(s, a)]. To account for the possibility that û is unreliable outside of the training set we
use the novelty of (s, a) to upper bound the uncertainty predicted by û (see Appendix D.6
and Equation 25). When the reward model is not learned, such as in AZ, the value model
still has epistemic uncertainty as it is trained from interactions and V[V̂ (s)] coincides with
the definition of value uncertainty in model-free literature (Equation 5). This definition
accounts for uncertainty in transitions that are unobserved in the environment, regardless of
whether the transitions are known to the planning model, capturing the uncertainty in a value
model that is trained from interactions. To estimate V[R̂(s, a)] RND and (pseudo-)counting
methods can be used (see Section 2.2 for more detail).
Epistemic Uncertainty of the Backup The epistemic uncertainty in one backup step
   i
V[νM̂ (sk , a)] starting at node sk and choosing action a can be formulated as follows:
                                    T −k−1
                                      X
                   i
                V[νM̂ (sk , a)] =            γ 2j V[R̂(sik+j , aik+j )] + γ 2(T −k) V[V̂ (siT )],   (12)
                                     j=0

under the assumption that R̂(sk+i , a) is independent from R̂(sk+j , a) , ∀i =
                                                                             ̸ j, and V̂ is
independent from R̂ conditional on the data. We note that this assumption might be
reasonable for some estimators (i.e., a table), but is not generally assumed to be true for
DNNs. To avoid this assumption, we can instead upper bound the standard deviation of
correlated backups using the sum of standard deviations (see Appendix A.2).
Epistemic Uncertainty of Node Values Since A/MZ use the same model M̂ throughout
planning, the returns predicted for different backups cannot be assumed to be de-correlated.
We propose to upper bound the epistemic uncertainty instead:
                                                             N (sk ,a)               2
                                 2                     1       X p
                                                                          i
              V[qM̂ (sk , a)] ≤ σqM̂ (sk , a) :=                       V[ν (sk , a)] ,  (13)
                                                   N (sk , a) i=0
where N (sk , a) is the number of visitations to action a at node sk . We provide a complete
derivation in Appendix A.2. Equation 13 completes the Epistemic MCTS (EMCTS) algorithm
for learned value and/or reward models. See Algorithm 1 for pseudo code of EMCTS with
EUCT, where we suppress dependence on the model M̂ for notation simplicity. Extensions to
MCTS are marked in blue. In AZ, with a true reward model, EMCTS will use V[R̂(s, a)] =
0, ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A, but still use V[V̂ (s)] ≥ 0.
To conclude this section we note that while in this work we motivate and later evaluate
EMCTS from the perspective of deep exploration, EMCTS is not limited to this use case.
Our method introduces to MCTS-based algorithms such as A/MZ a novel capability to
estimate the epistemic uncertainty in the value predictions during and post search, which
may be attractive for different purposes. Noted example are: p  (i) reducing over estimation
errors with lower-bound value targets of the form qM̂ (s, a) − β V[qM̂ (s, a)]. This approach
is popular in model free AC methods implicitly (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018)


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 EMCTS with EUCT. Requires f, r, v π and uncertainty estimators V[V̂ ], V[R̂]
 1: function EMCTS(state s, β)      ▷ β = 0 for unmodified MCTS exploitation episodes
 2:    while within computation budget do
 3:       SELECT(s, β)              ▷ traverses tree from root s0 := s and adds new leaf
 4:    return action a drawn from π(a0 |s) = P N′ N
                                                  (s0 ,a)
                                                    (s0 ,a′ )   ▷ MCTS action selection
                                                         a

 5: function SELECT(node sk , β)           q
                                             2 log( a′ N (sk ,a′ ))
                                                   P
 6:    ak ← arg maxa∈A q β (sk , a) + CUCT         N (s ,a)   k
                                                                                 ▷ Equation 9
 7:    if ak already expanded then SELECT(f (sk , ak ), β)                    ▷ traverses tree
 8:    else EXPAND(sk , ak )                                                  ▷ adds new leaf
 9: function EXPAND(node sk , not yet expanded action ak )
10:    sk+1 , V̂ (sk+1 ), R̂(sk , ak ) ← Execute MCTS expansion     ▷ creates a new leaf sk+1
11:    Estimate epistemic variance of reward V[R̂(sk , ak )] and store it in node sk+1 .
12:    Estimate epistemic variance of value V[V̂ (sk+1 )] and store it in node sk+1 .
13:    BACKUP(sk+1 , V̂ (sk+1 ), V[V̂ (sk+1 )]) ▷ updates the tree values & value variances
14: function BACKUP(node sk+1 , ret. ν(sk+1 , ak+1 ), ret. unc. V[ν(sk+1 , ak+1 )])
15:    sk , ak , ν(sk , ak ) ← Execute MCTS backup step     ▷ updates q(sk , ak ), N (sk , ak )
                                         2
16:    V[ν(sk , ak )] ← V[R̂(sk , ak )]
                                     √+ γ V[ν(sk+1 , ak+1 )]                    ▷ Equation 12
                                      V[ν(sk ,ak )]−σq (sk ,ak )
17:    σq (sk , ak ) ← σq (sk , ak ) +     N (sk ,ak )                          ▷ Equation 13
18:    if k > 0 then BACKUP(sk , ν(sk , ak ), V[ν(sk , ak )])

and explicitly (Ciosek et al., 2019), as well as in model-based RL (Zhou et al., 2020) and
is generally very common in offline RL (Kumar et al., 2020; Ghasemipour et al., 2022).
This makes EMCTS an espeically attractive candidate to enhance A/MZ’s Reanalyze for
offline-RL or off-policy target
                            p generation (Schrittwieser et al., 2021). We propose to track
the objective qM̂ (s, a) − β V[qM̂ (s, a)] in search, i.e. to use EP/UCT but with β < 0.
(ii) Weighting value and policy losses by the estimate of the epistemic uncertainty in the
value which was successful in online as well as offline RL (Lee et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021).
The uncertainty of the value of the root of EMCTS can be used for this purpose.


3.4   Search with a Learned Transition Model
Learned transition models introduce several challenges from the perspective of EMCTS: (i)
estimating epistemic uncertainty in the possibly-abstracted planning space, (ii) propagating
the uncertainty forward during search as future transitions become less certain, in addition
to backwards, and (iii) propagating it in such a way that maintains the UCB constructed in
Theorem 1. Multiple methods to overcome (i) have been successful in previous works, see
Henaff (2019); Sekar et al. (2020). In Appendix A.3 we propose an approach to overcome (ii)
and (iii) as well as discuss the challenges in more detail. In practice however, in Section 5
we include experiments where a MZ agent fitted with a reliable uncertainty estimator for
V[R̂(s, a)] successfully demonstrates deep exploration without accounting for (ii) and (iii).


4     Related Work
Search for exploration was used successfully in a number of previous works, see Jaksch et al.
(2010), Sun et al. (2011), Hester & Stone (2012), Shyam et al. (2019), Henaff (2019), Sekar
et al. (2020), Lambert et al. (2022) and Luis et al. (2023). We add to this line of work
EMCTS: designed for MCTS (and planning trees in general), practical and based in theory.
Tesauro et al. (2010) develop a Bayesian approach for aleatoric uncertainty propagation in
MCTS. POMCP (Silver & Veness, 2010), POMCPOW (Sunberg & Kochenderfer, 2018) and
BOMCP (Mern et al., 2021) extend MCTS to POMDPs with a probabilistic Bayesian belief
state at the nodes using a probabilistic model, while Stochastic MuZero (Antonoglou et al.,
2022) extends MuZero to the stochastic transitions setting by replacing the deterministic
transition function with a Vector Quantised Variational AutoEncoder (van den Oord et al.,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2017). In these works, epistemic uncertainty is not distinguished or used for exploration.
Latent disagreement ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2022) offer a
popular alternative to RND and counts. Wasserstein Temporal Difference (WTD, Metelli
et al., 2019) offers an alternative to UBE (O’Donoghue et al., 2018) for estimating value
uncertainty, using Wasserstein Barycenters (Agueh & Carlier, 2011) to update a posterior
over Q functions in place of a standard Bayesian update. While UBE was criticized by Janz
et al. (2019) for being insufficient for deep exploration with posterior-sampling based RL
(PSRL, Osband et al., 2013), we note that the same shortcomings do not apply when UBE
is used for UCB-based exploration.


5     Experiments
The task of writing code and finding new algorithms, where AZ has recently made world
real-world impact (Fawzi et al., 2022; Mankowitz et al., 2023), is natural to formulate
using sparse-reward environments where the actions of the agent are operations and reward
is received when a correct program is completed. Such environments represent a hard
exploration challenge: the state space is often exponential |A|L in the actions A and the
maximum length of the program L, and while the number of possible solutions is generally
unknown, it is in most cases very small compared to the number of possible sequences of
operations. To evaluate the contribution of EMCTS in such real-world tasks we conduct
experiments in the one-instruction Assembly programming language subleq (Section 5.1).
To verify that EMCTS demonstrates deep exploration and benefits from search, we conduct
experiments in the commonly used hard-exploration benchmark Deep Sea (Osband et al.,
2020) (Section 5.2). Specifically, we are interested in the following:
RQ I Does EMCTS paired with an epistemic search policy demonstrate deep exploration with
both AZ as well as MZ and in the presence of stochastic as well as deterministic rewards?
RQ II Is there benefit in search with EMCTS for deep exploration, compared to an otherwise
equivalent approach that does not use search, and if so, is the benefit retained in the presence
of the learned transition model of MZ?
We also conduct an ablation study on the exploration parameter β to verify that the agent can
learn stably from the possibly very-off-policy exploratory data provided by deep exploration.


5.1   subleq Experiments
subleq is a Turing-complete (excepting for finite memory) one-instruction programming
language (Mazonka & Kolodin, 2011). Because there is only one instruction, writing code
in subleq summarizes to writing a sequence of memory addresses. We model the action
space with A = {0, . . . , N − 1}, for N the size of the memory. The agent is rewarded with
1.0 when the sequence of addresses specifies a program that solves the task, evaluated on
a set of test cases. The reward is otherwise zero. The observation space constitutes of an
example input and corresponding desired output, the program written so far, and the state
of the input and output after executing the program on the example input. We limit the
memory size to 16 and the maximum program length to 10 resulting in a state space of
size ≤ 1610 ≈ 1 trillion unique states. We present results on two tasks: An easier task of
outputting the negated input for positive inputs (Negate Positives), and a harder task of
implementing the Identity Function. An implementation of Negate Positives in subleq of
length 2 is known, which means finding a solution without prior knowledge requires searching
on the order of 162 unique states. To the Identity Function an implementation of length 6 is
known which suggests searching on the order of 166 ≈ 16 million unique states. We provide
a more detailed introduction to subleq, a description of the environment and the tasks in
Appendix C. The results are presented in Figure 1.
We compare two variations of EMCTS with AZ (E-AZ) to the AZ baseline. Both variations
of E-AZ are able to solve the harder task in a much smaller number of samples than AZ. To
estimate V[R̂(·, ·, s′ )] one variation of E-AZ uses a hash based visit count that takes as input
the complete state s′ , allowing the agent to, in principle, avoid searching the same state
twice. The other E-AZ variation hashes only part of the state: the example input-output,
before and after execution (IO hash), directing the agent to search actions that have an


                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    Negate Positives (easy)                                                                                                                                                 Identity Function (hard)
                                      1.0                                                                                                                                       1.0

Average Evaluation Return


                                                                                                                                                    Average Evaluation Return
                                      0.8                                                                                                                                       0.8

                                      0.6                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                      0.4
                                                                                            E-AZ (IO Hash)                                                                      0.2                                                                                  E-AZ (IO Hash)
                                      0.2                                                   E-AZ (Full Observation Hash)                                                                                                                                             E-AZ (Full Observation Hash)
                                                                                            AZ                                                                                  0.0                                                                                  AZ
                                            0          50000         100000        150000                                  200000        250000                                       0.0     0.2                       0.4                         0.6        0.8         1.0          1.2
                                                                       Environment steps                                                                                                                                                         Environment steps                            1e7

Figure 1: Sample efficiency. Left: the easy subleq Negate Positives task. Right: the harder
Identity Function task. Mean of 15 seeds, two standard errors.
effect on the output of the program. As expected from a UCB-based method, E-AZ benefits
from the more-appropriate uncertainty estimator and finds a correct program much earlier
with the IO hash.
All agents use Danihelka et al. (2022)’s approach that combines Gumbel noise with Sequential
Halving at the root and a modern variation of PUCT at non-root nodes. For E-AZ variations,
                                                                                           β
in online search (when selecting actions in the environment) the tree search policies use qM̂
(11) in place of qM̂ and an exploration-prior-policy πe (See Section 3.2). To select actions
during evaluation, as well as when generating targets with Reanalyze, the search uses EMCTS
to propagate the uncertainty, but uses the exploitation prior policy π and qM̂ in the search
objective, in the standard manner of MCTS search. The policy πe (s) is trained with cross
entropy loss to fit the softmax across actions over q β (s, ·) at the root.


5.2                                         Deep Sea Experiments

The Deep Sea environment is structured as a grid, where at each time step the agent chooses
between two actions, goes right or left and one row down. There is a reward rgoal = 1.0 at
the bottom right corner, the agent starts at the top left corner and thus the probability of
randomly finding the unique optimal trajectory decays exponentially with the size of the grid.
Every transition along the optimal trajectory receives a negative reward that is negligible
in comparison to the goal reward, but is otherwise the only reward the agent sees, actively
discouraging exploration along the optimal path. The action mappings are randomized such
that the effect of the same action is different in different states, preventing the agent from
generalizing across actions. To evaluate EMCTS in the presence of deterministic transitions
and stochastic rewards that more generally align with the assumptions in Section 3, we include
a custom stochastic-reward variation of Deep Sea where the goal reward rgoal ∼ N (1, 1), and
a reward rmislead ∼ N (0, 1) is given at the bottom left corner. The agent must explore both
transitions a sufficient number of times to correctly identify the larger mean reward. Results
are presented in Figure 2.

                                                 Scaling to Different Deep Sea Sizes                                                Stochastic-Reward Deep Sea 50x50                                                                              Sensitivity to the Exploration Parameter
                                                                      estimated AZ, 2N 1                                             E-AZ (RND)                                                                                            1.0                                         E-AZ (RND)
                                      104                             E-AZ (RND)                                          0.8        AZ+UBE (RND)
Episodes until < 90% average regret


                                                                                                                                     AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average regret over 1000 episodes


                                                                      AZ+UBE (RND)
                                                                      E-MZ (Counts)                                                  BDQN                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                             Expected Evaluation Return


                                                                      MZ+UBE (Counts)                                     0.6
                                                                      BDQN
                                      103                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                          0.2
                                      102                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                          0.0
                                            10        20        30         40          50                                       0     10000       20000                               30000    40000                                             0.0 10 3 10 2 10 1 100          101    102   103
                                                            DeepSea Size                                                                    Environment steps                                                                                                     Beta

Figure 2: Left: Scaling to growing Deep Sea sizes, 5 seeds per point. Only 2 seeds of
MZ+UBE were able to solve size 40, and none size 50 within the training budget, both
marked with an X. Middle: Stochastic-reward Deep Sea 50x50, 10 seeds. Right: The effect of
the exploration parameter in Deep Sea 30x30, 3 seeds per point. Mean and standard error.

                                                                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The left subplot shows sample complexity measured as number of interactions until 90%
regret is reached against the size of the Deep Sea environment to demonstrate that the
scaling is sub-exponential as expected from deep-exploration methods. The middle subplot
presents expected return in evaluation episodes in the stochastic-reward variation of Deep
Sea. In the right subplot, the sensitivity to the exploration parameter β is studied and the
ability of the agent to learn stably from off-policy data. In Appendix B we include additional
results, including a visualization of the uncertainty estimated by EMCTS.
To answer the research questions the following agents based in A/MZ are compared: (i)
E-A/MZ (purple, dashed for AZ and dotted for MZ), our method. The agents use EMCTS
with counts/RND to estimate reward and transition uncertainty and UBE to estimate value
uncertainty, search with EUCT and act with the action with the most visitations at the
root. (ii) Baseline AZ (orange) explores by sampling actions proportionally to visitations
at the MCTS root. AZ is included for reference, to demonstrate that indeed Deep Sea
cannot be solved in reasonable time with random exploration, and is not able to solve
any of the environments in the alloted training steps, with the exception of one seed in
the smallest environment size, and that only because the initial replay buffer by chance
already contained a trajectory that reached the goal. We include the exponentially-scaling
performance expected of random-exploration based methods such as AZ, for reference. (iii)
Last, A/MZ+UBE (red) acts with a similar UCB-exploration objective to that of EP/UCT,
but does not search with the uncertainty (see Appendix D.8). AZ-based agents are given
access to the true transition model. The value model is learned, as well as the reward model
to investigate the behavior under the most general setting considered in Section 3.3. All
A/MZ agents are trained with targets generated by Reanalyze. For reference performance
on Deep Sea, we include Bootstrapped DQN (BDQN, Osband et al., 2018), a popular
model-free, non-search based deep exploration approach that relies on an ensemble to drive
deep exploration directly. For full implementation details see Appendix D.
As expected for deep exploration methods, agents that are informed with respect to epistemic
uncertainty (E-A/MZ, A/MZ+UBE and BDQN) demonstrate sample efficiency that scales
sub-exponentially with environment size (Figure 2, left). In addition, E-AZ is able to
solve Deep Sea in the presence of stochastic rewards (Figure 2, middle). This answers
RQ I: EMCTS successfully demonstrates deep exploration in the presence of learned value,
reward and transition models as well as both deterministic and stochastic rewards. E-A/MZ
(Figure 2, left and middle plots, purple) demonstrate significant improvement in sample
efficiency over the equivalent agents that do not use search (red), in deterministic and
stochastic reward environments and even with the learned transition model of MZ (dotted
line). This answers RQ II: EMCTS demonstrates benefits from search for uncertainty
estimation and exploration which is retained in the presence of MZ’s learned transition
dynamics’ model. The low regret in evaluation with exponentially increasing values of β
(Figure 2, right) demonstrates that the agent can stably learn the optimal policy even in the
presence of off-policy exploratory data.


6   Conclusions
In this work we present EMCTS, a novel, practical and theoretically motivated method to
incorporate the epistemic uncertainty from learned models into MCTS, as well as harness
the search for deep exploration. AZ paired with EMCTS (E-AZ) achieves significantly higher
sample efficiency in the sparse-reward, challenging task of programming in the Assembly
language subleq, compared to baseline AZ. In the popular hard-exploration benchmark
Deep Sea, E-A/MZ demonstrate deep exploration by solving variations of the task which
cannot be solved by baseline A/MZ at all in a reasonable amount of samples. EMCTS’
search demonstrates significantly improved epistemic uncertainty estimation through more
sample efficient exploration over an otherwise equivalent method that does not use search.
With EMCTS, A/MZ are much better equipped for sparse-reward and hard-exploration
environments, which come up in realistic settings such as algorithm design, where AZ has
already made significant advances. By making A/MZ uncertainty aware, EMCTS is also
promising for settings that require improved reliability in the face of the unknown such as
offline RL and off-policy target generation.


                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Marco Loog, Frank van der Meulen, Itamar Sher, Moritz Zanger,
Pascal van der Vaart, Joery de Vries & Jinke He for many fruitful discussions and helpful com-
ments. We acknowledge the use of computational resources of the DelftBlue supercomputer,
provided by Delft High Performance Computing Centre (https://www.tudelft.nl/dhpc) as well
as the DAIC cluster. This work was partially supported by the EU Horizon 2020 programme
under grant number 964505 (Epistemic AI), and partially funded by the Dutch Research
Council (NWO) project Reliable Out-of-Distribution Generalization in Deep Reinforcement
Learning with project number OCENW.M.21.234.


References
Martial Agueh and Guillaume Carlier. Barycenters in the wasserstein space. SIAM J. Math.
 Anal., 43(2):904–924, 2011. doi: 10.1137/100805741.
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Sherjil Ozair, Thomas K. Hubert, and David Silver.
  Planning in stochastic environments with a learned model. In The Tenth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
  OpenReview.net, 2022.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Ian Osband, and Rémi Munos. Minimax regret bounds for
 reinforcement learning. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia,
 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 263–272.
 PMLR, 2017.
Richard Bellman. A Markovian decision process. Journal of mathematics and mechanics, 6
  (5):679–684, 1957.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Cameron Browne, Edward Jack Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M. Lucas, Peter I. Cowling,
  Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez Liebana, Spyridon Samothrakis, and
  Simon Colton. A survey of Monte Carlo tree search methods. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell.
 AI Games, 4(1):1–43, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2186810.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random
  network distillation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Kamil Ciosek, Quan Vuong, Robert Tyler Loftin, and Katja Hofmann. Better exploration
 with Optimistic Actor Critic. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer,
 Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 1785–
 1796, 2019.
Ivo Danihelka, Arthur Guez, Julian Schrittwieser, and David Silver. Policy improvement by
  planning with gumbel. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022.
DeepMind, Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter
  Buchlovsky, David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Antoine Dedieu,
  Claudio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin, Chris Jones, Ross Hemsley, Tom Hennigan, Matteo
  Hessel, Shaobo Hou, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev, Michael King,
  Markus Kunesch, Lena Martens, Hamza Merzic, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman,
  George Papamakarios, John Quan, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Laurent


                                             11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Sartran, Rosalia Schneider, Eren Sezener, Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Miloš
  Stanojević, Wojciech Stokowiec, Luyu Wang, Guangyao Zhou, and Fabio Viola. The
  DeepMind JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind.
Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes,
  Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser,
  Grzegorz Swirszcz, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, and Pushmeet Kohli. Discovering faster
  matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning. Nature, 610(7930):47–53,
  2022. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05172-4.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error
  in actor-critic methods. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan,
  Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1582–1591. PMLR, 2018.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Ofir Nachum. Why so pes-
  simistic? estimating uncertainties for offline RL through ensembles, and why their indepen-
  dence matters. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and
  A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,
  November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning,
  volume 1. MIT Press, 2016.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie
  Tan, Vikash Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic
  algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Mikael Henaff. Explicit explore-exploit algorithms in continuous state spaces. In Hanna M.
 Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and
 Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December
 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 9372–9382, 2019.
Todd Hester and Peter Stone. Intrinsically motivated model learning for a developing
  curious agent. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Development and Learning and
  Epigenetic Robotics, ICDL-EPIROB 2012, San Diego, CA, USA, November 7-9, 2012, pp.
  1–6. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/DEVLRN.2012.6400802.
Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine
  learning: An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110(3):457–506,
  2021.
Ola Hössjer and Arvid Sjölander. Sharp lower and upper bounds for the covariance of
  bounded random variables. Statistics & Probability Letters, 182:109323, 2022. ISSN
  0167-7152. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spl.2021.109323.
Thomas Jaksch, Ronald Ortner, and Peter Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11:1563–1600, 2010. doi: 10.5555/1756006.1859902.
David Janz, Jiri Hron, Przemyslaw Mazur, Katja Hofmann, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  and Sebastian Tschiatschek. Successor uncertainties: Exploration and uncertainty in
  temporal difference learning. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer,
  Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 4509–
 4518, 2019.
Chi Jin, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Sébastien Bubeck, and Michael I. Jordan. Is Q-learning provably
  efficient? In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò


                                             12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS
  2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp. 4868–4878, 2018.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I. Jordan. Provably efficient reinforce-
  ment learning with linear function approximation. Math. Oper. Res., 48(3):1496–1521,
 2023. doi: 10.1287/MOOR.2022.1309.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.

Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. In Johannes
  Fürnkranz, Tobias Scheffer, and Myra Spiliopoulou (eds.), Machine Learning: ECML 2006,
  17th European Conference on Machine Learning, Berlin, Germany, September 18-22, 2006,
  Proceedings, volume 4212 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 282–293. Springer,
  2006. doi: 10.1007/11871842\_29.

Sotetsu Koyamada, Shinri Okano, Soichiro Nishimori, Yu Murata, Keigo Habara, Haruka
  Kita, and Shin Ishii. Pgx: Hardware-accelerated parallel game simulators for reinforcement
  learning. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt,
  and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans,
  LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023.

Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning
  for offline reinforcement learning. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia
  Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable
  predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and
  Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long
 Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6402–6413, 2017.

Nathan Lambert, Markus Wulfmeier, William Whitney, Arunkumar Byravan, Michael
 Bloesch, Vibhavari Dasagi, Tim Hertweck, and Martin Riedmiller. The challenges of
 exploration for offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11861, 2022.

Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvari. Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2017.

Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. SUNRISE: A simple
  unified framework for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 2021.

Owen Lockwood and Mei Si. A review of uncertainty for deep reinforcement learning. In
 Stephen G. Ware and Markus Eger (eds.), Proceedings of the Eighteenth AAAI Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, AIIDE 2022, Pomona,
 CA, USA, October 24-28, 2022, pp. 155–162. AAAI Press, 2022.

Carlos E. Luis, Alessandro G. Bottero, Julia Vinogradska, Felix Berkenkamp, and Jan Peters.
  Model-based uncertainty in value functions. In Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jennifer G. Dy,
  and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.), International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, 25-27 April 2023, Palau de Congressos, Valencia, Spain, volume 206 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8029–8052. PMLR, 2023.


                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amol Mandhane, Anton Zhernov, Maribeth Rauh, Chenjie Gu, Miaosen Wang, Flora Xue,
 Wendy Shang, Derek Pang, Rene Claus, Ching-Han Chiang, Cheng Chen, Jingning Han,
 Angie Chen, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Jackson Broshear, Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert,
 Oriol Vinyals, and Timothy A. Mann. MuZero with self-competition for rate control in
 VP9 video compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06626, 2022.

Daniel J. Mankowitz, Andrea Michi, Anton Zhernov, Marco Gelmi, Marco Selvi, Cosmin
 Paduraru, Edouard Leurent, Shariq Iqbal, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alex Ahern, Thomas
 Koppe, Kevin Millikin, Stephen Gaffney, Sophie Elster, Jackson Broshear, Chris Gamble,
 Kieran Milan, Robert Tung, Minjae Hwang, Taylan Cemgil, Mohammadamin Barekatain,
 Yujia Li, Amol Mandhane, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Demis Hassabis, Push-
 meet Kohli, Martin Riedmiller, Oriol Vinyals, and David Silver. Faster sorting algorithms
 discovered using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 618(7964):257–263, 2023. doi:
 10.1038/s41586-023-06004-9.

Oleg Mazonka and Alex Kolodin. A simple multi-processor computer based on subleq. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1106.2593, 2011.

John Mern, Anil Yildiz, Zachary Sunberg, Tapan Mukerji, and Mykel J. Kochenderfer.
  Bayesian optimized Monte-Carlo planning. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial
  Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial
  Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pp. 11880–11887. AAAI Press,
  2021. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V35I13.17411.

Alberto Maria Metelli, Amarildo Likmeta, and Marcello Restelli. Propagating uncertainty in
  reinforcement learning via Wasserstein barycenters. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle,
  Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver,
  BC, Canada, pp. 4335–4347, 2019.

Thomas M. Moerland, Joost Broekens, Aske Plaat, and Catholijn M. Jonker. Model-based
  reinforcement learning: A survey. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 16(1):1–118, 2023. doi:
 10.1561/2200000086.

Gergely Neu and Ciara Pike-Burke. A unifying view of optimism in episodic reinforcement
 learning. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
 and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December
 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.

Brendan O’Donoghue, Ian Osband, Rémi Munos, and Volodymyr Mnih. The uncertainty Bell-
  man equation and exploration. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmäs-
  san, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 3836–3845. PMLR, 2018.

Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (More) efficient reinforcement learning
  via posterior sampling. In Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon Bottou, Zoubin Ghahramani,
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26:
  27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2013. Proceedings of
  a meeting held December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pp. 3003–3011,
  2013.

Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep
  reinforcement learning. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen
  Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp. 8626–8638, 2018.


                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre Saraiva,
  Katrina McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepesvári, Satinder Singh, Benjamin Van Roy,
  Richard S. Sutton, David Silver, and Hado van Hasselt. Behaviour suite for reinforcement
  learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
Tiberiu Popoviciu. Sur les équations algébriques ayant toutes leurs racines réelles. Mathe-
  matica, 9(129-145):20, 1935.
Aditya A. Ramesh, Louis Kirsch, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Exploring
  through random curiosity with general value functions. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
 A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022.
Christopher D Rosin. Multi-armed bandits with episode context. Annals of Mathematics
 and Artificial Intelligence, 61(3):203–230, 2011.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre,
  Simon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy
  Lillicrap, and David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, Chess and Shogi by planning with a
  learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, Amol Mandhane, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Ioannis
  Antonoglou, and David Silver. Online and offline reinforcement learning by planning with
  a learned model. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy
  Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS
  2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 27580–27591, 2021.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak
  Pathak. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In Proceedings of the 37th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual
 Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8583–8592. PMLR,
  2020.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaskowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In
  Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California,
 USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5779–5788. PMLR,
  2019.
David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs. In John D. Lafferty,
  Christopher K. I. Williams, John Shawe-Taylor, Richard S. Zemel, and Aron Culotta
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23: 24th Annual Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems 2010. Proceedings of a meeting held 6-9 December
 2010, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, pp. 2164–2172. Curran Associates, Inc., 2010.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Arthur Guez, Marc
  Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen
  Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters
  Chess, Shogi, and Go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.
Malcolm J. A. Strens. A Bayesian framework for reinforcement learning. In Pat Langley (ed.),
 Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
 2000), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, June 29 - July 2, 2000, pp. 943–950.
 Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
Yi Sun, Faustino J. Gomez, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Planning to be surprised: Optimal
  Bayesian exploration in dynamic environments. In Jürgen Schmidhuber, Kristinn R.
  Thórisson, and Moshe Looks (eds.), Artificial General Intelligence - 4th International
 Conference, AGI 2011, Mountain View, CA, USA, August 3-6, 2011. Proceedings, volume


                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  6830 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 41–51. Springer, 2011. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-642-22887-2\_5.
Zachary N. Sunberg and Mykel J. Kochenderfer. Online algorithms for POMDPs with
  continuous state, action, and observation spaces. In Mathijs de Weerdt, Sven Koenig,
  Gabriele Röger, and Matthijs T. J. Spaan (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth
  International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2018, Delft, The
  Netherlands, June 24-29, 2018, pp. 259–263. AAAI Press, 2018.
Maciej Swiechowski, Konrad Godlewski, Bartosz Sawicki, and Jacek Mandziuk. Monte Carlo
 Tree Search: a review of recent modifications and applications. Artif. Intell. Rev., 56(3):
 2497–2562, 2023. doi: 10.1007/S10462-022-10228-Y.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John
 Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. #exploration: A study of count-based
 exploration for deep reinforcement learning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy
 Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA,
 pp. 2753–2762, 2017.
Gerald Tesauro, V. T. Rajan, and Richard B. Segal. Bayesian inference in Monte-Carlo
 Tree Search. In Peter Grünwald and Peter Spirtes (eds.), UAI 2010, Proceedings of the
 Twenty-Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Catalina Island, CA,
 USA, July 8-11, 2010, pp. 580–588. AUAI Press, 2010.
Aäron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation
  learning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach,
  Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6306–6315, 2017.
Yue Wu, Shuangfei Zhai, Nitish Srivastava, Joshua M. Susskind, Jian Zhang, Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, and Hanlin Goh. Uncertainty weighted actor-critic for offline reinforcement
  learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume
 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11319–11328. PMLR, 2021.
Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering Atari
 games with limited data. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin,
 Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 25476–25488, 2021.
Qi Zhou, Houqiang Li, and Jie Wang. Deep model-based reinforcement learning via estimated
  uncertainty and conservative policy optimization. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of
  Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
  Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020,
  pp. 6941–6948. AAAI Press, 2020. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V34I04.6177.


                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     Additional Results
A.1    Proof of Theorem 1
For clarity, let us again define π ∗ as the policy that is optimal in the true environment
π ∗ = arg maxπ Qπm , and πM̂∗
                               the policy that is optimal in a specific model M̂ , that is
  ∗
πM̂  = arg maxπ QπM̂ . By the definition of the model, we have E[M̂ ] = m, where m is the
                                                        ∗       ∗           ∗
true model of the environment. Therefore Q∗ =: Qπm = QπE[M̂ ] = EM̂ [QπM̂ ], by linearity of
the value in the reward function. By Chebyshev’s inequality:

                                  π∗        ∗    1 q       ∗

                        P EM̂ [QM̂   ] ≤ QπM̂ + √    V[QπM̂ ] ≥ 1 − δ.                   (14)
                                                   δ
                             ∗
                                    q
                                             ∗
The right-hand side term QπM̂ + √1δ V[QπM̂ ] is hard to estimate among other reasons because
the optimal policy is not known. But it can be upper bounded as follows:
                          ∗    1 q        ∗                  1 q
                       QπM̂ + √      V[QπM̂ ] ≤ max QπM̂ + √      V[QπM̂ ],
                                δ                π            δ
which holds because the right-hand side is the maximum possible policy in a set that contains
π∗ .
Putting the entire set of inequalities together, we arrive at:
                        ∗
                                        q                        q
                               π∗
       P Q∗ = EM̂ [QπM̂ ] ≤ QM̂
                                                ∗
                                  + √1δ V[QπM̂ ] ≤ max QπM̂ + √1δ V[QπM̂ ] ≥ 1 − δ,                    (15)
                                                      π
                                                                 q
                                                 ∗
                              and thus: P Q ≤ max QπM̂ + √1δ V[QπM̂ ] ≥ 1 − δ,                         (16)
                                                                 π
QED Theorem 1.


A.2    Derivation of the Upper Bound on V[qM̂ (sk , a)]
By definition,
                                         n
                                        hP               i      n
              V[qM̂ (sk , a)] = n12 V        ν i (sk , a) = n12   Cov ν i (sk , a), ν j (sk , a) .
                                                                P
                                                                                                       (17)
                                        i=1                    i,j=1


In A/MZ it is standard to learn one set of deterministic models V̂ , R̂ and use them throughout
planning, and therefore ν i , ν j cannot be assumed to be independent ∀i ̸= j. Had they been
independent, one would compute the variance of the sum directly with the sum of the
variances. Instead, we use the inequality
                                     p            for covariances with known variances (Hössjer &
Sjölander, 2022): Cov[X, Y ] ≤         V[X]V[Y ] to upper bound the variance V[qM̂ (sk , a)]:
                                      n
                                     hP             i        n
             V[qM̂ (sk , a)] = n12 V    ν i (sk , a) = n12     Cov ν i (sk , a), ν j (sk , a)
                                                            P
                                                                                               (18)
                                         i=1                   i,j=1

                           n p                                            Pn p               2
                         1                                               1
                           P
                     ≤ n2           V[ν i (sk , a)] V[ν j (sk , a)] =    n    V[ν i (s , a)] .
                                                                                      k                (19)
                            i,j=1                                          i=1
                                                                 p
In other words, the standard deviation of the averaged backup V[qM̂ (sk , a)] is upper
                                                               n p
bounded with the averaged standard deviation across backups n1
                                                               P
                                                                   V[ν i (sk , a)]. The first
                                                                                 i=1
inequality is due to the inequality for covariances with known variances, and the following
equality is a sum of squares.


A.3    EMCTS with learned transition dynamics

When the transition function fˆ is learned, we must formulate it as a random variable F̂
as well. We note that in this case S ′ ∼ F̂ (S, a) is a random variable that depends on the
distribution of the previous state S propagated through the uncertain transition function F̂ ,
and similarly the distribution of S ′ will propagate through the reward and value and future
transition predictions R̂(S ′ , a), V̂M̂
                                       π
                                         (S ′ ), F̂ (S ′ , a). In other words, in order to estimate V[QπM̂ ]


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we need to account for propagation of the variance through the Markov chain, which is an
expensive and non-trivial process. In addition, as the value is non-linear in the transition
dynamics f , Theorem 1 does not apply and Equation 8 is not an upper bound with a specific
probability. Finally, to extend EMCTS to MZ fully, we must account for the fact that the
dynamics model learned by MZ is not operating in the true state space of the environment,
but in a value-equivalent abstraction. To extend EMCTS to the learned dynamics case,
we will assume that it is possible to estimate epistemic uncertainty in the abstracted state
space Ŝ in a meaningful way. This problem can be circumvented by driving additional losses
through the learned model that incentivize distinguishing between unique states in latent
space (Henaff, 2019), or by learning an auxiliary dynamics model to distinguish between
novel and observed starting-states-and-action-sequences, which has been used successfully by
Sekar et al. (2020). We will therefore use the notation of states s or S in the tree, whether
they are in the true state space of the environment S or the abstracted space of MZ Ŝ. In
addition, since standard MZ plans with a deterministic transition model, we extend EMCTS
to the setting where either the underlying transition dynamics f are deterministic, or the
abstracted deterministic transition function is sufficiently meaningful. For simplicity, let us
further assume that the state space S is continuous, and the starting state distribution ρ is
over a finite domain.
To circumvent the problem of the propagation of state uncertainty through the Markov chain,
we propose a cheap and simple maximally-optimistic alternative upper-bound approximation
for V[QπM̂ ]. We note that: (i) F̂ , R̂ are trained on the same data and thus when the epistemic
variance over one of the two is maximal the other can be expected to be maximal as well.
(ii) We have assumed a deterministic true transition function f and thus the variance in F̂
can be modelled as maximal on the unknown and zero on the known. (iii) If the uncertainty
in the prediction of any state V[F̂ (Sk , a)] ≥ 0, we can expect the uncertainty in all future
predictions Sj along this trajectory j > k to be associated with maximal uncertainty. We
use these observations to formulate the following simple approximation:
                                                         π               π
                     V[R̂(Sk , a)] ≈ V[R̂(sk , a)], V[V̂M̂ (Sk )] ≈ V[V̂M̂ (sk )], ∀(s, a) ∈ D   (20)
                         2            π
        V[R̂(Sj , a)] ≈ rmax ,   V[V̂M̂             1
                                        (Sj )] ≈ ( 1−γ rmax )2 ,   where j ≥ k and ∀(s, a) ∈
                                                                                           /D    (21)
That is, we propose to ignore any uncertainty in transition along zero-uncertainty trajectories,
and with the first uncertain transition, to assume all uncertainties are maximal for all
predictions in the rest of the trajectory. To identify whether (s, a) ∈   / D we can directly use
                                    2
V[R̂(s, a)], where V[R̂(s, a)] ≈ rmax   indicates (s, a) ∈
                                                         / D. This will guarantee that (given that
the mechanism to identify unobserved transitions is sufficiently reliable) the agent remains
sufficiently optimistic and the planning objective of EP/UCT remains an upper bound on
Q∗ . We note that in practice, while this approach is theoretically sound, the results of the
experiments in Section 5.2, in the presence of reliable transition-uncertainty, motivate that it
is not necessary and the regular setup of EMCTS is sufficient for deep exploration even in
the presence of a learned, value-equivalent-abstraction-based transition model, given that
R̂(s, a) is a sufficiently reliable estimator of novelty in the environment.


B    Additional Experiments
We include an example comparison of the uncertainty estimated by EMCTS to that of the
uncertainty estimator used by EMCTS, the UBE network head, in Figure 3. The E-AZ
agent used in this experiment uses the true transition model but a learned reward as well as
value functions, matching the setup of Section 3.1. The Deep Sea environment is presented
as a grid, where states are the cells including and below the diagonal. Bold blue in the grids
in the bottom row (inverse counts) indicates unvisited states. By averaging across multiple
predictions in search, the uncertainty estimated by EMCTS (top row) is much more varied,
more accurately associating less or more uncertainty with states that lead into observed /
unobserved trajectories respectively, compared to the UBE predictions (middle row). Most
importantly from the perspective of exploration, EMCTS associates larger uncertainty with
states that lead into unobserved directions much more consistently than the single predictions
of UBE for each state (for an easily visible example, t= 2000, top of the diagonal).


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                             EMCTS State-Value Uncertainty Prediction
               t = 500            t = 1000                                t = 2000      t = 5000
                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                   0.0
                                              UBE State-Value Uncertainty Prediction
               t = 500            t = 1000                                t = 2000      t = 5000
                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                   0.0
                                                         Inverse Counts
                                                                                                   2.0

                                                                                                   1.5

                                                                                                   1.0

                                                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                   0.0


Figure 3: Heat maps over states in DeepSea 40 by 40 at different times (columns) during an
example training run of EMCTS with an AZ transition model. Upper row: value uncertainty
at the EMCTS root node. Middle row: single prediction of UBE at each state. Lower row:
inverse visitation counts as reliable local uncertainty, where score of 2.0 represents unvisited.
We include an addition detailed evaluation curves for E-A/MZ, A/MZ and A/MZ+UBE in
Figure 4, as well as rate-of-exploration (number of unique states encountered per interaction
with the environment). An additional variation of MZ is included in this Figure, where instead
of value-equivalent abstraction the model is trained with a reconstruction loss to match the
true transition function and observation space of the environment, such that fˆ(s, a) = ŝ′ ≈ s′ .
By training the RND estimator only on true transitions (s, a) and evaluating it online
on transitions predicted by the learned transition model (ŝ′ , a′ ), ŝ′ = fˆ(ŝ, a), this agent is
incentivized to estimate the uncertainty over every uncertain transition (s, a) ∈  / D as maximal,
implicitly implementing the approach described in Appendix A.3. For implementation details
see Appendix D.3. In all figures, E-A/MZ outperforms the other agents both in rate of
exploration as well as in their ability to learn to reach the goal. The most interesting behavior
is perhaps that of the reconstruction based model, that does not search the environment
significantly faster than the other baselines, and yet learns to reach the goal much earlier
(bottom row in Figure 4). We hypothesize that due to the search, the uncertainty estimated
by the agent is more reliable, resulting in identifying the correct action that leads into novel
states, more times in a row. Just visible on the right-hand plot, one can see that indeed the
purple curve remains the highest for quite a while, before all others curves match it, despite
all curves being very close throughout most of the training.
We include a table evaluating interactions-to-goal on Deep Sea 40x40 for all agents. The
results demonstrate that even when the learned dynamics model is not designed for planning
(anchored model, third block, Table 1), EMCTS is able to find the goal much faster.
Finally, we include a comparison between E-AZ and AZ on MinAtar in Figure 5. The
uncertainty estimator is the full-Hash used for SUBLEQ, which uses hash based counting to
distinguish between any two unique states. This demonstrates that even when the uncertainty
estimator is unsuited, and even without tuning the exploration parameter β = 0 (in Figure 5
β = 1.0 as in the SUBLEQ experiments), EMCTS can compare well to the baseline.


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                    AZ Transition Model
                                                                                  800
                         0.75


                                                                               Discovered states
       Episodic return
                                                                                                   600                        E-AZ (RND)
                         0.50                                                                                                 AZ+UBE (RND)
                                                                                                   400                        AZ
                         0.25                                                                                                 BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                   200                        maximum
                         0.00
                                0   10000       20000       30000      40000                             0   10000    20000       30000      40000
                                            Environment steps                                                    Environment steps
                                                                    MZ Transition Model
                         1.00                                                    800


                                                                               Discovered states
                         0.75
       Episodic return


                                                                                                   600                        E-MZ (counts)
                         0.50                                                                                                 MZ+UBE (counts)
                                                                                                   400                        MZ
                         0.25                                                                                                 BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                   200                        maximum
                         0.00
                                0   10000       20000       30000      40000                             0   10000    20000       30000      40000
                                            Environment steps                                                    Environment steps
                                                        Reconstruction Loss Learned Transition Model
                         1.00                                                    800


                                                                               Discovered states
                         0.75
       Episodic return


                                                                                                   600                        E-MZ (RND)
                         0.50                                                                                                 MZ+UBE (RND)
                                                                                                   400                        MZ
                         0.25                                                                                                 BDQN ensem. size 10
                                                                                                   200                        maximum
                         0.00
                                0   10000       20000       30000      40000                             0   10000    20000       30000      40000
                                            Environment steps                                                    Environment steps

Figure 4: Deep Sea 40x40, mean and standard error for 20 seeds. Rows: Different transition
models. Left: episodic return in evaluation vs. environment steps. Right: exploration rate
(number of discovered states vs. environment steps).


    Table 1: Number of environment steps until the first visitation to the goal transition.
                                                                Average steps to goal transition for                               % seeds that
    Novelty Estimator                   Exploration
                                                                seeds that discovered goal ± STD                                  discovered goal
                                             E-AZ                         10539 ± 9006                                           94% of 35 seeds
    RND                                     AZ+UBE                         22801 ± 7514                                          91% of 35 seeds
                                              AZ                                 -                                                0% of 20 seeds
                                             E-MZ                         14339 ± 6845                                           100% of 23 seeds
    Counts                                  MZ+UBE                         29945 ± 8113                                          57% of 21 seeds
                                              MZ                                 -                                                0% of 20 seeds
                                             E-MZ                         15241 ± 3236                                           95% of 20 seeds
    Reconstruction
                                            MZ+UBE                         22497 ± 6645                                          85% of 20 seeds
    Model (RND)
                                              MZ                                 -                                                0% of 20 seeds

C     Subleq

What follows is a formal characterization of subleq as used in our experiments, and example
programs for the two tasks we presented.
For subleq-N , we have a memory made up of N words (w0 , w1 , ..., wN −1 ) where each word
wi is an integer from 0 to N − 1 inclusive (we write wi ∈ [0, N − 1]). We also have an input
sequence (v0 , v1 , ...), vi ∈ [0, N − 1], of variable finite length depending on the particular
task to be solved. Tasks correspond to different algorithms we want the agent to implement.
Lastly, there is an output buffer (u0 , u1 , ...), ui ∈ [0, N − 1] which begins empty, but can be
extended with output values during execution of a subleq program.
We refer to wi as the word at address i. Additionally, we give names to some specific
addresses: @IN = N − 3, @OUT = N − 2, @HALT = N − 1. The program is stored contiguously
in memory starting at address 0. Execution begins from address 0 as well, meaning the first
instruction to execute is (w0 , w1 , w2 ).


                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     minatar-asterix                                                    minatar-seaquest                                                     minatar-freeway                                                    minatar-breakout
                            18                                                                                                                                    27.5                                                                 35
                            16                                                                 40                                                                 25.0                                                                 30
Average Evaluation Return


                                                                   Average Evaluation Return


                                                                                                                                      Average Evaluation Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Average Evaluation Return
                            14                                                                                                                                    22.5                                                                 25
                                                                                               30
                            12                                                                                                                                    20.0                                                                 20
                            10                                                                 20                                                                 17.5                                                                 15
                            8                                                                  10                                                                 15.0                                                                 10
                                               E-AZ                                                                         E-AZ                                                                 E-AZ                                                               E-AZ
                            6                  AZ, seeds=10                                                                 AZ                                    12.5                           AZ                                    5                            AZ
                                                                                               0
                                 0    2       4          6                                          0    2       4          6                                            0    2       4          6                                          0    2       4          6
                                     Environment steps       1e6                                        Environment steps       1e6                                          Environment steps       1e6                                        Environment steps       1e6


                                                         Figure 5: Mean and two standard errors for 10 seeds.
When executing some instruction at address i, we look at the three words (wi , wi+1 , wi+2 ),
and modify the memory by subtracting the value at address wi+1 from the word at address
wi , i.e. wwi ← wwi − wwi+1 . We say that this instruction reads from wi and wi+1 , and
writes to wi . We also say that reading from wi returns wwi . All operations are done modulo
N so that the words remain in the range [0, N − 1]. If the result before modulo was less or
equal to zero, execution continues from address wi+2 (we say we jump to wi+2 ), meaning
the next instruction would be (wwi+2 , wwi+2 +1 , wwi+2 +2 ). If the result before modulo was
strictly positive, then the next instruction is the next three words, i.e. (wi+3 , wi+4 , wi+5 ).
Interacting with the addresses @IN, @OUT, and @HALT has different behaviour than normal
execution. Reading from the address @IN will instead read the next number from the input
sequence. The first read from @IN will return v0 , the next read returns v1 , etc. Reading
from the input sequence when there is no next value will return 0 instead. Writing to @IN is
ignored.
Reading from @OUT always returns a 0, but writing to @OUT will write to the output buffer.
We say that we output the value. Each value that we output is added to the output buffer, so
after the first output u0 , the buffer looks like (u0 ), after the second output u1 , it is (u0 , u1 ),
etc.
The output buffer is compared against the desired output for the task to determine whether
the task was solved correctly. The first incorrect output terminates the program and results
in a failure of the task. If the output buffer ever equals the desired task output, the program
terminates and the task is solved successfully. Finally, if the program tries jumping to an
address where the instruction would overlap @HALT, such as (w@IN , w@OUT , w@HALT ), the program
terminates.
When using SUBLEQ-N as a reinforcement learning environment, the agent writes a
program one word at a time. It gets to observe the current state of the memory before
execution (it is just the program it has written up to that point followed by zeroes), an
example input and desired output pair for the given task, and the resulting state of the input
sequence and the output buffer after executing the currently written program.
At each state, the agent has N actions = {0, 1, ..., N − 1}, each corresponding to writing that
number into the next location in memory. The memory is initially filled with zeroes. After
an action is chosen, the number is added to memory, and the currently written program is
executed to determine the states of the input and output on the example test as well as
other (hidden) test cases. If all test cases succeed, the episode terminates after one more
(irrelevant) action. On the other hand, if the agent reaches the end of writable memory
(N − 3 actions), the episode terminates unsuccessfully.
The Negate Positives task expects a program which receives positive integers and outputs
that input, expect negated. This task are very simple, since it can be done with a single
instruction: Reading from @IN will subtract the next input from whichever address to which
we write. If we write to @OUT, which reads as 0, we are effectively writing 0 − vi = −vi . For
Negate Positives, this is exactly what is required, so the only remaining challenge is how to
loop back to the start. Luckily, since we know the input is always positive, the output will
be negative (or zero), so we always jump. Thus, if we choose the jump address to be 0, we
can also loop to the start in the same instruction.


                                                                                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(@OUT, @IN, 0, ...) in memory forms a solution to the task, and since the memory is initialized
with zeroes, it only requires the agent to write 2 words, meaning only 2 actions.
In code, a solution to Negate Positives looks like this:

@start:
subleq @OUT @IN @start

Which the agent would write as:

(N-2, N-3, )

In the Identity task, we require a program which outputs the input unchanged. This is slightly
more difficult that Negate Positives, because an instruction in subleq always subtracts, so
we need at least two instruction to undo the negation. This can be done by storing the
return of @IN in some auxiliary word, and then writing that value to output. Let us denote
the address at which we store the value temporarily as @x. The program that solves Identity
could begin (@x, @IN, 3, @OUT, @x, ...). Note the 3 at address 2 is needed to progress to the
second instruction regardless of whether the input is positive or negative. This program
would work for the first input, but we must produce a program which loops. Thus, we still
need to erase the value stored at address @x (to prepare it for the next write), and we must
loop to the start. These two things can be done in the same instruction. We arrive at a
program like (@x, @IN, 3, @OUT, @x, 6, @x, @x, 0, ...). The last instruction (@x, @x, 0) clears @x
and jumps to address zero (since w@x ← w@x − w@x = 0 which ≤ 0). Again, we required
the constant 6 at address 5 to unconditionally continue to the next address. In general,
an agent would need 8 actions to solve Identity, where it needs to pick @IN, @OUT, 3, and
6 specifically, and it needs to make sure that all of @x are the same. We say in general,
because there is actually a clever solution when we choose @x = 0. In that case, the program
becomes (0, @IN, 3, @OUT, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, ...) which only requires the agent to write 6 words, since
the memory is initially filled with zeroes.
In code, a general solution to Identity looks like this (left in human syntax, right as the
agent writes, the 9s can be any constant ≥ 9, < N ):

@start:
subleq @x @IN                 ; (9, N-3, 3)
subleq @OUT @x                ; (N-2, 9, 6)
subleq @x @x @start           ; (9, 9, )
@x: .data 0                   ; (, ...)

While the shortest (known) solution (in terms of non-zero bytes written) looks like this:

@start:
subleq @x:@x @IN              ; (0, N-3, 3)
subleq @OUT @x                ; (N-2, 0, 6)
subleq @x @x @start           ; (, , )


D     Implementation Details for Deep Sea
Our implementation for the Deep Sea agents is based in the framework of Ye et al. (2021).
Below, we detail the implementation details unique to E-A/MZ and A/MZ+UBE in Deep
Sea.

D.1    Targets
Value, policy and reward targets were all computed as in MZ Schrittwieser et al. (2020).
UBE targets were computed in an n-step manner:
                                       n−1
                                       X
                     utarget (st ) =         γ 2i η(st+i , at+i ) + γ 2n V[V̂M̂
                                                                              π
                                                                                (st+n )]      (22)
                                       i=0



                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Where η is the RND / exact or hash count-based novelty estimators. To guarantee that the
                                                                                    π
UBE estimates remains sufficiently optimistic, the value-uncertainty bootstrap V[V̂M̂ (st+n )]
was computed in one of two ways:

      1. Root targets: The uncertainty at the root of the EMCTS tree at state st+n .
      2. Non-root targets:
                                  π
                             V[V̂M̂ (st+n )] = max η(st+n , at+n ) + γ 2 u(st+n+1 ),                 (23)
                                                 a

Where
                                                           1
                     u(st+n+1 ) = max û(st+n+1 ),            2
                                                                V[R̂(st+n , at+n )]                  (24)
                                                          1−γ


D.2    Losses
The original MZ algorithm uses three loss functions Lr , Lv , Lπ for the reward, value and
policy, respectively. The gradients from the losses Lr , Lv , Lπ propagate through the learned
transition model f and are the only learning signal that is used to train the model.
For the anchored model (see Section 5) we use an additional reconstruction loss:
                                         P l−1
                                           P k
                                      1
                              Lre := |B|       ||ŝt − st+k ||2
                                               t∈Bk=0

where B ≡ {st , at , rt , st+1 , at+1 , . . . , st+l }t∈B is a training batch containing b trajectories of
length l sampled from different episodes, and ŝkt is the state predicted by the learned model.
To simplify model learning with the anchored model, the representation function g that
was used for the anchored model transforms the observations from 2 dimensional (N, N )
one-hot representations to 1 dimensional (2N ) representations where the first N entries are a
1-hot vector representing the row and following N entries are a 1-hot vector representing the
column. From this perspective, we can view the Lre loss that was used to train the anchored
model as a consistency loss between the representation and the state prediction rather than
a reconstruction loss.
To estimate value-uncertainty at the leaves, we train a UBE function u with a UBE loss Lu :
                                        P l−1
                                     1
                                              ϕ(utarget T    k
                                          P
                             Lu := |B|           t+k ) log ût
                                             t∈Bk=0


The final loss is computed as:
                                L := λr Lr + λv Lv + λπ Lπ + λu Lu
Where the coefficients λr , λv , λπ , λu are used to weigh the relative effects the individual
components of the loss have on the learned transition model f . When Lre was used (the
anchored model in Section 5), the model parameters of f were affected only by Lre , through
a second backwards pass.


D.3    Different Dynamics Models
We describe the three transition models used in 5 in more detail. The AlphaZero dynamics
model is a true model of the dynamics of the environment, in the true state space of the
environment. When planning with this model local uncertainty is estimated with RND
and value-uncertainty is estimated with UBE. The MuZero model is a value-equivalent
model in latent space. g, f are learned by the agent during training from the value, policy,
reward and UBE losses. When planning with this model local uncertainty is estimated
with state-visitation-counts (see D.5 and value-uncertainty is estimated with UBE. The
anchored-MuZero transition model trained only to predict the true transition dynamics of
the environment through a reconstruction loss Lkre (see Appendix D.2). When planning with
this model local uncertainty is estimated with RND and value-uncertainty is estimated with
UBE.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.4    Planning with Random Network Distillation Based Epistemic
       Uncertainty
In order to estimate the epistemic uncertainty of a transition η(s, a), RND (Burda et al.,
2019) take as input state s and action a and computes L2 (ϕ(s, a), ϕ′ (s, a)) between two neural
networks ϕ, ϕ′ . ϕ′ is kept stationary, while ϕ is trained with the same loss that evaluates the
uncertainty. When the planning is done with a true model, the agent has access to the true
states st+k . When the planning is done with the anchored model, the latent states outputted
by the transition model ŝkt approximate the true states st+k which allows us to use RND
over (ŝkt , at+k ). In both cases, RND is trained only over the observed transitions (st+k , at+k ),
not latent state representations (ŝkt , at+k ), to achieve the objective of yielding large RND
prediction errors the further the latent state prediction ŝkt is from observed state st+k .

D.5    Planning with Visitation-Counts Based Epistemic Uncertainty
When planning with the abstracted model, we provide the agent with access to two additional
mechanisms that are used only for local uncertainty estimation: the true model of the
environment and a state-action visitation counter C(st , at ). During planning, the true
transition model follows the planning decisions at:t+k and keeps track of the true state st+k .
When the agent evaluates the local uncertainty with transition (ŝkt , at+k ) the true model
provides the matching true state st+k to the visitation counter, which produces the local
uncertainty based on the following formula:
                                                        1
                             η(st+k , at+k ) =
                                               C(st+k , at+k ) + ϵ
Where ϵ > 0 is a constant and C(st+k , at+k ) counts the number of times the state action
pair (st+k , at+k ) has been observed in the environment. This allows us to evaluate the
abstracted-model agent in the presence of a reliable source of local uncertainty. The leaf-
value uncertainty u(ŝkt ) (which is the dominating factor in visited areas of the state space, as
η(st+k , at+k ) → 0 quickly in observed transitions) relies entirely on the learned UBE function
u which operates directly on latent states ŝkt .

D.6    Using UBE to Estimate Value-Uncertainty at the Leaves
It is essential for exploration that the epistemic uncertainty prediction is reliably high in
unobserved areas of the state action space. For this reason, a learned function û ≈ u may
not be sufficient to detect that a state st has not been previously observed. Instead, we use
the following:
                                                 1
                                  max û(st ),     2
                                                     η(st , π(st ))                            (25)
                                               1−γ
If the uncertainty η(st , π(st )) for the transition (st , π(st )) is high, the uncertainty will be
estimated as high regardless of the UBE prediction u(st ), and otherwise, either u(st ) is high
or both are negligible.

D.7    Separating Exploration from Exploitation
Acting in the environment with a dedicated exploration policy can be expected to result in
samples that are very off-exploitation-policy. Learning from very off-policy data is known
to cause instability in training even in off-policy agents. To mitigate that, the EMCTS
and only-UBE agents (see section 5) alternate between two types of training episodes:
exploratory episodes that follow an exploration policy throughout the episode (such as a
policy generated by EMCTS with an exploratory planning objective), and exploitatory
episodes that follow the standard MuZero exploitation policy throughout the episode. This
enables us to provide the agent with quality exploitation targets to evaluate and train the
value and policy functions reliably, while also providing a large amount of exploratory samples
that explore the environment much more effectively and are more likely to efficiently search
for high-reward interactions.
In practice, rather than alternate between exploration and exploitation episodes we run a
certain number of episodes in parallel, a certain portion of which are exploitatory and the


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rest are exploratory. In our experiments the ratio was 50/50. To avoid learning a a separate
prior-policy that may not be necessary in environments with small actions space, we set
the policy prediction π(sk ) (see Equation 3) to uniform over all actions, for all sk during
exploration episodes. Dirichlet noise was not used to drive exploration in MCTS with the
UBE and EMCTS agents, as any little amount of stochasticity in the policy can prevent the
agent from reliably completing the one optimal trajectory.


D.8    The A/MZ+UBE Agent

The A/MZ+UBE ablation agent uses MCTS to evaluate the q value of actions in the same
manner as A/MZ, and explores by taking the action at that maximizes the combination of
the Q-values approximated by MCTS, local uncertainty V[R̂] and UBE head u:
                                              q
               at = arg max qM̂ (s0 , at ) + β V[R̂(s0 , at )] + γ 2 u(f (s0 , at )). (26)
                           a
qM̂ (s0 , at ) are the values at the root of the regular MCTS tree after search. The
main
q       difference between A/MZ+UBE and E-A/MZ is that in E-A/MZ the uncertainty
  V[R̂(s0 , at )] + γ 2 u(f (s0 , at )) estimated takes into account estimates from multiple differ-
ent future trajectories, in the manner MCTS estimates the values qM̂ .


E     Network Architecture & Hyperparameters
E.1   Hyperparameter Search

Due to the large number of hyperparameters in the MuZero framework, our optimization
process consisted of manual modifications to the hyperparameters used by Ye et al. (2021)
for Deep Sea and Koyamada et al. (2023) for subleq with the objective of achieving learning
stability on the target environment with the simplest network architectures possible. Two
exceptions to this statement are the RND network architecture and scale, and the exploration
parameter β.
The RND architecture was designed with the objective of reliably achieving small RND
predictions over observed state-action pairs and large predictions over unobserved state-action
pairs. The RND scale was tuned with the objective of achieving local uncertainty measures
for unobserved state-action pairs that are significantly larger than the minimum reward of
Deep Sea.
The β parameter in Deep Sea was tuned with the objective that the EMCTS and only-
UBE agents will prioritize exploration of the environment over exploitation until the entire
environment has been searched, and was tuned separately for every model.
For subleq we chose β = 1. We did not experiment with additional values of β. However,
first, the values, UBE prediction, and state-novelty predictions are all bounded ≤ 1, such
that β need not account in this case to the possibly arbitrary scales of UBE / the novelty
estimator. Second, to make the most out of Jax’s naturally parallelized setup, each parallel
episode explores with a different βi ≤ β, evenly spaced from 0 to β.


E.2   Network Architecture

The functions f, g, r, v, u, π, ψ, ψ ′ used fully connected DNNs of varying sizes. The sizes of
the hidden layers and output layers are specified in Table 2 for Deep Sea. For subleq the
FC network architecture constituted value, UBE, exploration policy πe and exploitation
policy π networks. All networks used two hidden layers of size 256 with ReLu activations
between hidden layers. The value head used tanh activation on the last layer, the UBE head
used a 0.5(tanh(x) + 1) activation to bound the ube prediction between 0 and 1. The policy
heads did not use any activation layers.


                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 2: Network architecture hyperparameters, Deep Sea
                                             True Model
                 Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                     f                 -                   -
                     g                 -                   -
                     r            [256, 256]              21
                     v            [256, 256]              21
                     u            [256, 256]              21
                     π            [256, 256]               2
                                           Anchored Model
                 Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                     f       [1024, 1024, 1024]           80
                     g                 -                   -
                     r            [256, 256]              21
                     v            [256, 256]              21
                     u            [256, 256]              21
                     π            [256, 256]               2
                                         Abstracted Model
                 Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                     f       [1024, 1024, 1024]           100
                     g            [512, 512]              100
                     r            [128, 128]              21
                     v            [128, 128]              21
                     u         [128, 128, 128]            21
                     π            [128, 128]               2
                                    RND network architecture
                 Function Hidden Layers Sizes Output Layer Size
                     ψ           [1024, 1024]             512
                    ψ′               [512]                512
E.3   Deep Sea Hyperparameter Configuration
We detail the full set of hyperparameters in Tables 3 and 4 for Deep Sea. For the BDQN
baseline, we used the default implementation in https://github.com/deepmind/bsuite,
with ensemble size of 10 and matching batch size to EMCTS: number of unroll steps times
batch size 5 · 256 = 1230. Otherwise, the default hyper parameters were used.

E.4   SUBLEQ Hyperparameter Configuration
The subleq E-/AZ agents are implemented in Jax, based in the implementation of Koyamada
et al. (2023). MCTS parameters used the defaults provided by DeepMind et al. (2020).
Detailed hyperparameter configuration below:

hash: XXHash, 32bit
number of parallel episodes = 128
number of E/MCTS simulations = 32
batch size = 4096
number of times each frame appears in training in expectation = 4
discount = 0.97
replay buffer size = 200,000
priority exponent of prioritized replay buffer = 0.6
learning rate = 0.001
populate replay buffer for N frames before starting training, N = 5000
run evaluation episode every N frames, N = 20480
number of parallel evaluation episodes = 32


                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 3: Hyperparameters used in the Deep Sea experiments
             Parameter                  Setting                                 Comment
       Stacked Observations                 1
                 γ                       0.995
  Number of simulations in MCTS            50
      Dirichlet noise ratio (ξ)            0.3
     Root exploration fraction              0
             Batch size                   256
           Learning rate                 0.0005
             Optimizer          Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
           Unroll steps l                   5
    Value target TD steps (nv )             5
    UBE target TD steps (nu )               1
         value support size                21
         UBE support size                  21
       Reward support size                 21
      Reanalyzed policy ratio             0.99                          See (Ye et al., 2021)
                                                                   See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
Prioritized sampling from the replay             True
                                                                            Appendix G
                                                                   See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
       Priority exponent (α)                      0.6
                                                                            Appendix G
                                                                   See (Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
      Priority correction (βp )                 0.4 → 1
                                                                            Appendix G
         Evaluation episodes                      8
    Min replay size for sampling                 300
 Self-play network updating inerval               5
 Target network updating interval                10



                             Table 4: Specific for models and agents
                                            Setting
    Parameter          True Model      Abstracted Model Anchored Model
                    EMCTS UBE Uninf. EMCTS UBE Uninf. EMCTS UBE Uninf.
 Training steps /
   environment       45K          45K   45K     35K       35K    35K       45K      45K     45K
   interactions
   Reward loss
                       1           1     1       1         1      1         1        1       1
     weight λr
     Value-loss
                      0.5         0.5    0.5    0.5       0.5     0.5      0.5       0.5     0.5
     weight λv
    Policy-loss
                      0.5         0.5    0.5    0.5       0.5     0.5      0.5       0.5     0.5
     weight λπ
     UBE-loss
                     0.125     0.125      -     0.25      0.25     -      0.125    0.125      -
     weight λu
    RND scale         1.0         1.0     -      -         -       -      0.001    0.001      -
    Root based
                     False     False    False   True      True   True     False     False   False
       targets
     Disabled
        policy       True      True     False   True      True   False    True      True    False
  in exploration
    Number of
      parallel         2           2     2       2         2      2         2        2       2
      episodes
    Out of are
    exploration        1           1      -      1         1       -        1        1        -
      episodes
   Exploration
                      10          10      -      1         1       -       10        10       -
   coefficient β
  Dirichlet noise
                       0           0    0.25     0         0     0.25       0        0      0.25
   magnitude ρ



                                                27
