Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HINK B OT: E MBODIED I NSTRUCTION F OLLOWING
WITH T HOUGHT C HAIN R EASONING

  Guanxing Lu1 , Ziwei Wang2♯ , Changliu Liu3 , Jiwen Lu4 , Yansong Tang1†
 1
   Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
 2
   School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
 3
   Carnegie Mellon University 4 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
 {lgx23@mails.,lujiwen@,tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn
 ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg cliu6@andrew.cmu.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

            Embodied Instruction Following (EIF) requires agents to complete human instruc-
            tion by interacting objects in complicated surrounding environments. Conven-
            tional methods directly consider the sparse human instruction to generate action
            plans for agents, which usually fail to achieve human goals because of the instruc-
            tion incoherence in action descriptions. On the contrary, we propose ThinkBot
            that reasons the thought chain in human instruction to recover the missing action
            descriptions, so that the agent can successfully complete human goals by follow-
            ing the coherent instruction. Specifically, we first design an instruction completer
            based on large language models to recover the missing actions with interacted
            objects between consecutive human instruction, where the perceived surrounding
            environments and the completed sub-goals are considered for instruction comple-
            tion. Based on the partially observed scene semantic maps, we present an ob-
            ject localizer to infer the position of interacted objects and the related Bayesian
            uncertainty for close-loop planning. Extensive experiments in the simulated en-
            vironment show that our ThinkBot outperforms the state-of-the-art EIF methods
            by a sizable margin in both success rate and execution efficiency. Project page:
            https://guanxinglu.github.io/thinkbot/.


1    I NTRODUCTION


Designing autonomous agents for diverse household tasks has been highly desired in research of
artificial intelligence for a long time. Recent advances in computer vision Wang et al. (2023a); Li
et al. (2023b) and natural language processing Brown et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022) enable au-
tonomous agents to complete complex human requirements, because the appeared large pre-trained
models can comprehend human instruction and perceive the world accurately. Embodied instruction
following (EIF) Misra et al. (2017); Zhu et al. (2017); Gordon et al. (2018); Shridhar et al. (2020)
requires the agent to ground human instruction to consecutive task plans with feasible execution,
which necessitates high success rate and completion efficiency.
To accomplish the challenging EIF task, imitation learning Shridhar et al. (2020); Pashevich et al.
(2021); Singh et al. (2021); Song et al. (2022); Nguyen et al. (2021); Zhang & Chai (2021); Nguyen
& Okatani (2020); Suglia et al. (2021); Kim et al. (2021) is widely adopted to generate low-level
actions from historical observation and given instruction, while they fail to adapt to new scenarios
due to the insufficient pair-wise data between human instruction and low-level actions. To this
end, modular methods Blukis et al. (2022a); Min et al. (2022); Murray & Cakmak (2022); Inoue &
Ohashi (2022); Kim et al. (2023); Ding et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2022) decompose complex tasks to
high-level planning conditioned on instruction and low-level execution with predefined controllers.
However, human instruction is usually sparse with incoherence for action plan generation of agents.
For example, in Figure 1, humans may give the instruction ‘Prepare a spoon, Take a mug’ for
     ♯
         Project lead. † Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR
                             Human        2025
                                    Instruction


           Task: Please get a              Prepare a spoon                            The mug should be chilled, so it may be in the fridge
         chilled mug for coffee                Take a mug
                                                                                  Go to the fridge     Open the fridge        Take a mug
                 Take a mug       Take a mug          Take a mug


                                                                       ThinkBot
                                                                                                                         
    Previous


Figure 1: Comparison between conventional EIF methods (Prompter Inoue & Ohashi (2022)) and
our ThinkBot. Existing methods directly leverage sparse human instruction to generate action se-
quence, which usually get stuck due to the incoherence of instruction. Our ThinkBot recovers
missing action descriptions by reasoning the thought chain in sparse human instruction, and can
successfully complete challenging tasks.

making cold brew coffee. In realistic scenarios, the mug may be stored in a fridge, and the agent
may need to open the fridge first to get the mug. Therefore, the dense instruction should be ‘Go
to the fridge, open the fridge, and take a mug’. Lacking coherent instruction usually disables the
agent to acquire feasible action sequences in execution, and the success rate across diverse tasks in
complicated indoor environments still remains low.
In this paper, we propose a ThinkBot agent to accurately complete diverse EIF tasks in interac-
tive environments. Unlike existing methods that directly employ the sparse human instruction for
agent action sequence generation, we recover the missing action descriptions for agent execution
by reasoning the thought chain in sparse human instruction. Therefore, coherent instruction can
be leveraged to generate more feasible agent actions in complex EIF tasks especially with long
sequences. More specifically, we first propose an instruction completer based on large language
models to predict the missing actions with interacted objects in the sparse human instruction, where
we carefully design prompts to consider the perceived objects in the surrounding environments and
the completed sub-goals in the task execution sequences. We then present a multimodal object lo-
calizer that predicts the position of the recovered missing objects based on the scene semantic maps,
where the mined object correlation is also leveraged to enhance the localization ability. Extensive
experiments on ALFRED Shridhar et al. (2020) show that our ThinkBot outperforms the state-of-
the-art EIF methods by a sizable margin in both success rate and execution efficiency. Our main
contributions can be summarized as follows:

                • We propose a ThinkBot agent that reasons the thought chain in sparse human instruction
                  for coherence mining to successfully complete complex EIF goals.
                • We present an instruction completer based on large language models to generate the missing
                  actions with interacted objects, and propose an object localizer to predict the position of
                  objects for interaction.
                • We conduct extensive experiments of diverse EIF tasks on ALFRED benchmark, and the
                  results demonstrate that our method achieves higher success rate and path-length-weighted
                  success rate than the state-of-the-art methods on unseen environments.

2              R ELATED W ORK
Embodied Instruction Following: Developing generalist agents that can follow human instruction
to complete diverse tasks in interactive environments is a long-standing goal. In the pursuit of this
goal, EIF has been widely studied in recent years for high generalizability and practicality. Prior arts
can be divided into two categories: end-to-end methods and modular methods. End-to-end methods
directly generate low-level actions conditioned on the current state of the environment and human
instruction Shridhar et al. (2020); Pashevich et al. (2021); Singh et al. (2021); Song et al. (2022);
Nguyen et al. (2021); Zhang & Chai (2021); Nguyen & Okatani (2020); Suglia et al. (2021); Kim
et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2018). For instance, Pashevich et al. Pashevich et al. (2021) developed
an episodic transformer to encode language inputs and the episode history of visual observation and
actions, which was decoded for action sequence generation with auto-regression. However, end-to-


                                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


end methods often struggle to generalize to unseen scenes due to insufficient pair-wise data between
instruction and low-level action sequences. To address this, modular methods Jia et al. (2022);
Blukis et al. (2022a); Min et al. (2022); Murray & Cakmak (2022); Inoue & Ohashi (2022); Kim
et al. (2023); Ding et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2022) plan high-level action sequences and execute them
with pre-defined local policies guided by online semantic maps, which are free of the pair-wise data
between instruction and low-level actions. In modular methods, selecting correct targets and actions
for navigation and interaction is important for searching efficiency and task success. Min et al. Min
et al. (2022) directly employed convolutional networks to predict the target position from current se-
mantic map, and Murray et al. Murray & Cakmak (2022) proposed a landmark classification model
based on BERT Kenton & Toutanova (2019) for target selection from original human instruction.
Inoue et al. Inoue & Ohashi (2022) predicted landmark objects according to offline co-occurrence
probabilities of objects evaluated by pre-trained language models, and Kim et al. Kim et al. (2023)
yield the detailed plan by incorporating the contextual information of natural language instructions.
Nevertheless, directly considering the sparse human instruction for agent action generation usually
fails to achieve human goals due to the instruction incoherence with missing action descriptions.
LLMs for Embodied Agents: Large language models (LLMs) Brown et al. (2020); Ouyang et al.
(2022) have demonstrated their capability in embodied AI tasks such as visual-language navigation
Qiao et al. (2023); Long et al. (2023); Shah et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2023a); Georgakis et al.
(2022); Chen et al. (2022), object navigation Yu et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2023b), open-world
exploration Wang et al. (2023b); Zhu et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2024), and embodied planning Mu
et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2023); Ahn et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022a;b); Raman
et al. (2022); Singh et al. (2023); Lu et al. (2022), where the high generalizability across deployment
scenes and downstream tasks of LLMs enables embodied agents to achieve diverse human goals
in complex environments. With the rich commonsense embedded in LLMs, fine-grained actions
regarding human instruction can be directly generated. Zhou et al. Zhou et al. (2023a) directly
prompted LLMs to perform zero-shot sequential action prediction by taking the textual descriptions
of historical visual observations as inputs. To facilitate efficient exploration, ESC Zhou et al. (2023b)
generated frontier candidates on the observed semantic map, and employed LLM to determine the
next frontier by considering hand-crafted soft constraints jointly. While direct generation of fine-
grained actions is challenging for LLMs due to the extremely large search space, other methods
decompose the overall solution into high-level plan generation and low-level action controlling Mu
et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2023); Ahn et al. (2022); Huang et al. (2022a;b). Wu
et al. Wu et al. (2023) crafted a large-scale embodied planning dataset and finetuned different
plan generators on the dataset for task plan grounding. Yao et al. Yao et al. (2022) generated
consecutive plans by prompting LLMs to synergize reasoning and acting, and achieved impressive
performance on text-based benchmarks Shridhar et al. (2021). However, despite the high reasoning
ability of LLMs, the spatial localization ability for interacted objects is weak in LLMs. We present
a multimodal transformer-based object localizer to provide spatial guidance and feedback for agents
in object interaction accurately.


3     A PPROACH

In this section, we first briefly introduce the problem in EIF and our overall pipeline of the ThinkBot
agent (Section 3.1). Then we detail the instruction completer that recovers the missing actions
with interacted objects for coherence mining (Section 3.2), and demonstrate the multimodal object
localizer which provides spatial guidance for agents in interaction (Section 3.3).

3.1   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND OVERALL P IPELINE

The embodied instruction following task requires an agent in the interactive environment to finish
the human goals physically by generating action sequences, where the human goals and the step-
by-step instruction are given to the agent for guidance. Following the modular methods, we first
generate high-level subgoal sequences and then execute them with a pre-defined controller guided
by online semantic maps. In the tth step, the agent needs to generate a high-level subgoal At
based on the current instruction It and the object state St−1 after implementing the last subgoal
by the controller. A high-level plan At is a tuple (at , ot , pt ), where at is the primitive action and
ot means the interacted object with the position pt . In EIF tasks, human instruction is usually


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Task                 Observed Scene                    Current Frame       Object Localizer
      To get a chilled
      mug for coffee
                                                                  
   Human Instruction

      Prepare a spoon
        Take a mug                                                                                       Open the fridge
                            Fridge: (x1, z1), Sink: (x2, z2)     Prepare a spoon       Semantic Map
                                                                                                              Next Step

                            Instruction Completer                                                        
                  The mug should                                 Prepare a spoon
                  be chilled, so it                              Go to the fridge
                   may be in the                                 Open the fridge
                                                Subgoal
                      fridge                                       Take a mug
                                               Generation
                                                                                      Position Heatmap
             Thought Chain Reasoning                           Coherent Instruction      Uncertainty       Take a mug


Figure 2: The overall pipeline of ThinkBot, which consists of an instruction completer and an
object localizer. The instruction completer generates the coherent instruction with interacted objects
based on sparse human instruction and the current visual perception results, and the object localizer
predicts the position of the interacted object for manipulation and navigation.

sparse with significant incoherence between consecutive steps. Therefore, it is very challenging to
generate feasible action At based on the current step-wise instruction It and the object state St−1
after implementing the last action. For example, humans may provide the instruction ‘Prepare a
spoon, take a mug’ for coffee making. However, the mug may be stored in the fridge in realistic
scenes. Consequently, it is difficult for the agent to take the mug with spoon without other instruction
after preparing the bread. The coherent instruction should be ‘Prepare a spoon, go to the fridge, open
the fridge, take a mug’. Therefore, our goal is to recover the missing action descriptions in the sparse
human instruction.
Since the thought chain reveals a series of intermediate steps from the initial problem to the fi-
nal solution Wei et al. (2022), it can be leveraged to decompose the original complex problems
and enhance the feasibility of the solution. In EIF tasks, reasoning the thought chain can predict
the missing action descriptions in the sparse human instruction to successfully achieve the goal.
The overall pipeline of our ThinkBot agent is shown in Figure 2, which consists of an instruction
completer recovering the missing actions with interacted objects and an object localizer predicting
the object location for agent interaction. For the instruction completer, we design prompts for the
pre-trained large language model including the descriptions of scene information, task completion
process, and the executor feedback which is expected to reason the thought chain in sparse human
instruction to provide coherent instruction. For the object localizer, the generated missing actions
with interacted objects and the perceived semantic map of the scene are utilized to predict the object
location for the agent to interact with, where multimodal transformers are employed for the align-
ment between language instruction and visual clues in the environment. Finally, the agent can easily
complete the human goals to achieve significantly higher success rate with the coherent instruction
and the explicit interaction location.

3.2     I NSTRUCTION C OMPLETER

To recover the missing action descriptions in the sparse human instruction, we employ LLMs with
rich commonsense to reason the thought chain in the instruction. While LLMs have demonstrated
remarkable abilities in various tasks, unlocking their complete potential requires prompt engineer-
ing. To enable the pre-trained LLMs to predict the missing actions with interacted objects accurately,
we carefully design the prompt by organizing the system message and agent message that respec-
tively describe the innate world properties and the perceived information. The input and output of
the instruction completer are shown in Figure 3 with an example.
System Message: The system message describes the innate world properties in the simulator includ-
ing the role explanation, message definition, primitive actions and response format, which remains
unchanged during the whole EIF process for the given task and environment. The role explanation


                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   • Method



 System Message                     Agent Message                                             Response
         Role                                           Human                   Thought Chain                   Recovered Subgoals
                          Prepare a spoon
      Explanation                                     Instruction
                            Take a mug                                        : The current instruction               Prepare a spoon
       Message                                           Task                                                         Recovered
                                                                         is ‘take a mug’, but mug is
       Definition                                     Completion                                                   Go to the fridge
       Primitive
                                                                         unobserved. The mug should
                                                      Observed
        Actions                                        Objects           be chilled, so it may be in               Open the fridge
       Response                                       Executor           the fridge. We need to first
        Format                                        Feedback           check the fridge.                                  Take a mug


Figure 3: Input and output of the instruction completer based on LLMs. The input contains system
message describing the world properties and agent message demonstrating perceived environment
information. The output includes the thought chain in sparse human instruction and missing sub-
goals with interacted objects.

defines the household AI assistant’s scenario, message definition explains input meanings, primitive
actions limit agent options, and response format structures LLM outputs for missing actions.
Agent Message: The agent message demonstrates the perceived information including the human
instruction, task completion process, observed objects and the executor feedback, which is updated
along with the EIF process. The human instruction means the given sparse instruction sentences and
the final goal. The task completion depicts completed subgoals, the current subgoal and all subgoals,
which reflects the execution process of the final goal. The information on observed objects in the
scene is represented by the object category and the coordination of the instances that have been seen
by the agent, which demonstrates the affordable candidates for interaction during the EIF process.
The executor feedback contains the uncertainty obtained by the multi-modal object localizer and the
environmental feedback to enable close-loop planning. Finally, the system message and the agent
message are concatenated to form the prompt for recovering missing actions with interacted objects
in the sparse instruction.
Uncertainty-aware Thought Chain Reasoning: To accurately recover the missing actions in
sparse human instruction, we enforce LLMs to reason the thought chain in human instruction that
indicates the detailed process from the initial state to the final goal. However, the recovered actions
can only be executed if the agent knows the exact position of the interacted objects. Therefore, we
also require LLMs to generate the missing subgoals in a structured format for subsequent location
prediction. The recovered subgoals are leveraged in subsequent object localizer for position pre-
diction in the partially-observed map, where the uncertainty of the object location is also outputted.
Then, the LLMs leverage the predicted uncertainty provided in the executor feedback and the object
location to refine the subgoals, so that the agent can manipulate the object to successfully achieve
the subgoal for task completion.

3.3     M ULTIMODAL O BJECT L OCALIZER

LLMs can reason through sparse instructions to recover missing actions with objects, but struggle
with spatial localization due to weak language-based positioning. To address this, we propose a
multimodal transformer-based object localizer in Figure 4 that predicts object positions and related
Bayesian uncertainty using recovered instructions and a partially observed semantic map.
To obtain the semantic map, the egocentric image is used to estimate a depth map.
At the same time, an instance segmentation mask is created with a pretrained detector.
These two results are combined to create a se-                                Object Correlation Graph
mantic 3D point cloud, which is then changed
                                                                                                          Map-instruction


                                                                                  Table      Fridge
                                                                                                                             Map Decoder
                                                                                Map Encoder


into the partially observed 2D semantic map.
                                                                                                             Aligner


                                                                                       Stove
For the instruction encoder, we leverage a pre-                                  Sink
                                                                                           Counter

trained BERT Kenton & Toutanova (2019) to Partially-observed Map                                              Position Heatmap
                                                                                                                 Uncertainty
extract the instruction features Xs for the hu- Instruction: .. turn around and go to                          Subgoal: Open
                                                                                                 Text Encoder
man instruction and the goal object, which are the counter on the right of the stove..                         the fridge

acquired from the prediction results of instruc-
tion completer. For the map encoder, we em- Figure 4: The architecture of the multimodal ob-
ploy convolutional neural networks to extract ject localizer, where the object correlation graph
the initial map features X′t . Since semantic cor- is also learned to strengthen the map features.


                                                               5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


relation among objects provides beneficial priors for accurate localization, we mine the object cor-
relation graph to embed the priors into semantic map features for further enhancement of object
position prediction. The graph is defined as G = (V, E), where V is the set of nodes and E are
the edges between different nodes. Each node represents a possible object category in the simulator,
and the element in the ith row and jth column of E indicates the correlation of objects between
the ith and the jth classes. While conventional graph convolutional networks use external priors to
handcraft a predefined graph structure, we construct the object correlation graph by learning from
the semantic map features X′t to adapt to different scenes. The object correlation graph is gener-
ated from the semantic map features X′t by Et = f (X′t We ), where f (·) denotes the activation
function and We is a learnable matrix for graph generation. The process of learning the object
correlation graph can be regarded as encoding the object correlation priors among the categories.
We then employ graph convolutional layers to enhance the semantic map representation with the
object correlation encoding, and acquire the map features for multimodal alignment according to
the following:
                                                   \mathbf {X}_t = \mathbf {X}'_t + \mathbf {E} \mathbf {X}'_t \mathbf {W}_a,    (1)
where Wa is a learnable weight matrix for message passing to embed the object correlation priors
into the map features. After the representation extraction for the instruction and the semantic map,
we leverage a map-instruction aligner to align the instruction features and the map features for ob-
ject position prediction. Since the semantic map is updated in an online manner with high frequency
during agent navigation, we take the features of the semantic maps as the query. The instruction re-
mains unchanged in a subtask, which is utilized as the key and the value features. The representation
that aligns the visual information provided by semantic maps and the language information in the
instruction is acquired by cross-attention, which is then leveraged to decode the predicted location
of the interacted objects.
In addition to predicting the object location, we also allow the network to output an uncertainty
measured by the variance, which can serve as feedback for our instruction completer. However,
obtaining annotated uncertainty labels can be costly. To address this, we leverage the Bayesian un-
certainty estimation to learn the aleatoric uncertainty Kendall & Gal (2017); Ding et al. (2022) to
model the probabilistic nature of unseen object localization. Specifically, we assign a scalar variance
to each pixel that measures the prediction uncertainty of this pixel, which encourages the instruction
completer to refine the current plan from exploitation to exploration if the prediction has low confi-
dence. To train the object localizer, we need to acquire the groundtruth instance position y for the
interacted objects that are predicted by the instruction completer. We replay expert demonstrations
in the training data, and record the masks of interacted objects when a subtask is successfully com-
pleted. With the projection from the egocentric mask to the top-down view by depth estimation, the
groundtruth positions are used to supervise the object localizer to predict the position of interacted
objects ŷ. The labels of pixels covered by the interacted objects are set to one and otherwise to zero.
The model is trained with a combination of pixel-wise binary cross-entropy loss and the uncertainty
regularization term:

                              \mathcal {L} = \frac {1}{T} \sum y \log (\hat {y}_t) + (1 - y) \log (1 - \hat {y}_t),              (2)

where the output with uncertainty estimation is given by ŷt = ŷ + ϵt at sample t, and ϵt ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
is a sampled Gaussian noise based on the estimated variance. T denotes the total sampling time. By
optimizing this objective, the training sample that hard to locate is adaptively assigned with a high
variance, thus realize the uncertainty estimation that can be provided to the instruction completer as
feedback signal, which shows effectiveness in both quantitative and qualitative analysis.


4   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first introduce the experiment setup including datasets, baseline methods, eval-
uation metrics and implementation details. Then we compare our method with the state-of-the-art
EIF approaches to show the superiority in success rate and efficiency, and conduct an ablation study
to verify the effectiveness of the instruction completer and the object localizer. Finally, we also
demonstrate the visualization results of our method to depict our intuition. Additional results and
case studies are provided in the appendix.


                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Comparison with the state-of-the-art methods in SR, GC, PLWSR, PLWGC on the test
seen and test unseen splits.
                                   Test Seen                                 Test Unseen
      Method
                        PLWGC    GC       PLWSR             SR     PLWGC   GC        PLWSR     SR
      Seq2seq           6.27    9.42           2.02         3.98    4.26    7.03       0.08     3.9
      MOCA              22.05   28.29          15.10       22.05    9.99   14.28       2.72    5.30
      E.T.              34.93   45.44          27.78       38.42   11.46   18.56       4.10    8.57
      LWIT              23.10   40.53          43.10       30.92   16.34   20.91       5.60    9.42
      HITUT             17.41   29.97          11.10       21.27   11.51   20.31       5.86   13.87
      ABP               4.92    51.13          3.88        44.55    2.22   24.76       1.08   15.43
      LLM-Planner         -     26.77            -         18.20     -     23.37        -     16.42
      FILM              15.59   39.55          11.27       28.83   15.13   38.52      11.32   27.80
      LGS-RPA           28.97   48.66          21.28       40.05   22.76   45.24      22.76   35.41
      Prompter          30.72   63.43          25.81       53.23   26.22   58.76      20.76   45.72
      CPEM              27.49   59.40          22.61       50.62   27.00   61.10      22.61   49.84
      Prompter+         36.35   70.20          31.12       60.86   30.09   65.71      26.22   55.46
      ThinkBot (Ours)   37.01   71.64          32.02       62.69   30.73   67.75      26.93   57.82

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Dataset: For the simulation of EIF tasks, we utilize the well-recognized ALFRED benchmark Shrid-
har et al. (2020) within the AI2-THOR Kolve et al. (2017) virtual environment. The ALFRED
benchmark includes 25,743 trajectory-instruction pairs, covering 7 different task types with vary-
ing levels of complexity. The benchmark is divided into five splits including train, test seen, test
unseen, valid seen and valid unseen. The ALFRED benchmark poses significant challenges for
EIF agents, as it requires them to ground incoherent natural instruction of different granularity into
various household tasks that involve long-horizon reasoning plans. To further evaluate the general-
izability and the planning accuracy of ThinkBot, we also evaluate it on ActioNet Duan et al. (2020),
which contains a variety of challenging high-level planning tasks that differs from ALFRED.
Baselines: We compare our agent, ThinkBot, with previously published state-of-the-art EIF models.
The counterparts include end-to-end methods Seq2seq Shridhar et al. (2020), MOCA Singh et al.
(2021), E.T. Pashevich et al. (2021), LWIT Nguyen et al. (2021), HITUT Zhang & Chai (2021),
ABP Kim et al. (2021), and modular methods LLM-Planner Song et al. (2023), FILM Min et al.
(2022), LGS-RPA Murray & Cakmak (2022), Prompter Inoue & Ohashi (2022), CPEM Kim et al.
(2023). We also construct a strong baseline denoted as Prompter+ in our experiments, which is a
modified version of Prompter Inoue & Ohashi (2022) that combines environment-aware memory
Kim et al. (2023) and a re-trained object detector Wang et al. (2023a).
Evaluation Metrics: We follow the evaluation protocol outlined in the ALFRED benchmark. The
primary metric is the success rate (SR) that measures the percentage of tasks completed, and we
also report the goal-condition success rate (GC), which evaluates the percentage of satisfied goal
conditions for all subgoals in step-by-step instruction. To account for efficiency in task completion,
both SR and GC are penalized by the length of the execution sequence to compute a path-length-
weighted (PLW) score for each metric, which are termed PLWSR and PLWGC respectively. To
evaluate the planning outputs of our ThinkBot, We report the high-level planning (HLP) accuracy
from Song et al. (2023) compared with atomic actions for ALFRED, and report BERT similarity
compared with dense instructions for ActioNet.
Implementation Details: The instruction completer adopts the publicly released GPT-3.5 API
GPT-3.5-turbo as the base model, where we set the generation temperature to 0 for stabil-
ity enhancement. For prompt design, we leverage emotion prompt Li et al. (2023a) and prompt
optimization Yang et al. (2023) in the system message template to further boost the performance
of LLMs. For the multimodal object localizer, we employ a truncated ResNet18 Georgakis et al.
(2022) for the map encoder. AdamW optimizer Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) with the initial learning
rate 5 × 10−4 and step decay is employed for parameter update.

4.2     C OMPARISON WITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

Comparison on Task Completion: We compare the proposed ThinkBot with the state-of-
the-art methods on the ALFRED benchmark1 . Table 1 illustrates the comparison of SR,
  1
    The results have been publicly released in https://leaderboard.allenai.org/alfred/
submissions/public


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of methods combining different proposed techniques, where valid unseen and
the selected hard valid unseen splits are used for evaluation.
                                           Valid Unseen                       Hard Valid Unseen
   Method
                                  PLWGC   GC       PLWSR       SR     PLWGC     GC       PLWSR     SR
   Random                         26.18   67.64     23.80     59.68    0.32     5.41       0       0
   FILM                           28.74   72.46     26.58     64.31    0.29     4.76       0       0
   Prompter+                      29.36   72.00     26.82     64.43    0.48     5.41       0       0
   Groundtruth Location           39.71   72.75     37.01     67.97    0.79     5.41       0       0
   w/o Instruction Completer      29.09   72.38     26.43     64.92    0.48     5.41         0      0
   w/o Object Localizer           30.24   74.37     27.87     66.99    9.29    22.41       8.11   16.22
   w/o Object Correlation Graph   30.41   73.89     28.14     67.36   11.31    29.46       9.74   21.62
   ThinkBot                       31.11   75.30     28.73     67.72   11.95    30.86      10.26   22.97

GC, PLWGC, and PLWSR on the test splits for both seen and unseen scenarios. Our
ThinkBot achieves the best performance on all four metrics in both test seen and test un-
seen split, outperforming the previous arts including both end-to-end and modular meth-
ods by a sizable margin.          Compared with CPEM Kim et al. (2023), ThinkBot sur-
passes by 7.98% and 12.07% SR on the test unseen and test seen split, respectively.
Besides, Prompter leverages the large language models to infer Table 3:        Comparison with the
object co-occurrence probability for semantic search in EIF, state-of-the-art method in HLP ac-
and is further enhanced with better visual perception modules curacy and BERT similarity.
to acquire our Prompter+. However, they still suffer from the      Method/Dataset ALFRED ActioNet
sparse human instruction with incoherence that usually causes
                                                                   LLM-Planner      43.2   68.4
execution failure. On the contrary, our ThinkBot reasons the       Thinkbot         69.9   73.3
thought chain in the sparse human instruction to recover the
missing action descriptions, which can provide coherent instruction for the agent to successfully
complete the human goal with high efficiency. As a result, our method outperforms the second-
best Prompter+ method by 1.83% (62.69% vs. 60.86%) and 1.44% (71.64% vs. 70.20%) in SR
and GC respectively in the test seen split. Moreover, the advantages of our method are more obvi-
ous in the test unseen split, which are 2.36% (57.82% vs. 55.46%) in SR and 2.04% (67.75% vs.
65.71%) in GC. The results indicate the high generalization ability of our ThinkBot even in novel
scenarios that are never seen in training data. In terms of the efficiency in task completion, our
method achieves 32.02% PLWSR and 37.01% PLWGC in the test seen split, and 26.93% PLWSR
and 30.73% PLWGC in the test unseen split, which demonstrates the efficiency of our method.
In conclusion, our ThinkBot agent is more practical than stat-of-the-art methods for EIF tasks in
scenarios with complex environments and long sequences.
Comparison on High-level Planning Accuracy: To assess the generalizability of Thinkbot, we
evaluate the outputs of the instruction completer in both ALFRED and ActioNet in Table 3. The
results show that our method outperforms Song et al. (2023) significantly in both ALFRED and Ac-
tioNet datasets, which indicates the generalizabilty of our ThinkBot provided by the visual ground-
ing and feedback mechanism.

4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

Our instruction completer recovers the missing actions with interacted objects by reasoning thought
chain in sparse human instruction, and the object localizer predicts the position of the interacted
objects. In Table 2, we conduct an ablation study to verify the effectiveness of each presented
technique. Since recovering the incoherent instruction is especially beneficial in the hard cases
where target objects are located inside closed containers (e.g. The task ‘to get a chilled mug for
coffee’ where the mug is in a closed fridge), we also evaluate different methods in the hard cases
extracted from valid unseen split, referred to as hard valid unseen. In this subset, the agent must open
the receptacles to locate the target objects by recovering the missing interaction with the receptacles
from sparse instruction, and then the challenging tasks in the hard cases can be completed.
Instruction Completer: We first implement our ThinkBot without the instruction completer, where
we directly predict the location of the target in the original sparse human instruction with the ob-
ject localizer for interaction. The results in success rate drops 2.80% compared with our vanilla
ThinkBot in the valid unseen split. Directly predicting the location of interacted objects in inco-
herent instruction usually causes large deviation, because the semantic correlation is weak between
the target object and the observed semantic map. In hard cases, the agent is more likely to fail to


                                                          8
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Task:        Place sliced lettuce into a bin.                                   Task:        Examine a box of tissues using the light.
        Instruction: Take a knife. Cut the lettuce in the fridge.                       Instruction: Walk to the cabinet. Grab tissues from the bottom right cabinet.

                                                                                         


                Pickup Knife             Slice Lettuce              Slice Lettuce             Go to Cabinet             Pickup Tissue             Pickup Tissue

                                                                                                                                         


                Pickup Knife          Open Fridge                   Slice Lettuce             Go to Cabinet             Open Cabinet              Pickup Tissue
Pickup Tissue           ToggleOn Lamp
        Figure 5: Visualization of the agent action sequence acquired by Prompter+ (top) and our ThinkBot
                  Task: Place sliced lettuce into a bin.
        (bottom), where    our method can recover the missing actions with interacted instances ‘Open Fridge’
                  Instruction: Take a knife. Cut the lettuce in the fridge.
        and ‘Open Cabinet’ to successfully achieve the human goal.
         Task: Examine a box of tissues using a floor lamp. Instruction: walk to the cabinet. Grab tissues from the bottom right cabinet. Turn on the lamp.

                                                                                                                                        


                Open Cabinet             Close Cabinet              Go to Cabinet           Open Cabinet               Pickup Tissue            ToggleOn Lamp

        Figure 6: Additional visualization of the complete agent action sequence acquired by our ThinkBot,
        where our method can not only recover the missing actions with interacted instances but also revise
        the recovered actions when opening the wrong cabinet.

        complete the task due to the missing interaction with the containers, and the invisible target object
        is hard to discover by the agent. As a result, the performance in SR without instruction completer
        drops to zero in hard unseen split. On the contrary, our instruction completer can reason intermedi-
        ate action descriptions to mine the semantic correlation, which provides fine-grained instruction for
        the agent to achieve human goals.
        Object Localizer: We also evaluate the performance of our ThinkBot without the object local-
        izer, and observe notable performance drops in SR and PLWSR. In the valid unseen split, the
        performance drops 0.73% in SR and 0.86% in PLWSR compared with our vanilla ThinkBot.
        Meanwhile, we implement the object localizer without Table 4: Comparisons of error modes.
        the object correlation graph, the performance is also de- Following Min et al. (2022); Inoue &
        graded in both valid unseen and hard valid unseen split. Ohashi (2022), we categorize the failure
        This indicates the correlation mining between target ob- reasons into 3 main classes to provide
        jects and the containers can significantly enhance lo- further explanation.
        calization accuracy. Besides, we present the results of               Goal object Interaction Navigation
                                                                    Method
        Prompter+ with random and Prompter’s search policy,                    not found    failures   failures
        which drop significantly in SR and PLWSR. We also pro-      FILM         53.01        6.78      19.60
        vide the results for the settings where the groundtruth lo- Prompter     34.39        7.72       4.62
                                                                    Prompter+    21.10        7.56       6.95
        cation of the interacted objects is given. Our ThinkBot     ThinkBot     18.08        7.32       6.83
        achieves a similar success rate, which indicates the pre-
        cise prediction of the object location.
        Error Mode: Table 4 presents the absolute ratio of failure cases caused by different factors in
        FILM, Prompter, and the proposed ThinkBot. The counterparts’ results are taken from their papers
        Min et al. (2022); Inoue & Ohashi (2022). We categorize failure cases into three types: ‘Goal object
        not found’, ‘Interaction failures’, and ‘Navigation failures’. As depicted in Table 4, the occurrence
        of the ‘goal object not found’ error substantially decreases (18.08% vs. 21.10%) in our ThinkBot
        by incorporating the recovered coherent human instruction. Our method does not noticeably impact


                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Instruction: Walk forward and left to face the desk.          Instruction: Pick up tomato from the back of the counter.
 Recovered Object: Pencil                                      Recovered Object: Tomato


      Semantic Map           Prediction     Ground-truth          Semantic Map          Prediction          Ground-truth
    Instruction: Pick up the dirty green washcloth that’s in    Instruction: Turn to the left then to the right then to the
    front of you between the sinks.                             sink on the right. Pick up the apple to the left of the egg.
    Recovered Object: Cloth                                     Recovered Object: Apple


     Semantic Map          Prediction        Groundtruth          Semantic Map           Prediction         Groundtruth


Figure 7: The visualization of the predicted and groundtruth positions of interacted objects, where
the partially observed semantic maps are also depicted.
error modes like ‘Interaction failures’ and ‘Navigation failures’, since these are unrelated to the
instruction-following strategy that this paper focuses on. The results verify the effectiveness of our
method in recovering the missing actions to prevent the agent from failure, while maintaining a
comparable performance in interaction and navigation to the state-of-the-art methods.

4.4      Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

Action Sequence Visualization: We present two qualitative examples of the generated action se-
quence in Figure 5 from Prompter+ and our ThinkBot. In the left case, the agent is instructed to
‘Take a knife. Cut the lettuce in the fridge’. The results show that the previous agent struggles to
complete the task due to the missing ‘open’ action and interacted object ‘fridge’. In contrast, our
ThinkBot first reasons the thought chain of human instruction, and then recovers the missing ‘open’
action and interacted object ‘fridge’ from the instruction, thus successfully completes the task. In the
right case, ThinkBot not only recovers the missing ‘open’ action and interacted object ‘cabinet’, but
also interacts with the right cabinet that contains the tissue box. The case study demonstrates the ef-
fectiveness of ThinkBot in recovering the missing actions and interacted objects from sparse human
instruction. In Figure 6, we also showcase an additional complete action sequence of our ThinkBot
on the ALFRED valid unseen split. Our ThinkBot can not only recover the missing ‘Open’ actions
but also refine the recovered actions. For instance, our instruction completer outputs ‘Close cabinet,
go to another cabinet, and open cabinet’ when the agent mistakenly opens the wrong cabinet.
Visualization of the Object Localizer: Figure 7 shows the groundtruth and the predicted location
of the interacted objects from the object localizer, where the object category is generated from the
upstream instruction completer. For example in the top case, the interacted object ‘pencil’ is located
on the table, and the object localizer predicts the position of the interacted object with negligible
deviation. In cases where multiple instances exist for the recovered object, the object localizer is
able to locate all objects in the same category. Meanwhile, our ThinkBot can correctly assign the
largest probability to the instance that is described by the instruction, and the human goals can be
successfully achieved following the step-by-step human instruction.


5      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented a ThinkBot agent that reasons the thought chain for missing instruc-
tion recovery in EIF tasks. We design an instruction completer to predict the intermediate actions
with interacted objects between incoherent human instruction, and then leverage a multimodal trans-
former to infer the interaction location for the agent. Extensive experiments in a wide variety of EIF
tasks demonstrate the superiority of our method in terms of success rate and execution efficiency.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The main limitations include the low planning frequency during closed-loop thought chain gener-
ation, the dependence on the inherent reasoning capabilities of LLMs and the reliance on human
instructions instead of active questioning, requiring further alignment for deployment in realistic
household scenarios.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62125603, Grant 62336004, and Grant 62321005, in part by the Shenzhen Science and Technology
Program JCYJ20240813111903006, in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant
No. L247009, and in part by the NTU Start up Grant 024303-00001.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In CoRL,
 2022.

Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial semantic
  representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In CoRL, 2022a.

Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial semantic
  representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In CoRL, 2022b.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. NeurIPS, 2020.

Jiaqi Chen, Yuxian Jiang, Jiachen Lu, and Li Zhang. S-agents: self-organizing agents in open-ended
   environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04578, 2024.

Kai Chen, Jiaqi Wang, Jiangmiao Pang, Yuhang Cao, Yu Xiong, Xiaoxiao Li, Shuyang Sun, Wansen
  Feng, Ziwei Liu, Jiarui Xu, Zheng Zhang, Dazhi Cheng, Chenchen Zhu, Tianheng Cheng, Qijie
  Zhao, Buyu Li, Xin Lu, Rui Zhu, Yue Wu, Jifeng Dai, Jingdong Wang, Jianping Shi, Wanli
  Ouyang, Chen Change Loy, and Dahua Lin. MMDetection: Open mmlab detection toolbox and
  benchmark. arXiv:1906.07155, 2019.

Peihao Chen, Dongyu Ji, Kunyang Lin, Runhao Zeng, Thomas Li, Mingkui Tan, and Chuang Gan.
  Weakly-supervised multi-granularity map learning for vision-and-language navigation. NeurIPS,
  2022.

Mingyu Ding, Yan Xu, Zhenfang Chen, David Daniel Cox, Ping Luo, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and
 Chuang Gan. Embodied concept learner: Self-supervised learning of concepts and mapping
 through instruction following. In CoRL, 2022.

Jiafei Duan, Samson Yu, Hui Li Tan, and Cheston Tan. Actionet: An interactive end-to-end platform
   for task-based data collection and augmentation in 3d environment. In ICIP, pp. 1566–1570.
   IEEE, 2020.

Georgios Georgakis, Karl Schmeckpeper, Karan Wanchoo, Soham Dan, Eleni Miltsakaki, Dan Roth,
  and Kostas Daniilidis. Cross-modal map learning for vision and language navigation. In CVPR,
  2022.

Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Rastegari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali
  Farhadi. Iqa: Visual question answering in interactive environments. In CVPR, 2018.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In ICML, 2022a.

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. In CoRL, 2022b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yuki Inoue and Hiroki Ohashi. Prompter: Utilizing large language model prompting for a data
  efficient embodied instruction following. arXiv:2211.03267, 2022.
Zhiwei Jia, Kaixiang Lin, Yizhou Zhao, Qiaozi Gao, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav S Sukhatme.
  Learning to act with affordance-aware multimodal neural slam. In IROS, 2022.
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer
  vision? NeurIPS, 30, 2017.
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT, volume 1, pp. 2, 2019.
Byeonghwi Kim, Suvaansh Bhambri, Kunal Pratap Singh, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Jonghyun Choi.
  Agent with the big picture: Perceiving surroundings for interactive instruction following. In
  Embodied AI Workshop @ CVPR, 2021.
Byeonghwi Kim, Jinyeon Kim, Yuyeong Kim, Cheolhong Min, and Jonghyun Choi. Context-aware
  planning and environment-aware memory for instruction following embodied agents. In ICCV,
  2023.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt
  Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, et al. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment
  for visual ai. arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
Cheng Li, Jindong Wang, Kaijie Zhu, Yixuan Zhang, Wenxin Hou, Jianxun Lian, and Xing Xie.
  Emotionprompt: Leveraging psychology for large language models enhancement via emotional
  stimulus. arXiv:2307.11760, 2023a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv:2301.12597, 2023b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Xiaotian Liu, Hector Palacios, Muise, and Christian. A planning based neural-symbolic approach
  for embodied instruction following. In Embodied AI Workshop @ CVPR, 2022.
Yuxing Long, Xiaoqi Li, Wenzhe Cai, and Hao Dong. Discuss before moving: Visual language
  navigation via multi-expert discussions. arXiv:2309.11382, 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Yujie Lu, Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Wenda Xu, Xin Eric Wang, Miguel Eckstein, and
  William Yang Wang. Neuro-symbolic procedural planning with commonsense prompting.
  arXiv:2206.02928, 2022.
So Yeon Min, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar, Yonatan Bisk, and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. FILM: Following instructions in language with modular methods. In ICLR, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qI4542Y2s1D.
Dipendra Misra, John Langford, and Yoav Artzi. Mapping instructions and visual observations to
  actions with reinforcement learning. In EMNLP, 2017.
Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng
  Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of
  thought. arXiv:2305.15021, 2023.
Michael Murray and Maya Cakmak. Following natural language instructions for household tasks
 with landmark guided search and reinforced pose adjustment. In RA-L, 2022.
Takayuki Okatani Van-Quang Nguyen and Takayuki Okatani. A hierarchical attention model for
  action learning from realistic environments and directives. In EVAL Workshop @ ECCV, 2020.
Van-Quang Nguyen, Masanori Suganuma, Okatani, and Takayuki. Look wide and interpret twice:
  Improving performance on interactive instruction-following tasks. In IJCAI, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. NeurIPS, 2022.
Alexander Pashevich, Cordelia Schmid, Sun, and Chen. Episodic transformer for vision-and-
  language navigation. In ICCV, 2021.
Yanyuan Qiao, Yuankai Qi, Zheng Yu, Jing Liu, and Qi Wu. March in chat: Interactive prompting
  for remote embodied referring expression. In ICCV, 2023.
Shreyas Sundara Raman, Vanya Cohen, Eric Rosen, Ifrah Idrees, David Paulius, and Stefanie Tellex.
  Planning with large language models via corrective re-prompting. In Foundation Models for
  Decision Making Workshop @ NeurIPS, 2022.
Dhruv Shah, Błażej Osiński, Sergey Levine, et al. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large pre-trained
  models of language, vision, and action. In CoRL, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In CVPR, 2020.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
 ICLR, 2021.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans
   using large language models. In ICRA, 2023.
Kunal Pratap Singh, Suvaansh Bhambri, Byeonghwi Kim, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Jonghyun Choi.
  Factorizing perception and policy for interactive instruction following. In ICCV, 2021.
Chan Hee Song, Jihyung Kil, Tai-Yu Pan, Brian M. Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. One step at
  a time: Long-horizon vision-and-language navigation with milestones. In CVPR, 2022.
Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-
  planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In ICCV,
  2023.
Alessandro Suglia, Qiaozi Gao, Jesse Thomason, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav Sukhatme. Em-
  bodied bert: A transformer model for embodied, language-guided visual task completion.
  arXiv:2108.04927, 2021.
Wenhai Wang, Jifeng Dai, Zhe Chen, Zhenhang Huang, Zhiqi Li, Xizhou Zhu, Xiaowei Hu, Tong
 Lu, Lewei Lu, Hongsheng Li, et al. Internimage: Exploring large-scale vision foundation models
 with deformable convolutions. In CVPR, 2023a.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and
  select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
  NeurIPS, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. NeurIPS,
  2022.
Zhenyu Wu, Ziwei Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Jiwen Lu, and Haibin Yan. Embodied task planning with
  large language models. arXiv:2307.01848, 2023.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
Wei Yang, Xiaolong Wang, Ali Farhadi, Abhinav Gupta, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Visual semantic
 navigation using scene priors. arXiv:1810.06543, 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
Bangguo Yu, Hamidreza Kasaei, and Ming Cao. L3mvn: Leveraging large language models for
  visual target navigation. arXiv:2304.05501, 2023.
Yichi Zhang and Joyce Chai. Hierarchical task learning from language instructions with unified
  transformers and self-monitoring. In Findings of ACL-IJCNLP, 2021.
Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, and Qi Wu. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language navi-
  gation with large language models. arXiv:2305.16986, 2023a.
Kaiwen Zhou, Kaizhi Zheng, Connor Pryor, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin, Lise Getoor, and Xin Eric
  Wang. Esc: Exploration with soft commonsense constraints for zero-shot object navigation.
  arXiv:2301.13166, 2023b.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin
  Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for
  open-world enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory.
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.
Yuke Zhu, Daniel Gordon, Eric Kolve, Dieter Fox, Li Fei-Fei, Abhinav Gupta, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
  and Ali Farhadi. Visual semantic planning using deep successor representations. In ICCV, 2017.


A    D ETAILS OF THE ALFRED B ENCHMARK
In this section, we first provide a concise overview of the input and output space within the ALFRED
benchmark, and then analyze the hard valid unseen split we extracted from the valid unseen split.
Input and Ouput Space. In a typical ALFRED task, the agent is spawned into a 3D indoor floor
plan with a first-person view. To specify a task, the agent receives a high-level goal statement
that describes the task’s objective and step-by-step instruction that provides detailed explanations.
Accompanying these, the agent receives a 300 × 300 egocentric RGB frame and outputs actions
for each time step. Note that during the test phase, other information such as groundtruth depth
images and instance segmentation images is not provided to the agent. The action space of the agent
consists of 5 navigation actions, 7 interaction actions, and a S TOP action. The navigation actions
are M OVE A HEAD, ROTATE L EFT, ROTATE R IGHT, L OOK U P, and L OOK D OWN. The interaction
actions are P ICKUP O BJECT, P UT O BJECT, O PEN O BJECT, C LOSE O BJECT, T OGGLE O BJECT O N,
T OGGLE O BJECT O FF, and S LICE O BJECT. If an interaction action is outputted, the agent is required
to predict an additional binary object mask for the current RGB frame, so that the agent can interact
with the object of the highest IoU score. When the agent takes the S TOP action, the simulator will
check whether all objects are correctly positioned based on a predefined PDDL domain. The trial
will fail if the agent exceeds the 1000-step limit or makes more than 10 errors while attempting to
achieve the goal.
Hard Valid Unseen Split. As outlined in the main paper, we have created a specific subset named
hard valid unseen split from the valid unseen split in ALFRED. The hard valid unseen split only
includes cases where all target objects are confined within closed containers, to assess the agent’s
capability to recover missing interactions. These types of cases make up 8.6% in the valid unseen
split, 4.8% in the valid seen split, and 5.52% in the train split, indicating the importance for the agent
to handle such situations. Consequently, the hard valid unseen split contains 74 trials extracted from
the valid unseen split, involving five task types of ‘Examine’, ‘Pick & Place’, ‘Stack & Place’,
‘Clean & Place’ and ‘Heat & Place’. The hard valid unseen split is capable of evaluating the agent’s
ability to recover missing interactions comprehensively.

B    D ETAILS OF THE P ROMPTER + BASELINE
In the main paper, we have constructed a strong baseline termed Prompter+, and we provide addi-
tional implementation details of Prompter+ in this section. Prompter+ is built upon the Prompter
codebase, which combines environment-aware memory Kim et al. (2023) and a re-trained object


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


detector Wang et al. (2023a) with the vanilla Prompter. We utilize the InternImage-XL backbone
pretrained on the COCO dataset Lin et al. (2014) with Cascade Mask R-CNN head implemented
Wang et al. (2023a) on MMDetection Chen et al. (2019). To collect the dataset for finetuning, we
replay the expert trajectories in the ALFRED train split, and record the egocentric image and the
groundtruth instance mask at each step. Following Shridhar et al. (2021), we also balance the train-
ing samples from each room type in the ALFRED benchmark. For finetuning, we use AdamW
optimizer Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and weight decay
of 5 × 10−2 . Please refer to Wang et al. (2023a) for more training details. The whole finetuning
process takes one day on 4 NVIDIA 3090 GPUs, where the batch size on each GPU is set to 4.

C     F ULL P ROMPT OF THE I NSTRUCTION C OMPLETER
In this section, we present the full system prompt for the instruction completer in our ThinkBot for
reproducibility.

C.1    C OMPONENTS IN THE P ROMPT

The system prompt template for our instruction completer consists of the following components:

      (1) The role explanation with the emotion prompt Li et al. (2023a);
      (2) Definition of the task description:
             • High-level goal statement: A string describes the goal of this task;
             • Low-level step-by-step instruction: A list contains the whole incoherent human in-
               struction;
             • Possible landmarks in this room type: A list contains all possible landmarks in the
               current room to avoid object hallucination;
             • Task Completion: The current task completion progress we provide for the agent to
               locate the corresponding instruction sentences.
      (3) Definition of the agent’s current state:
             • Global observed landmarks: A dictionary of observed landmarks and their positions,
               where the uncertainty of estimated object is also given for re-planning;
             • Last message: A string contains the failure feedback from the last run, which enables
               close-loop planning.
      (4) Primitive actions: All interaction actions and the related arguments we introduce in Ap-
          pendix A along with a ‘GotoLocation’ subgoal for navigation.
      (5) Requirements on the response format, where we impose chain-of-thought prompting Wei
          et al. (2022): We request the large language model to first reason on the current subtask
          then give a detailed action list. The last predicted subgoal should always be the same as the
          current subgoal for coherent instruction recovery.

C.2    F ULL P ROMPT

The complete system prompt template is shown in Listing 1, and the response format is shown in
Listing 2.
Listing 1: Full system prompt for the instruction completer in our ThinkBot. The response format
is shown in another listing.
You are a helpful household assistant in a game called ALFRED with high
    intelligence. Given human instructions, total subgoals, current
    subgoals, etc., you need to accomplish the current subgoal by giving
    a detailed action list. This is very important to my career.

At each run, you need:
step1. First recognize which target object you need, and determine the
    target location by following the corresponding step-by-step
    instruction sentence or by common sense.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


step2. Give a detailed action list to accomplish the current subgoal, the
     last action should always be the same as the current subgoal.

1. The input contains:
Task description:
- high-level goal statement: describe the goal of this household task.
- low-level step-by-step instructions: describe the step-by-step
    instructions of this household task. The current subgoal is only
    corresponding to one or two sentences in this list, so you do not
    need to use all instructions, just focus on completing the current
    subgoal.
- possible landmarks in this room type: you should only use landmarks in
    this list.
- total subgoals: a list of <subgoal name, arguments>, memorizing all
    subgoals you need to complete.
- completed subgoals: a list of <subgoal name, arguments>, memorizing
    subgoals you have completed.
- current subgoal: <subgoal name, arguments>, the subgoal you are
    currently working on.

My current state:
- observed landmarks: a dict of key <object name> and value (<location>,
    <uncertainty>).
- last message: a string, the message from the last run, success message
    is an empty string.

2. You can ONLY use the following functions. Don’t make plans purely
    based on your experience, think about how to use these actions.

GotoLocation(object)
Go to a landmark object.
Augment:
- object: a string, the landmark to go to.

OpenObject(object)
Open an openable object.
Augment:
- object: a string, the receptacle to open. please note that only [’
    Fridge’, ’Cabinet’, ’Microwave’, ’Drawer’, ’Safe’, ’Box’] are
    openable.

CloseObject(object)
Close an openable object
Augment:
- object: a string, the receptacle to close.

PickupObject(object)
Pick up an object. If the object is inside a closed receptacle, please
    open the receptacle first.
Augment:
- object: a string, the object to pick.

PutObject(object, receptacle)
Put down the holding object to a receptacle.
Augments:
- object: a string, the object to put.
- receptacle: a string, the receptacle to place the object.

SliceObject(object)
Slice a sliceable object with the held knife.
Augments:
- object: a string, the object to slice.

3. Your response should follow the format:
{response_format}


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ensure that your response can be parsed by Python json.loads

Examples:
...



                     Listing 2: The response format of the instruction completer.
{
"thought": "Your thoughts in natural language",
"action_list": [
{"name": "action name", "args": "action arg(s)", "expectation": "describe
     the expected results of this action shortly"},
{"name": "action name", "args": "action arg(s)", "expectation": "describe
     the expected results of this action shortly"}
]
}


Table 5: Comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods in success rate on the valid unseen split
break down by task type.
        Method                 Examine        Pick & Place      Stack & Place       Clean & Place
        Seq2seq                   0                0                  0                  0
        MOCA                     4.6              6.0                6.4                10.6
        HLSM                     36.6             34.8              4.4                 11.3
        FILM                     29.7             16.0              2.0                 33.6
        Prompter+                80.9             46.0              32.1                71.7
        ThinkBot (Ours)          79.2             50.0              40.4                77.9
                             Cool & Place     Heat & Place     Pick 2 & Place         Average
        Seq2seq                   0                0                  0                 0.00
        MOCA                     2.8              5.1                1.2                3.78
        HLSM                     14.8              0.0              18.0                18.3
        FILM                     14.0             23.0              11.8               20.10
        Prompter+                82.6             78.7              37.0               64.43
        ThinkBot (Ours)          88.1             86.0              33.3               67.72


D     A DDITIONAL Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS

D.1   P ERFORMANCE BY TASK T YPE

We compare the proposed ThinkBot with the state-of-the-art methods on the ALFRED benchmark
by task types. The counterparts include end-to-end method Seq2seq Shridhar et al. (2020), MOCA
Singh et al. (2021) and modular methods (HLSM Blukis et al. (2022b), FILM Min et al. (2022),
Prompter+). The compared results are taken from their original papers Shridhar et al. (2020); Singh
et al. (2021); Blukis et al. (2022b); Min et al. (2022). From Table 5, we can observe that our
ThinkBot outperforms on almost all task types. For instance, ThinkBot surpasses the state-of-the-
art method Prompter+ on five out of seven task types by sizable margins. Especially, ThinkBot
succeeds in 40.4% of ‘Stack & Place’ tasks, which is an absolute improvement of 8.3% compared to
the state-of-the-art method Prompter+. While Prompter+ suffers from the sparse human instruction
that usually causes execution failure, our ThinkBot reasons the thought chain in the sparse human
instruction to recover the missing action descriptions, and successfully complete different tasks. In
‘Examine’ tasks, the agent is instructed to pick up the target object and toggle on a lamp that is
initially off. Since our main focus is not on detecting the status of floor lamps, we adopt a trial-
and-error approach by toggling all lamps in the current room following Min et al. (2022); Inoue &
Ohashi (2022). This random selection approach introduces variability in the success rate of these
tasks. In ‘Pick 2 & Place’ tasks, the agent is directed to take two instances within the same category
and relocate them to a specified location. During the repeated subgoal completion, our language
model-based instruction completer may be prone to the hallucination issue, which remains a focus
for future improvements.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Task:        Put a box with a key chain in it on an armchair.                Task:        Wash the cloth from the cabinet, put it back.
Instruction: Walk to the safe. Take out the key chain from the safe.         Instruction: Walk to the vanity. Open the right cabinet, take the green cloth.


       Pickup Key                Pickup Key                Pickup Key                 Pickup Cloth            Pickup Cloth              Pickup Cloth

                                                                                                                              


       Go to Safe                Open Safe                 Pickup Key                Go to Cabinet            Open Cabinet              Pickup Cloth



Figure 8: Visualization of the agent action sequences acquired by Prompter+ (top) and our ThinkBot
(bottom), where our method can recover the missing actions with interacted instances ‘Open Safe’
and ‘Open Cabinet’ to successfully achieve the goal.


D.2      I NFERENCE T IME A NALYSIS

In Table 6, we analyze the time consumption of each component in the whole system. We benchmark
the time consumption in a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. In line with Min et al. (2022), we query
the LLM after every 25 steps or subgoal completion to ensure consistency. Hence, the delay of LLM
reasoning only affects steps that require important subgoal decisions (slow thinking), while most
steps just involve path planning to achieve the subgoal (fast thinking), resulting in an acceptable
average time per step. In summary, the whole system executes at 1.37Hz on average.


                                       Table 6: Inference time of different components.
      Module                     Segmentation        Depth        Mapping        Path Planning       Object Localizer      Instruction Completer
      Avg. Time per Step            0.20             0.0076        0.021              0.18                0.013                     0.31


D.3      R EAL - WORLD A PPLICATIONS

The mobile agent consists of a Realman manipulator, a HEXMAN ECHO-Plus mobile base,
and a Realsense RGB-D camera for observation. We test sparse human instructions like ‘Ex-
amine the red block on the table in front of you’ to complete one mobile pick & place task.
These tasks validate instruction recovery in
partially observed scenes via active percep-
tion. The primitive skills include: goto(base
position), move(arm position) and grip-
per(openness). An example trajectory is shown
in Figure 9, where ThinkBot is able to explore
the scene, avoid the obstacle, and complete the Figure 9: Visualization of the ThinkBot agent per-
mobile manipulation task successfully.          forming a mobile pick & place task.

D.4      I MPACT OF D IFFERENT LLM S

The proposed method is complementary to the                                                              internal reasoning abilities
of LLMs, which unlocks their spatial reasoning ability by in-                                           Table 7: Impact of base LLMs.
corporating the uncertainty predicted by the Bayesian object                                                  Base LLM             Success Rate
localizer as a feedback signal for closed-loop planning. To
                                                                                                              Llama 3.2 3B             66.87
mitigate the dependence on the high-capacity base LLM, we                                                     GPT-3.5-Turbo            67.72
implement the instruction completer with a relatively small-


                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


size and open-sourced LLM Llama 3.2 3B in valid unseen. The results on ALFERD’s valid unseen
split are shown in Table 7, where the consistent improvements across different LLMs verify the
robustness of ThinkBot.

E     A DDITIONAL Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS
E.1   ACTION S EQUENCE V ISUALIZATION

We present two more qualitative examples of the generated action sequences from Prompter+ and
our ThinkBot in Figure 8. In the left case, the agent is instructed to ‘Walk to the safe. Take out the
key chain from the safe’. The results show that the previous agent struggles to complete the task
due to the missing ‘Open’ action and interacted object ‘Safe’. On the contrary, our ThinkBot first
reasons the thought chain of human instruction, and then recovers the missing ‘Open’ action and
interacted object ‘Safe’ from the instruction, thus successfully completing the task. In the right case,
our ThinkBot not only recovers the missing ‘Open’ action and interacted object ‘Cabinet’, but also
interacts with the right cabinet instance that contains the green cloth. The case studies demonstrate
the effectiveness of ThinkBot in recovering the missing actions and interacted objects from sparse
human instruction.

E.2   A V IDEO FOR C OMPLETE T RIAL V ISUALIZATION

We provide an additional comprehensive trial visualization in the attached video file (demo.avi)
selected from the valid unseen split. In the video, the agent is instructed to ‘Put a mug with a spoon
inside of it on the counter.’ However, the mug is stored in the fridge. Our ThinkBot can recover the
missing ‘Go to Fridge’ and ‘Open Fridge’ subgoal and locate the interacted objects precisely, thus
completing the task effectively and efficiently.


                                                  19
