Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T HE B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER
 Edward S. Hu1,2 Kwangjun Ahn1 Qinghua Liu1 Haoran Xu1,3 Manan Tomar1,4
 Ada Langford1 Dinesh Jayaraman2 Alex Lamb1 John Langford1
 1
   Microsoft Research 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 UT Austin 4 University of Alberta



                                            A BSTRACT

         We introduce the “Belief State Transformer”, a next-token predictor that takes both
         a prefix and suffix as inputs, with a novel objective of predicting both the next token
         for the prefix and the previous token for the suffix. The Belief State Transformer
         effectively learns to solve challenging problems that conventional forward-only
         transformers struggle with, in a domain-independent fashion. Key to this success is
         learning a compact belief state that captures all relevant information necessary for
         accurate predictions. Empirical ablations show that each component of the model is
         essential in difficult scenarios where standard Transformers fall short. For the task
         of story writing with known prefixes and suffixes, our approach outperforms the
         Fill-in-the-Middle method for reaching known goals and demonstrates improved
         performance even when the goals are unknown. Altogether, the Belief State
         Transformer enables more efficient goal-conditioned decoding, better test-time
         inference, and high-quality text representations on small scale problems. Website:
         https://edwhu.github.io/bst-website


1    I NTRODUCTION

Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have created a revolution in language modeling (Achiam
et al., 2023) with the capability to generate language with many emergent properties at large scale.
Examining these models for flaws in the pursuit of further progress, it’s notable that they struggle
with planning-heavy problems (Bubeck et al., 2023; Momennejad et al., 2024). How can we modify
the architecture, objectives, and algorithms to create a model more capable of reaching goals?
To make progress, we propose the new Belief State Transformer (BST) architecture and objective
in Section 2. Informally, a belief state is a sufficient amount of information from the past to predict
the outcomes of all experiments in the future, which can be expressed as either a distribution over
underlying world states or a distribution over future outcomes. The Belief State Transformer is
similar to a standard decoder-only Transformer (e.g., GPT2), except that it has encodings that run
both forward and backward. Both of these encodings are fed into output heads which predict not only
the next token after the prefix but also the previous token before the suffix as shown in Figure 1.
In Section 3 we then study in depth how the Belief State Transformer performs on a known-hard
problem, the star graph (Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024) which is an elegantly simple sequential
prediction problem known to confound next token prediction approaches. It’s easy to show that
transformers can represent star graph solutions using known results (e.g., (Sanford et al., 2024;
Frydenlund, 2024)), so the problem here is one of optimization. In particular, we discover that parity
problems can be embedded within star graph problems, with parity known as difficult for gradient-
based optimizers. Surprisingly, despite throwing away the backward encoder for inference, the BST
solves even relatively difficult instances of star graphs with experiments detailed in Section 3.4.
Analyzing this discovery, the BST benefits from extra gradients, enabling avoidance of the parity-by-
gradient problem systematically. We also show that data augmentation approaches and ablations of
the BST cannot solve the star graph problem systematically.
Building on this discovery, Section 4 proves this is a general phenomenon: ideal Belief State
Transformers recover the full belief state in a compact representation for the output head. In contrast,
a forward-only transformer and even modifications which predict every future token do not. This
result implies that the Belief State Transformer learns maximal information from a sequence—there
is no other objective/representation which pulls more relevant information into a compact belief state.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               A     B          D             Output              W           Y    Z
                                               Head
                   Forward                                            Backward
                   Encoder                    E     V                  Encoder


Figure 1: The Belief State Transformer has two encoders, one running forward and one backward
with an output head for the next forward token and another for the previous backward token.


The Belief State Transformer creates new allowances which we further explore in Section 5. In
particular, it’s easy to specify a goal token (or tokens) explicitly to generate a goal-conditioned
sequence. We compare this to the fill-in-the-middle approach (Bavarian et al., 2022), finding that
the Belief State Transformer succeeds more effectively on the Tinystories dataset. The Belief State
approach also enables inference planning because rollouts can occur with the Next head and a
semi-independent evaluation of rollout quality can be enabled with the Prev head. Going further,
we can use the Belief State Transformer as an embedder, with the relevant embeddings significantly
superior to other transformer-based approaches.
Altogether, we show that the Belief State Transformer extracts more information (in theory and in
practice) from a set of sequences, enabling Transformer models to perform well in new regimes.
Performance at larger scale is of course an important question for further consideration.

2     T HE B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER

This section introduces the Belief State Transformer. We start by introducing the architecture and the
training objective then discuss how to utilize the model for inference.

2.1    A RCHITECTURE AND O BJECTIVE

Let x1:T be shorthand for the sequence x1 , ..., xT . First, we set up the following networks:
      Forward encoder      F(x1:t )                                   ▷ Encodes prefix
      Backward encoder     B(xt+k:T )                                 ▷ Encodes suffix
                                                                                                    (1)
      Next decoder         x̂t+1 ∼ Tn (· | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k:T ))      ▷ Predicts next token
      Prev decoder         x̂′t+k−1 ∼ Tp (· | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k:T ))   ▷ Predicts previous token
The forward encoder aggregates the prefix into a latent F(x1:t ), and the backward encoder aggregates
the suffix into a latent B(xt+k:T ). We use GPT2-style encoders throughout our experiments, including
baselines. The output heads Tn and Tp then predict their respective tokens. In our experiments, the
parameters of Tn and Tp are tied with only the last layer differing. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
The Belief State Transformer objective is the straightforward sum of the objectives of forward and
backward Transformers conditioned on the prefix and suffix.

                                    1                                       1
  Et,x1:t ,k≤T −t log                                  + log                                     (2)
                      Tn (xt+1 | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k:T ))       Tp (xt+k−1 | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k:T )
An obvious alternative (called “Fill in the Middle" (Bavarian et al., 2022)) when both a prefix and
suffix are available is simply putting them together and then using a forward encoder. Information-
theoretically, Fill in the Middle works, but we’ll see that the Belief State Transformer has several
advantages: it causes the system to coalesce a compact belief state which has many benefits explored
here. This approach also extracts O(T 2 ) gradients from sequences enabling a gradient based optimizer
to solve new problems as discussed in the next section. See Appendix E for code and scaling rules.
Training on all prefix-suffix pairs is surprisingly efficient. First, we cache all forward f0:T = {∀i ∈
[0 : T ] : F(x1:i )} and backwards b1:T +1 = {∀i ∈ [1, T + 1] : B(xi:T )} latents. Then the loss


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Equation (2) is computed over training examples (fi , bj ) and their labels (xi+1 , xj−1 ) for valid i, j
with j − i > 1. We first compute the gradients of the output decoder, and then add them up to compute
the gradients of the encoders. Since there are O(n) gradients over the output head per position of the
forward or backward encoders this optimization saves a large amount of memory and compute.

2.2     B ELIEF S TATE I NFERENCE

During inference time, the forward model Tn (F(x1:t ), B(∅)) is given a prefix x1:t and an empty
suffix ∅. Autoregressive sampling (ARS) is always used, where we sample the next token x̂ from the
next token decoder, add it to the prefix, and repeat. Note that since B(∅) can be precomputed, this
approach requires no more parameters at inference time than a standard forward-only Transformer.
Later in Section 5, we study more complex inference approaches.

3     T ESTING P LANNING A BILITIES WITH S TAR G RAPHS


    Figure 2: The Belief State Transformer outperforms baselines in all star graph navigation tasks.

Bachmann & Nagarajan (2024) propose the star graph problem as an elegantly simple yet challenging
task for forward Transformers to solve. In Figure 2, we reproduce their results while adding a
data augmentation baseline and the new Belief State Transformer results. Notably, the Belief State
Transformer performs exceptionally well without relying on domain-specific adaptations. In the
following sections, we explain the star graph problem, present a new theory to account for these
results, provide a detailed discussion of our experiments, and ablate key design choices.

3.1     T HE S TAR G RAPH P ROBLEM

A star graph (depicted in Figure 3) G(d, l) is a graph with d
paths of length l emanating out from the start node. To construct
a graph, nodes ni are sampled uniformly from {1, . . . , N }. A
training example is formatted as a sequence containing the edge
list E, the start and end nodes, and a path of length l from start
to end: [E | n1 , nl | n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . nl ]. Despite its simplicity,
modern next token prediction models fail to solve it.
This task captures a core challenge found in practical planning
tasks like story writing, where creating a coherent narrative
requires the author to keep the story’s resolution and backstory
in mind while progressing through each plot point.               Figure 3: Illustration of the star
                                                                 graph problem from Bachmann &
                                                                 Nagarajan (2024).
3.2 W HY DO FORWARD - ONLY APPROACHES FAIL ?

As shown by (Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024, Appendix F.2) through extensive experiments, next-
token predictors quickly learn a “flawed cheat” strategy: soon after training begins, forward-only
transformers learn to arbitrarily select a neighbor of the current node since, aside from the start node,


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each node has only one outgoing edge. This flawed strategy leads the model to choose a neighbor of
the start node without accounting for the designated goal during inference, limiting the test accuracy
to 1/d, where d is the number of neighbors of the start node. The key issue with this flawed cheat is
that once the model learns it, finding the correct solution becomes exceedingly difficult. To better
understand this challenge, we provide formal evidence of its difficulty for gradient optimization.
Theorem 1 (Informal). Once the “flawed cheat” strategy is perfected, learning the correct path is at
least as difficult as learning full parity functions.

A full proof is provided in Appendix B. The full parity problem is a notoriously hard problem
for gradient-based optimizers (e.g., Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017; Abbe & Sandon, 2023). In fact,
it is conjectured that learning the full parity function requires exponentially many samples and
computations in the input dimension (e.g., Abbe & Boix-Adsera, 2022).
The analysis in this section indicates that once the flawed cheat is perfected, the limited supervision
available for the task leads to significant intractability.

3.3   H OW DOES THE B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER S UCCEED ?

The Belief State Transformer is trained to predict the previous token for every suffix, which prevents
the problem from collapsing into the parity problem described in Theorem 1. At a high level, for our
approach to reduce to the parity problem, a large number of gradients must approach zero. However,
the Belief State Transformer ensures that the information necessary to construct path suffixes (e.g.,
n2:l ) is present in the input to the output head. From this information, predicting n2 is straightforward,
allowing the model to solve the problem effectively.
This is an instance of a more general phenomenon: the Belief State Transformer naturally converges
toward extracting a compact, complete belief state as discussed further in Section 4.1.

3.4   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON S TAR G RAPH

Here, we provide details on the Stargraph results in Figure 2. We run experiments on three types of
graphs: G(2, 5), G(5, 5), G(2, 20). In each experiment, we choose one graph topology and generate
many example graph sequences, with all methods receiving the same amount of data and every
baseline receiving at least as much computation as the Belief State Transformer uses. For evaluation,
the models are conditioned on the edge list, start, goal, and current path, with the task of next node
prediction: p(ni | E, n1 , nl , n1:i−1 ). We report the path accuracy, which is the percentage of correct
path generations during the test time, over 10,000 evaluation graphs.

Empty suffix at inference. The Belief State Transformer trains an additional encoder B for suffixes.
However, as discussed in Section 2.2, we remove the dependency on B during inference time by
pre-computing the backward latent b∅ = B(∅) with the end token and proceed with auto-regressive
sampling of the Next decoder Tn (· | F(E, n1 , nT , n1 , . . . ni ), b∅ ). The model is still able to produce
goal-conditioned behavior since the goal node nT is present in the prefix input to the forward encoder.

Baselines. We select baselines that can be applied to a broad class of problems.
• Forward-only next-token prediction: This baseline follows the conventional strategy of training
  a Transformer with the next token prediction objective and teacher forcing, i.e., the model is trained
  by feeding the correct previous token as input.
• Data augmentation: A common strategy to improve performance is to employ some form of data
  augmentation, although this requires some domain expertise to perform (Lee et al., 2024). This
  baseline augments the training data by replacing the goal with subgoals to potentially improve the
  learning of goal-conditioned behaviors. Specifically, the goal node, usually the terminal node in the
  path, is replaced with an intermediate node in the path. Then, a Transformer is trained with the
  next-token objective on this augmented dataset.
• Fill-in-the-middle: The FIM approach (Bavarian et al., 2022) moves a span of text from the
  middle to the end, and then trains the transformer with next token prediction. This can be seen as a
  generalization of the data augmentation approach, where subsequences of intermediate nodes are
  used in lieu of a single intermediate node.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• Multi-token Prediction: The multi-token approach refers to a Transformer trained to predict the
              QT
  entire path i=1 p(ni | E, n1 , nT ) in one forward pass without providing access to tokens from a
  partial path (hence the name “Teacherless" in Bachmann & Nagarajan (2024)).
Our code and baselines adopt the GPT2 Transformer architecture, using standard hyperparameter
settings for number of layers, embedding dimension, etc. All models are trained on the same dataset
with the same training budget. See Appendix C for additional training information and model setup.

3.5   R ESULTS

As seen in Figure 2, the Belief State Transformer successfully learns to solve all the graphs. Since
the Belief State Transformer uses an empty suffix, the parameter counts at inference time are very
similar with minor variations driven by variations in output heads.
The baselines have varying degrees of success. The forward only baseline achieves at most a 1/d
success rate, as it learns to output valid paths at random during inference time. Similarly, the
data augmentation and FIM baselines perform poorly. We suspect that despite access to additional
information like intermediate sub-goals or paths, the gradients which the model is exposed to are still
inadequate to encourage the development of appropriate representations due to the easy availability
of shortcut solutions.
The multi-token baseline, while successful in some smaller graphs like G(2, 5), fails to solve more
complicated graphs with more arms (G(5, 5)) or with longer path lengths (G(2, 20)), reproducing
prior results of Bachmann & Nagarajan (2024).

3.6   B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER VARIANTS

Next, we ablate the Belief State Transformer to characterize its performance. The Belief w/o Prev
ablation removes the previous token decoder and its objective from the training. The Belief w/o
Backward ablation removes the backward encoder B from the training and inference process.


Figure 4: Ablations of the Belief State Transformer on the star graph. Both the belief state objective
and the backward encoder are crucial.

The results in Figure 4 show that both the belief state objective and backward encoder are important
components of the Belief State Transformer, and removing either drops performance back down to
randomly guessing amongst valid paths. Prediction of the Prev token forces the Transformer to learn
to represent long term dependencies which ends up being useful for goal-conditioned navigation.

4     B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER A NALYSIS
In this section, we show that the Belief State Transformer discovers a compact belief state, and that
the forward-only and multi-token approaches do not1 . First, we formally define a belief state.
    1
      The fact that the forward-only approach does not produce a compact belief state is well known. We formalize
it here to contrast with the Belief State Transformer.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 1 (Belief State). For any probability distribution over a set of sequences P (x1:T ), for
any partial sequence s = x1:t , a vector vs is a belief state for s if there exists a randomized function
g(vs ) which can sample from the conditional distribution P(xt+1:T |x1:t ).

By definition, a belief state captures all available information relevant for predicting the future tokens.
Once the belief state is learned, there is no additional useful information to be gained—everything
necessary for future predictions is already encoded within it.

4.1   B ELIEF S TATE D ISCOVERY

We first show that successfully optimizing a Belief State Transformer results in a compact belief state.
Theorem 2. Let D = P (x1:T ) represent any given probability distribution over a set of sequences.
Consider an ideal Belief State Transformer that satisfies the following conditions for all prefixes x1:t
and suffixes xt+k+1:T :
                    Tn (xt+1 | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k+1:T )) = P(xt+1 | x1:t , xt+k+1:T ),                   (3)
                    Tp (xt+k | F(x1:t ), B(xt+k+1:T )) = P(xt+k | x1:t , xt+k+1:T ).                   (4)
Then, for any partial sequence x1:t supported by D, the forward encoding of the ideal Belief State
Transformer, F(x1:t ), is a belief state for x1:t .

Proof. Let st = x1:t denote the prefix. To prove that ft := F(st ) is a belief state for st , we must
show that, given ft , one can sample from the conditional distribution P(xt+1:T | st ).
The key observation is that the conditional distribution can be decomposed as follows:
           P(xt+1:T | st ) = P(xT | st )P(xT −1 | st , xT ) · · · P(xt+1 | st , xt+2:T ).
For an ideal Belief State Transformer, this decomposition can be rewritten as:

              = Tp xT | ft , B(∅) · Tp xT −1 | ft , B(xT ) · · · Tp xt+1 | ft , B(xt+2:T ) ,
Thus, using the forward encoding ft , one can generate the remaining sequence xt+1:T by sampling
in reverse order—first sampling xT , then xT −1 conditioned on xT , and so on, until xt+1 . Each step
involves using the Prev decoder and updating the backward encoder with the newly generated token.
Since the forward encoding ft enables sampling from the conditional distribution P(xt+1:T | st ) in
this way, it follows that ft is a belief state for st .

4.2   N EXT- TOKEN OR M ULTI - TOKEN P REDICTION D OES N OT G UARANTEE B ELIEF S TATES

Theorem 2 establishes that an ideal Belief State Transformer learns correct belief states. In contrast,
the following two theorems demonstrate a fundamental limitation of standard next-token predictors
and their variants when viewed from the belief state perspective.
Theorem 3. Consider a standard next-token predictor with a forward encoder F and output head T
such that
                                      T(F(x1:t )) = P(xt+1 | x1:t ).                                   (5)
There exists a distribution P (x1:t ) over sequences and a next-token predictor of the form Equation (5)
such that the input to the output head is not a belief state.

The proof is provided in Section B.2. Next, we analyze the case of multi-token training (see
Section 3.4), where the model is asked to predict multiple future tokens at once.
Theorem 4. Consider the multi-token setting where, for predicting H tokens into the future, the
model is of the form
                         Tj (F(x1:t )) = P(xt+j | x1:t ) for j = 1, 2, . . . , H.                      (6)
There exists a distribution D = P (x1:t ) over sequences and a multi-token model satisfying Equa-
tion (6) such that the input to the output head is not a belief state.

The proof is provided in Section B.3. In summary, the analysis in this section highlights the inherent
limitations of next-token predictors: the input to the output head fails to capture the belief state.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5     E XPERIMENTING WITH THE B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER

Given a model jointly trained on prefixes and suffixes, the representation is useful in new ways which
are not available to simple forward Transformers. Here we detail two different forms of search based
on forward and backward probabilities (respectively) as well as belief state embedding extractions.

Setup. We use TinyStories (Eldan & Li, 2023), a dataset consisting of synthetic short stories.
TinyStories aims to represent key challenges in text generation while keeping training tractable for
small to medium scale models. We tokenize the dataset into a vocabulary space of size 1000, and
discard stories greater than 256 tokens long resulting in a dataset consisting of 2.7 million stories.
During evaluation, the models generate text using prefix-suffix snippets from an evaluation set of 100
unseen stories. Given stories from two competing models, GPT4 is then asked to output an analysis of
each story examining multiple factors (e.g. grammar, flow, cohesiveness, creativity) before outputting
a final recommendation. We follow best practices in evaluating with multiple trials and shuffling
choice order. We report the winrate and confidence interval (CI) for each model. See Appendix D.2
for more details and examples of the GPT4 judge outputs and scoring.

5.1   G OAL - CONDITIONED T EXT G ENERATION

In the goal-conditioned setting, the user provides the model with a prefix and suffix, and the model
infills the text in between. See below for an example of the prefix and suffix. We describe a goal-
conditioned planning procedure with the Belief State Transformer for text generation in Algorithm 1.
Method. The algorithm performs n roll-outs. Algorithm 1 Goal-conditioned Planning
In each roll-out (starting at line 3), a candi-
                                                Require: prompt x1:t , goal xt+k:T , horizon k, rollouts n
date trajectory is generated that differs from
the greedy trajectory but maintains high prob- 1: Priority Queue Q ← (1, x1:t )
ability. The key features of the process are as 2: Candidates C ← ∅
follows:                                           Roll-outs start here
                                                    3: for j = 1, . . . , n do
1. Greedy generation: Starting with a se-           4:    (priority r, sequence s) ← pop(Q)
quence s popped from the priority queue Q, a        5:    while |s| < t + k − 1 do
candidate trajectory is extended up to a max-       6:       Greedy generation
imum length k using argmax greedy selection                  xmax ← arg maxx Tn (x | F(s), B(xt+k:T ))
(line 6). The completed trajectory is appended      7:       Priority queue update for future generation
to the set of candidates C (line 11).                        value Tmax = Tn (xmax | F(s), B(xt+k:T ))
                                                    8:       for x ̸= xmax do
2. Priority queue update for future generation:                              T (x | F(s),B(xt+k:T ))
                                                    9:          Q ← (r · n            Tmax
                                                                                                     , s + x)
Simultaneously, the priority queue Q is up-
                                                   10:       s ← s + xmax
dated to track alternative candidate sequences.    11:    Appending C with greedy generation
This is done by appending non-greedy tokens               C ← C ∪ {s + xt+k:T }
to the queue, with their priority set by the rela- 12: Scoring
tive suboptimality of each token. Specifically,        Output: arg maxx1:T ∈C of Equation (7)
lines 8 and 9 add alternative tokens with pri-
ority equal to the current sequence priority
multiplied by the ratio of the alternative token’s probability to that of the greedy token. Since this
ratio is ≤ 1, priorities decreases with suboptimality. Also, this ensures that partial sequences of
different lengths remain comparable, as suboptimality is independent of sequence length. This
encourages branching at ambiguous points.
3. Scoring: Once candidate trajectories are generated, they are scored by evaluating the consistency
of generated tokens xt+1:t+k−1 with the goal xt+k:T using the next-head probability:
                                  T
                                  Y
                                         Tn (xi | F(x1:i−1 ), B(xi+1:T ))                                   (7)
                                 i=t+k

We then return the highest-scoring trajectory based on Equation (7).
Baseline. We select the Fill-in-the-middle (FIM) (Bavarian et al., 2022) approach as a natural
goal-conditioned baseline. FIM trains a single forward-only transformer where the input is the


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


concatenated suffix and prefix, and the objective is next token prediction. Because the forward-only
approach is radically less efficient, we sample suffixes uniformly at random during training. During
inference, beam search (Graves, 2012) is performed to search for high-probability sequences.
For fair comparisons, we train the FIM and Belief State Transformer with a similar amount of
resources in terms of wall-clock and GPU usage, and set the architecture configuration so that the
number of parameters between models is similar (80M for Belief, 85M for FIM). During inference
time, we configure the search methods so that the computational budget is similar, i.e. setting the
number of beams and depth to the values we use in Algorithm 1. See Appendix D.1 for more details.
Results. As seen in Figure 5, GPT4 prefers the Belief State
transformer 64% of the time with a binomial confidence interval
of [54%, 74%]. Qualitatively, the stories of Belief State Trans-
former are superior to FIM in several ways. The Belief State
outputs more frequently display clear narrative structure, with a
beginning, middle, and end, while the FIM model tends to gen-
erate shorter stories with simpler structure and repetitions. The
FIM model also frequently failed to connect its completions
to the suffix, resulting in abrupt and grammatically incorrect
transitions. See below for an example.
                                                                                             Figure 5: Storytelling winrates.
         Prefix: Once upon a time, there was a king. He was a big and strong king who ruled over his kingdom. One day, he
         wanted to take a nice and long bath, so he filled the bathtub with warm water
         Belief: . He got in and started to wash. The king was very busy, but he was so busy that he didn’t notice the water was
         getting too hot. Suddenly, he felt a sharp pain in his foot. He looked down and saw it burning. He was very scared and
         he quickly put his foot in the water. The king was very worried. He
         FIM: and lots of bubbles. He stepped into the bathtub and started to play with the bubbles. Suddenly, the king
         noticed that one of the bubbles was getting bigger and bigger. He asked the king, "What’s happening?" The king
         replied, "The bubble is getting bigger and bigger. It’s getting
         Suffix: quickly grabbed a cloth and began to clean it up. The king got so hot from cleaning up the mess that he
         decided to take another soak in the bathtub. He put a lot of bubbles in the water to make it nice and bubbly. He relaxed
         again and felt all the worries wash away.


In this example, the Belief State Transformer’s story has a clear narrative structure with setup, conflict
and resolution. It is also able to correctly connect the prefix, generated text, and suffix. On the other
hand, the FIM model has repetitions (“bigger and bigger”), confusing dialogue where a previously
unmentioned person asks the king a question, and an abrupt and grammatically incorrect transition to
the suffix (“It’s getting quickly grabbed”). See Appendices D.2 and D.3 for more examples as well as
the grade reports and evaluation outputs of the GPT4 judge.

5.2   U NCONDITIONAL T EXT G ENERATION

Method. Next, we investigate the unconditional setting, or when the goal is unknown. We reuse the
logic in Algorithm 1 with two following changes: setting the goal to the empty input z∅′ := {∅}, and
scoring the sequences with the previous head Tp over a fixed amount of suffix tokens k. We choose
to use the previous head rather than the next head as a semi-independent evaluator of next-generated
tokens to reduce the bias associated with self-evaluation. By scoring over the last k tokens, this
selects for trajectories whose endings are more likely.


                                            T
                                            Y
                                                   Tp (xi | F(x1:i−1 ), B(xi+1:T ))                                                 (8)
                                         i=T −k



Results. As seen in Figure 6, the Belief State transformer
outperforms the FIM model. The Belief State Transformer
outputs consistently have correct grammar, whereas the
FIM models often abruptly end in the middle of sentences.
This grammatical flaw is consistently picked up by the
GPT4 judge, and results in the FIM’s lower winrate. See
below for an example.


                                                                    8                  Figure 6: Unconditioned winrates.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Prefix: You don’t have to be scared of the loud dog, I’ll protect you". The mole felt so safe with the little girl. She was
         very kind and the mole soon came to trust her. He was
         Belief: so gentle and kind. The little girl was so happy to have a new friend. She wanted to show the mole all her
         favorite things. She took him to the park and showed him all the different things she could see. The mole was so
         excited to see the different things. He ran around and played with the other kids. He even found a ball and a toy car.
         The little girl was so happy to see the mole having fun.
         FIM: always there to protect her. One day, the mole was walking through the woods when he heard a loud noise.
         He looked up and saw a big, scary dog. The dog was barking and growling at the mole. The mole was so scared that
         he ran away as fast as he could. The dog chased after the mole, but the mole was too fast. The dog was getting closer
         and clos
         Suffix: ∅


5.3   A BLATIONS

Finally, we conduct a few ablations to verify our design choices.
First, the Belief Beamsearch ablation uses beamsearch to gen-
erate the candidate set rather than the priority queue scheme
in Algorithm 1. Next, in the unconditioned setting, the Belief
Next Score ablation uses the next head Tn to score the suffix
instead of Tp .
Figure 7 shows the performance drops in both cases. The
Belief Beamsearch outputs is more prone to repetition than
Algorithm 1. Next, the Belief Next Score ablation frequently
outputs stories that end abruptly and incorrectly, similar to the
FIM baseline in the unconditional setting.

5.4   U NDERSTANDING B ELIEF S TATES                                                                    Figure 7: Ablations.

We investigated the representations learned by the Belief State Transformer to provide insight into
what the states capture and how they are learned. First, we verified that the representations are indeed
belief states, by training small MLP networks from the first hidden state on the G(2,5) Stargraph
to predict the future token on a specific timestep. We found that the Belief State Transformer has
the information to predict all future tokens, while the information contained within the state learned
using the Forward-Only objective is incomplete (Figure 8, top-left).
An analysis of how the probe accuracy improved over the course of training revealed a clear trend.
The belief state captures information about the tokens at the end of the sequence at the beginning of
training, while information about the earlier tokens is learned later (Figure 8, top-right).
The same probing technique can understand how well the Belief State successfully captures in-
formation about the graph description. We found that the Belief State Transformer captures more
information about the graph description than the Forward-Only model (Figure 8, bottom). Capturing
the graph description completely is sufficient but not necessary for learning the belief state, since all
the information in the graph description might not be used for predicting the future tokens.


6     OTHER RELATED WORK

Many previous works explore non-left-to-right approaches for sequence modelling. ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) were prominent approaches that trained language
representations with past and future information. Gu et al. (2019) model the generation order as
latent variables and performs beam search over the generation order itself to produce the final text.
This is beneficial because in general, the best ordering for decoding is task-dependent. On the
other hand, Welleck et al. (2019) explore generating text in a binary tree order, but their model
struggles to outperform traditional left-to-right autoregressive generation in tasks like language
modeling, machine translation, sentence completion, and word reordering. In Nguyen et al. (2024),
they propose training two separate transformers and implement several strategies to “meet in the
middle” during decoding. In contrast, our approach involves jointly training a transformer capable
of both forward and backward decoding, which has important implications for creating compact
belief states. A general study of the quality of backward prediction is done in Papadopoulos et al.
(2024) discovering that backward prediction is possible but generally slightly worse than forwards


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                             Future Token Prediction Accuracy
                                                            1.00
          Future Token Prediction Accuracy
    1.0                                                     0.75
                                                                                                              0 --> 1
    0.5                                                     0.50                                              0 --> 2
                                                            0.25                                              0 --> 3
    0.0 0 --> 1 0 --> 2 0 --> 3 0 --> 4                                                                       0 --> 4
                                                            0.00
     w/o context       Forward-Only          Belief State          0     5       10       15 20 25          30 35
                                                                                      Iterations (x 1000)
                                      Graph Description Prediction Accuracy
              1.0
              0.5
              0.0     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                      w/o context           Next-token          Belief State


Figure 8: Probing results on star graphs show that Belief State Transformer’s learned representation
captures more information about future tokens (top-left). Top right: this belief state develops earlier
in training for tokens which are further in the future. Bottom: besides future tokens, the inputted
graph descriptions are also captured in the embeddings.


prediction. Somewhat further afield, combined forward/backward decoding approaches with RNNs
have proved useful (Mou et al., 2015; Serdyuk et al., 2018; Mangal et al., 2019) and similarly for
neural machine translation (Liu et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018).
The concept of predicting multiple tokens has been explored in other works. Gloeckle et al. (2024);
Cai et al. (2024) aim to increase decoding speed by employing models that predict multiple tokens
rather than just the next token. DeepSeek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024) pretrains the LLM to predict the
next two tokens, and shows the objective is beneficial in the large scale setting. Such approaches
align with our theoretical insights that predicting multiple tokens fosters the creation of more robust
representations of future contexts.
Shai et al. (2024) show that transformers create a non-compact representation of belief states within
their residual stream. Compact belief states are accessible in state-space models (Hasani et al., 2020;
Gu & Dao, 2023), although this comes with different trade-offs compared to transformer-based
approaches. For example, the Mamba training process is known to fail on star graphs (Bachmann &
Nagarajan, 2024).

7    C ONCLUSION
The Belief State Transformer advances goal-conditioned next-token predictors, effectively addressing
the limitations of traditional forward-only transformers. The ability of our model to learn a compact
belief state provides a maximal solution: since the belief state contains all the information useful in
predicting the future, no more complex objective can elicit more information. Through experiments
with both star graphs and story writing tasks, we have demonstrated the necessity of each component
of our model, particularly in challenging scenarios where standard transformers struggle.
Looking ahead, while our results demonstrate the superior performance of the Belief State Transformer
in small scale story writing, exploring its application to other goal-conditioned tasks would be valuable.
Our current experiments serve as proof-of-concept. Further investigation into the scalability of our
approach to larger practical scenarios is essential.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the NSF CAREER 2239301, NSF 2331783, and DARPA TIAMAT
HR00112490421 grants. The authors would like to thank the MSR AI Frontiers team for fruitful
discussions and support, and the ICLR reviewers for their constructive feedback.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Enric Boix-Adsera. On the non-universality of deep learning: quantifying the
 cost of symmetry. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17188–17201, 2022.
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. Polynomial-time universality and limitations of deep learning.
 Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 76(11):3493–3549, 2023. doi: https://
 doi.org/10.1002/cpa.22121. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
 1002/cpa.22121.
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
  Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Gregor Bachmann and Vaishnavh Nagarajan. The pitfalls of next-token prediction. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Mohammad Bavarian, Heewoo Jun, Nikolas Tezak, John Schulman, Christine McLeavey, Jerry
 Tworek, and Mark Chen. Efficient training of language models to fill in the middle. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2207.14255, 2022.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri Dao.
  Medusa: Simple llm inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.10774, 2024.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Ronen Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. Tinystories: How small can language models be and still speak coherent
  english? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07759, 2023.
Arvid Frydenlund. The mystery of the pathological path-star task for language models. In Yaser
  Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 12493–12516, Miami, Florida, USA,
  November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.
  695. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.695/.
Fabian Gloeckle, Badr Youbi Idrissi, Baptiste Rozière, David Lopez-Paz, and Gabriel Synnaeve.
  Better & faster large language models via multi-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19737,
  2024.
Alex Graves. Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.3711,
  2012.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Jiatao Gu, Qi Liu, and Kyunghyun Cho. Insertion-based decoding with automatically inferred
   generation order. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:661–676, 2019.
Ramin Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus, and Radu Grosu. Liquid time-
  constant networks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04439.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nayoung Lee, Kartik Sreenivasan, Jason D. Lee, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
  Teaching arithmetic to small transformers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=dsUB4bst9S.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
  Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
Lemao Liu, Masao Utiyama, Andrew Finch, and Eiichiro Sumita. Agreement on target-bidirectional
  neural machine translation. In Kevin Knight, Ani Nenkova, and Owen Rambow (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 411–416, San Diego, California, June 2016.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N16-1046. URL https://
  aclanthology.org/N16-1046.
Sanidhya Mangal, Poorva Joshi, and Rahul Modak. Lstm vs. gru vs. bidirectional rnn for script
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04332, 2019.
Ida Momennejad, Hosein Hasanbeig, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Hiteshi Sharma, Nebojsa Jojic, Hamid
  Palangi, Robert Ness, and Jonathan Larson. Evaluating cognitive maps and planning in large
  language models with cogeval. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Lili Mou, Rui Yan, Ge Li, Lu Zhang, and Zhi Jin. Backbone language modeling for constrained
  natural language generation. CoRR, abs/1512.06612, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1512.06612.
Anh Nguyen, Nikos Karampatziakis, and Weizhu Chen. Meet in the middle: A new pre-training
  paradigm. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Vassilis Papadopoulos, Jérémie Wenger, and Clément Hongler. Arrows of time for large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17505, 2024.
ME Peters, M Neumann, M Iyyer, M Gardner, C Clark, K Lee, and L Zettlemoyer. Deep contextual-
 ized word representations. corr. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365, 2018.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Transformers, parallel computation, and logarith-
  mic depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09268, 2024.
Dmitriy Serdyuk, Nan Rosemary Ke, Alessandro Sordoni, Adam Trischler, Chris Pal, and Yoshua
 Bengio. Twin networks: Matching the future for sequence generation, 2018. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1708.06742.
Adam S. Shai, Sarah E. Marzen, Lucas Teixeira, Alexander Gietelink Oldenziel, and Paul M.
  Riechers. Transformers represent belief state geometry in their residual stream, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15943.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, and Shaked Shammah. Failures of gradient-based deep learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3067–3075. PMLR, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Sean Welleck, Kianté Brantley, Hal Daumé Iii, and Kyunghyun Cho. Non-monotonic sequential text
  generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6716–6726. PMLR, 2019.
Zhirui Zhang, Shuangzhi Wu, Shujie Liu, Mu Li, Ming Zhou, and Tong Xu. Regularizing neural
  machine translation by target-bidirectional agreement, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1808.04064.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     S TATEMENT O F C ONTRIBUTIONS
Edward Hu developed the BST, set up the code and infrastructure, proposed and ran the experiments.
Kwangjun Ahn developed the BST, assisted with the Stargraph experiments, and contributed to
theoretical analysis. Qinghua Liu contributed the parity proof and gave feedback to the project.
Haoran Xu assisted in debugging, ran baselines, and gave feedback. Manan Tomar contributed early
architecture code, ran the probe analysis, and gave feedback. Ada Langford contributed code for the
Stargraph experiment. Dinesh Jayaraman advised EH and gave feedback. Alex Lamb oversaw the
project, developed the BST, debugged models, proposed experiments, and ran the probe analysis. John
Langford oversaw the project, developed the BST, contributed to BST theory, proposed experiments,
and assisted with writing.

B     P ROOFS OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In this section, we provide a formal statement and a proof of Theorem 1.
As discussed in the main text, the starting point of our argument is the observation by (Bachmann
& Nagarajan, 2024, Appendix F.2) that the model quickly learns the aforementioned “flawed cheat”
solution, which prevents it from learning the true solution. Specifically, next-token predictors rapidly
adopt this flawed shortcut, but make little progress in correctly predicting the first vertex on the path.
Below, we provide formal evidence that learning the flawed cheat indeed hinders the model from
learning the true solution.
In essence, once the flawed cheat solution is perfected, the model receives supervision only from the
prediction of the first vertex after the starting node. This effectively reduces the star graph task to the
following simplified task:
Task 1. Given a stargraph and a goal node, predict the correct neighbor of the starting node.
The formal statement of Theorem 1 is that Task 1 is at least as difficult as learning the full parity
function (i.e., predicting whether the sum of the elements in a binary string is even or odd).
Theorem 5. For every full parity problem, there exists a stargraph such that solving Task 1 provides
a solution to the parity problem.
Notably, empirical evidence shows that gradient-based methods struggle to learn the full parity
function in standard training setups, especially in high dimensions (e.g., Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017;
Abbe & Sandon, 2023). It has been also conjectured that learning the full parity function requires a
number of samples and computations exponential in the input dimension (e.g., Abbe & Boix-Adsera,
2022). Consequently, Task 1 inherits this difficulty, as it encapsulates learning the full parity function
as a special case.


             Parity                   𝒙𝟏 =𝟎 𝒙𝟐 =𝟏             𝒙𝟑 =𝟏     𝒙𝟒 =𝟎 𝒙𝟓 =𝟏
                                                                                             ...

                                     1         2         -3         4         5         -6

            Star Graph       0                                                               ...

                                     -1        -2         3        -4         -5        6


Figure 9: Reduction from learning parity to learning star graph. Note that if parity(x) = 0 (even),
then the shortest path from center 0 to vertex n passes 1. Otherwise, it passes −1. As a result, solving
the star graph instance induced by x implies correctly predicting the parity of x.

Proof of Theorem 5. Consider a star graph with 2n+1 vertices. For simplicity, we index the vertices
by −n, . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , n. Given a binary string x ∈ {0, 1}n , we generate a star graph instance as


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


follows: First we make vertex 0 the center and connect it to vertex ±1. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1},
if x[i] = 0 we connect vertex i to i + 1 and vertex −i to −i − 1. Otherwise, we connect i to −i − 1
and −i to i + 1. We illustrate this reduction in Figure 9.
The parity of x can now be determined by the first step towards target vertex n. Specifically, if
parity(x) = 0 (even), then the first vertex is 1. Otherwise, it is −1. Consequently, if an algorithm can
solve Task 1 for star graphs generated in this way, then it equivalently solves learning the full parity
problem.


B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We prove this theorem by constructing a counterexample. Consider the distribution D that is uniform
over the sequences {ACA, BCB}. Our goal is to show that there exists an ideal next-token predictor,
in the sense of Equation (5), that does not learn a belief state.
First, note that an ideal next-token predictor achieves a log loss of 1 bit on the first token and 0 log
loss on all subsequent tokens. Define the forward encoder F(x1:t ) to output a two-dimensional vector
for any partial sequence x1:t . Specifically, we define the encoding as follows:

                                             F(∅) = (−1, −1),
                                     F(A) = F(B) = (−1, 1),
                                          F(AC) = (1, −1),
                                          F(BC) = (1, 1).

Next, we define the output head T for the next-token predictions:

                                    T(−1, −1) = uniform(A, B),
                                     T(−1, 1) = C,
                                     T(1, −1) = A,
                                       T(1, 1) = B.

It can be verified that this setup achieves the optimal performance: a 1-bit log loss on the first token
(since A and B are equally likely), and 0 log loss on subsequent tokens (since the continuation of
the sequence is fully deterministic). However, the key observation is that F(A) = F(B) = (−1, 1) is
not a belief state for the remainder of the sequence. This is because any function g(−1, 1) applied
to this encoding outputs a distribution that is independent of whether the initial token was A or B.
Thus, the encoding fails to capture the information necessary to distinguish between the two possible
continuations of the sequence, violating the definition of a belief state. Therefore, this next-token
predictor does not output a belief state, completing the proof.


B.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

We again use a counterexample construction to prove this theorem. Consider the distribution D,
which is uniform over the four sequences {DAA, DBB, SAB, SBA}. Here, the initial tokens D
and S determine whether the next symbol is doubled or not. Our goal is to demonstrate that a
multi-token model, in the sense of Equation (6), does not learn a belief state.
First, we construct an ideal multi-token model that suffers a log loss of 2 bits on each token except for
the last token. Note that this is the minimal log loss achievable. Define the forward encoder F(x1:t )
to output a two-dimensional vector for any partial sequence x1:t . Specifically, we define the encoding
as follows:

                                             F(∅) = (−1, −1),
                                      F(D) = F(S) = (−1, 1),
                                   F(DA) = F(SB) = (1, −1),
                                   F(DB) = F(SA) = (1, 1).


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, define the output head for predicting the next tokens at different time steps as follows:

                                     T1 ((−1, −1)) = uniform(S, D),
                                     T2 ((−1, −1)) = uniform(A, B),
                                     T3 ((−1, −1)) = uniform(A, B),
                                      T1 ((−1, 1)) = uniform(A, B),
                                      T2 ((−1, 1)) = uniform(A, B),
                                      T1 ((1, −1)) = A,
                                         T1 ((1, 1)) = B.

This multi-token model clearly achieves the minimal log loss. However, the key observation is that
F(S) = F(D) = (−1, 1) is not a belief state for the remainder of the sequence. The reason is that any
function g(−1, 1) applied to this encoding outputs a distribution that is independent of whether the
initial token was S or D. Thus, the encoding fails to capture the necessary information for predicting
the future tokens. Therefore, this multi-token model does not output a belief state, completing the
proof.


C     S TAR G RAPH D ETAILS

In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of the star graph experiments from Section 3.4.
    • Data Generation. We use the data generation code from the official codebase. To generate
      the star graph structure, each node ni is sampled uniformly from the set {1, . . . , N }. For all
      experiments, we set N = 50, and we generate 8M examples for each data set.
    • Data Tokenization. We follow the same tokenization settings as in (Bachmann & Nagarajan,
      2024, Section G.1).
    • Architectures. Both the forward and backward encoders consist of nlayers = 6 layers with an
      embedding dimension of 768, nhead = 8 attention heads, and an MLP expansion factor of 1.
      The baselines use the same configuration.
    • Training Details. In all cases, we use the AdamW optimizer with a weight decay strength
      of 0.1. For G(2, 5), the learning rate is set to η = 3 · 10−4 , while for G(5, 5) and G(2, 20), a
      smaller learning rate of η = 1 · 10−4 is used. We run all experiments for 100 epochs to ensure
      convergence. All models run quickly, finishing 100 epochs in less than 2 hours. The belief state
      transformer reaches ≈ 100% accuracy in a few minutes on the easier graphs. Each model is
      trained on a single A100 / H100 GPU with 80GB memory.
    • Evaluation. We evaluate the models on 10,000 unseen graphs. To succeed, the model must
      output the entire path correctly, and we report the success rate.

C.1    BASELINE DETAILS

We use the official codebase from Bachmann & Nagarajan (2024) to instantiate and train the baselines.
    • Forward-only. This baseline trains a transformer to do next-token prediction over the sequence
      data. Teacher forcing is used during training, so the model gets ground truth intermediate
      sequences as input.
    • Data Augmentation. Here, our data augmentation process entails simply modifying the data
      using some domain knowledge, before feeding it into the standard forward-only transformer
      training process.
      Given the original training sequences [E | n1 , nl | n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . nl ], we propose to replace the
      task specification n1 , nl with n1 , n′ where n′ ∼ {n2 . . . nl−1 } is an intermediate node in the
      path. The resulting training sequence would then look like: [E | n1 , n′ | n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . nl ]. The
      idea here is that replacing the long horizon goal with a subgoal closer to the start would make
      learning the goal conditioning easier.
    • Fill-in-the-Middle. This is similar to the domain augmentation baseline, except we replace
      intermediate nodes with intermediate suffixes nj , . . . nT . The input to the transformer is then:
      [E | n1 , nT | nj , nj+1 , . . . nl | n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . nl ]. During training time, we uniformly sample
      suffixes of different lengths.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    • Multi-token Prediction. This baseline changes the objective from next-token prediction, to
      multiple token prediction. Given the graph description, start and goal, [E | n1 , nl ] the model
      needs to predict the path [n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . nl ] in a single forward pass.


D     T INY S TORIES EXPERIMENTS

We train all models on a single A100 / H100 GPU with 80GB memory.

D.1    T RAINING

The Belief State Transformer’s encoders have the following settings: nlayers = 8, blocks with
embedding dimension edim = 768, and nheads = 8. The textheads Tn , Tp are implemented as a single
3-layer MLP with dimensionality 512 and ReLU activations that outputs two predictions. The total
model size is 80 million parameters.
The FIM baseline trains a forward only transformer with the following settings: nlayers = 12, blocks
with embedding dimension edim = 768, and nheads = 8. The total model size is 85 million parameters.
The FIM baseline’s training is simple—for a given prefix x1:t , we prepend a random suffix xk:T for
k ∼ U(t + 2, T ) and train the transformer to predict xt+1 . We create as many prefix-suffix inputs as
the GPU memory allows. Even then, for longer sequences, it becomes increasingly intractable for the
FIM baseline to train on all possible prefix-suffix inputs.
The Belief State Transformer on the other hand, is able to train on all O(T 2 ) possible prefix-suffix
combinations for a sequence of length T , by carefully accumulating text head gradients over all pairs
before computing the forward and backward encoder gradients. Without such a scheme, training goes
from a few hours to multiple days. As a result, the Belief State Transformer is only around 3 − 5×
slower than the FIM baseline’s suffix-sampling update, yet is able to train on all O(T 2 ) possible
prefix-suffix inputs.
We trained the Belief State transformer on 1 epoch of the TinyStories dataset with 2.7M stories, with
a batch size of 256. The training takes around 5 hours for 1 epoch. Because the FIM baseline goes
through an epoch more quickly than the Belief State transformer, we allow it to run for multiple
epochs with a max training time of 5 hours, and use early stopping on the validation loss to select the
best checkpoint.

Algorithm 2 Beam Search
Require: text x1:t , goal xt+k:T , number of steps K, beams n
 1: Priority Queue Q0 ← (1, ∅)
 2: for k = 1 to K − 1 do
 3:   for j = 1 to n do
 4:      if |Qk−1 | > 0 then
 5:          (priority r, sequence u) ← pop(Qk−1 )
 6:          for Possible x̃ do
 7:             Qk ← (rTn (x̃ | F(xt+k:T + x1:t + u)), u + x̃)
 8: Output: top(n, QK )


The FIM model uses beam search (Graves, 2012) to find high probability sequences at inference time.
At a high level, beam search only examines and expands upon a fixed amount of paths during search
to keep search tractable. To keep the inference time resources comparable, We use the same number
of paths as trajectories we generate in Algorithm 1, which is 120.

D.2    E VALUATION

We evaluate the models on 100 held out stories from the TinyStories dataset. For each story, we use
the first 50 tokens for the prompt, and last 100 tokens for the suffix. The choice of 100 for the suffix
length is due to the varying length of the stories - shorter stories would often just receive padding
tokens as the suffix if the suffix window wasn’t long enough.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We use GPT4 to judge the quality of generated text. Given two generated stories, one from each
model, we ask GPT4 to analyze the stories and output a recommendation on which story is superior.
The stories are anonymized and shuffled to prevent information leakage about its author before we
feed it to GPT4. For every evaluation, we shuffle the story ordering once, and repeat the the evaluation
3 times for a total of 6 GPT4 evaluations for every story. Since we evaluate across 100 held out
stories, this amounts to 600 total queries to GPT4. We use the OpenAI API to automate the process.
Here is an example input we feed into GPT4.
         System Prompt: You are evaluating two story generation models. First, analyze the outputs and note their properties.
         Then, make an argument for why one is better than another, or say that both are roughly equal.
         Story 1:
         Once upon a time, in a warm and sunny place, there was a big pit. A little boy named Tom liked to play near the pit.
         One day, Tom lost his red ball. He was very sad. Tom asked his friend, Sam, "Did you see my red ball?" Sam said,
         "No, but let’s look together." They looked and looked, but they could not find the red ball. Tom was very sad. Then, a
         big bird came and dropped the red ball. The bird had the red ball in its beak. Tom and Sam were so happy! They said,
         "Thank you, bird!" The bird flew away, and Tom played with his red ball all day.
         Story 2:
         Once upon a time, in a warm and sunny place, there was a big pit. A little boy named Tom liked to play near the pit.
         One day, Tom lost his red ball. He was very sad. Tom asked his friend, Sam, for help. "Sam, can you help me find my
         red ball?" Sam said, "Yes, I will help you." They looked and looked, but they could not find the red ball. Just when
         they were about to give up, a big bird flew down from the sky. The bird had the red ball in its beak! The bird dropped
         the ball into the pit. Tom and Sam were so happy. They thanked the bird and played with the red ball


Then, GPT4 responds with:
         Analysis of Outputs:
         Story 1:
         **Grammar and Style:** - Simple and clear sentences, with correct grammar throughout. - Repetitive usage of "Tom
         was very sad". - "Tom and Sam were so happy!" creates a clear and optimistic conclusion.
         **Narrative Flow:** - Introduction: Sets the scene with Tom and the pit. - Conflict: Tom loses his red ball. - Resolution:
         A big bird returns the ball. - Conclusion: Ends with Tom playing all day, providing a satisfying closure.
         Story 2:
         **Grammar and Style:** - Generally grammatically correct. - Uses a more varied sentence structure. - Dialogue
         includes direct speech ("Sam, can you help me find my red ball?"), adding a personal touch.
         **Narrative Flow:** - Introduction: Similar setup with Tom and the pit. - Conflict: Tom loses his red ball, seeks Sam’s
         help. - Resolution: Big bird returns the ball, but drops it into the pit. - Conclusion: The story seems to end abruptly
         without further explanation about retrieving the ball from the pit.
         Argument for Which Story is Better:
         **Conclusion Analysis:** - **Story 1** concludes clearly with Tom playing all day, which establishes a definite
         and satisfying ending for the reader. - **Story 2** leaves a gap in logic—though the bird returns the ball, it drops it
         into the pit, and we don’t see how Tom and Sam retrieve it. The absence of this information feels like an incomplete
         ending.
         **Grammar and Narrative:** - Both stories are grammatically correct and maintain simple language, making them
         suitable for young readers. - Story 1 employs more repetition, which could be beneficial for reinforcement but
         potentially tedious for some readers. Story 2 introduces more varied dialogue which might be more engaging.
         **Overall Conclusion:** - Given that Story 1 has a logical setup, development, and conclusion, **Story 1** is the
         better option. It provides a clear, satisfying end where Tom is happy and continues to play. Story 2, while containing
         more engaging dialogue, fails to wrap up the narrative logically, leaving the reader with lingering questions about the
         outcome.


As seen in the example above, GPT4 is able to consider multiple factors about the story, from low
level grammar and vocabulary choices, to higher level concepts like cohesiveness and logical flow,
and uses these factors to make its final recommendation.

D.3    M ODEL O UTPUTS

Here are additional stories generated by the Belief State transformer in the goal-conditioned setting.
         Story 1: You don’t have to be scared of the loud dog, I’ll protect you". The mole felt so safe with the little girl. She
         was very kind and the mole soon came to trust her. He was so gentle and kind. The little girl was so happy to have a
         new friend. She gave the mole a big hug and they played together all day. They ran around the garden and laughed and
         had lots of fun. When it was time to go home, the little girl hugged the mole and said goodbye. The mole was so
         happy to have a friend like her and they promised to always be friends.
         Story 2: Once upon a time, in a warm and sunny place, there was a big pit. A little boy named Tom liked to play near
         the pit. One day, Tom lost his red ball. He was very sad. Tom asked his friend, Sam, "Did you see my red ball?" Sam
         said, "No, but let’s look together." They looked near the pit and found the red ball. Tom was very happy. He said,
         "Thank you, Sam!" But then, a big dog came and took the red ball. Tom and Sam were scared. They wanted the ball
         back. They ran after the dog. The dog ran into the pit and disappeared. Tom and Sam were sad. They went into the pit
         to search. It was dark and scary. They could not find the ball. They tried to get out, but the pit was too deep. Tom and



                                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Sam were stuck in the pit. They called for help, but no one could hear them. They were sad and scared, and they never
         got out of the pit.
         Story 3: Once upon a time there was a little girl named Lucy. She loved to go to the store to buy sweets with her
         mom and dad. On this special day, Lucy entered the store with her mom. Lucy saw a big, red ball. She asked her
         mom, "Can I have the ball, please?" Her mom said, "No, Lucy. We don’t have enough money today. We have to go
         home and get a new one." Lucy was sad, but she understood. She asked her mom, "Can we get a new ball?" Her mom
         smiled and said, "Yes, we can get a new one. But first, we have to be peaceful and kind to her. Have patience and
         understanding. Together, you can both be happy!" So, Lucy smiled at the girl and said, "Can we play together?" The
         little girl softened and smiled back. She agreed to share the toy and even let Lucy have a turn first. Lucy and the little
         girl played together happily.


And some outputs for the FIM baseline, over the same prefix / suffix pairs from above.
         Story 1: You don’t have to be scared of the loud dog, I’ll protect you". The mole felt so safe with the little girl. She
         was very kind and the mole soon came to trust her. He said, "Don’t be scared, I’m here to protect you". The little girl
         was so happy and thanked the mole for keeping her safe. From then on, the little girl and the mole were the best of
         friends.
         Story 2: Once upon a time, in a warm and sunny place, there was a big pit. A little boy named Tom liked to play near
         the pit. One day, Tom lost his red ball. He was very sad. Tom asked his friend, Sam, for help. "Sam, can you help me
         find my red ball?" Tom said. Sam said, "Yes, I will help you." They looked and looked, but they could not find the red
         ball. They were very sad. Then, a big bird flew down from the sky. The bird had the red ball in its beak! The bird
         dropped the ball into the pit. Tom and Sam were so happy. They said, "Thank you, bird!"They went into the pit to
         search. It was dark and scary. They could not find the ball. They tried to get out, but the pit was too deep. Tom and
         Sam were stuck in the pit. They called for help, but no one could hear them. They were sad and scared, and they never
         got out of the pit.
         Story 3: Once upon a time there was a little girl named Lucy. She loved to go to the store to buy sweets with her mom
         and dad. On this special day, Lucy entered the store with her mom and dad. When they arrived at the store, Lucy was
         so excited to see all the different kinds of sweets. She couldn’t believe her eyes when she saw all the different kinds of
         sweets. She couldn’t believe her eyes when she saw all the different kinds of sweets. Lucy’s mom smiled at her and
         said, " to be peaceful and kind to her. Have patience and understanding. Together, you can both be happy!" So, Lucy
         smiled at the girl and said, "Can we play together?" The little girl softened and smiled back. She agreed to share the
         toy and even let Lucy have a turn first. Lucy and the little girl played together happily.



E    T RAINING THE B ELIEF S TATE T RANSFORMER


                                            Figure 10: BST input and outputs.

The belief state transformer, at a high level, takes in a prefix x1:i , a suffix xi+k:T , and predicts the
token right after the prefix, and the token right before the suffix. See Figure 10 for an example.
To create training data from a sequence x1:T , all valid prefix-suffix pairs are created from the sequence.
We define a valid prefix-suffix pair as follows.
Let the prefix be x1:i . Then a suffix xi+k:T is valid for all k ≥ 2. This condition ensures that there is
at least one token that separates the prefix and suffix, which makes it feasible to predict tokens in
between the prefix and suffix.
For a sequence n tokens long, there are O(n2 ) possible valid prefix-suffix pairs. See Figure 11 for
example training inputs and their targets.
We present pytorch pseudocode illustrating a simplified implementation of the belief state trans-
former (Figure 12). Additionally, we present a slightly more complex version which computes and
accumulates the gradients for the text head MLP before backpropagating gradients into the encoders
(Figure 13). This implementation is more computationally efficient as it avoids backpropagating
through the large transformer encoders multiple times. Gloeckle et al. (2024) adopts a similar strategy
to efficiently compute gradients of an encoder with multiple heads.


                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         Figure 11: Forming training examples for the BST.


We define the training overheads. Let the sequence length be n. To scale with batch size, one would
multiply the batch size with the following equations. Let h be the cost related to the output head size,
and e be the cost of soft attention.
GPT: O(hn+en2 ), first term is cost of doing text_head(fi ) for f1:t , second term is cost of encoding
the tokens x1:t with attention to produce f1:t .
BST: O(hn2 + en2 ), first term is cost of doing text_head(fi , bj ) for all valid pairs in the O(n2 )
prefix-suffix pairs, second term is cost of encoding the prefix and suffix tokens with attention. Note
that at inference, BST is O(hn + en2 ).


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


import torch
import torch.nn as nn

def belief_state_objective(enc_F, enc_B, text_head, x):
  bs, T = x.shape
  forward_state = enc_F(x)
  backward_state = enc_B(x.flip(1)).flip(1)
  ft = torch.arange(T, dtype=torch.int32)
  bt = torch.arange(T, dtype=torch.int32)
  combinations = torch.cartesian_prod(ft, bt)
  combinations = combinations[(combinations[:, 1]-combinations[:, 0]>=2)]
  fb_pairs = combinations.clone()
  fb_pairs = fb_pairs[combinations[:,1] < T]
  f_idxs = fb_pairs[:, 0]
  b_idxs = fb_pairs[:, 1]
  nt_idxs = (combinations[:, 0] + 1)
  f = forward_state[:, f_idxs]
  b = backward_state[:, b_idxs]
  single_labels_f = x[:, nt_idxs].unsqueeze(2)
  single_labels_b = x[:, b_idxs].unsqueeze(2)
  single_labels = torch.cat((single_labels_f, single_labels_b), dim=2)
  logits = text_head(torch.cat([f, b],dim=2))
  fb_numpairs = fb_pairs.shape[0]
  logits = logits.reshape((bs, fb_numpairs, 2, -1))
  logits = logits.reshape((bs*fb_numpairs*2, -1))
  single_labels = single_labels.reshape((bs*fb_numpairs*2))
  loss = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()(logits, single_labels)
  return loss

if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  batch_size = 8
  T = 12
  m = 512
  num_tokens = 100
  #Use dummy function in place of actual autoregressive transformer
  enc_F = nn.Sequential(nn.Embedding(num_tokens, m), nn.Linear(m, m))
  enc_B = nn.Sequential(nn.Embedding(num_tokens, m), nn.Linear(m, m))
  text_head = nn.Sequential(nn.Linear(m*2, m), nn.LeakyReLU(), nn.Linear(
                                       m, num_tokens*2))
  x = torch.randint(0, num_tokens, size=(batch_size,T))

  loss = belief_state_objective(enc_F, enc_B, text_head, x)
  print(loss)


          Figure 12: A simple implementation of the belief state transformer objective


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


import torch
import torch.nn as nn

def belief_state_objective(all_f, all_b, text_head, x):
  bs, T = x.shape
  forward_state = all_f
  backward_state = all_b.flip(1)
  ft = torch.arange(T, dtype=torch.int32)
  bt = torch.arange(T, dtype=torch.int32)
  combinations = torch.cartesian_prod(ft, bt)
  combinations = combinations[(combinations[:, 1]-combinations[:, 0]>=2)]
  fb_pairs = combinations.clone()
  fb_pairs = fb_pairs[combinations[:,1] < T]
  f_idxs = fb_pairs[:, 0]
  b_idxs = fb_pairs[:, 1]
  nt_idxs = (combinations[:, 0] + 1)
  f = forward_state[:, f_idxs]
  b = backward_state[:, b_idxs]
  single_labels_f = x[:, nt_idxs].unsqueeze(2)
  single_labels_b = x[:, b_idxs].unsqueeze(2)
  single_labels = torch.cat((single_labels_f, single_labels_b), dim=2)
  logits = text_head(torch.cat([f, b],dim=2))
  fb_numpairs = fb_pairs.shape[0]
  logits = logits.reshape((bs, fb_numpairs, 2, -1))
  logits = logits.reshape((bs*fb_numpairs*2, -1))
  single_labels = single_labels.reshape((bs*fb_numpairs*2))
  loss = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()(logits, single_labels)
  return loss

if __name__ == ’__main__’:
  batch_size = 8
  T = 12
  m = 512
  num_tokens = 100
  #Use dummy function in place of actual autoregressive transformer
  enc_F = nn.Sequential(nn.Embedding(num_tokens, m), nn.Linear(m, m))
  enc_B = nn.Sequential(nn.Embedding(num_tokens, m), nn.Linear(m, m))
  text_head = nn.Sequential(nn.Linear(m*2, m), nn.LeakyReLU(), nn.Linear(
                                       m, num_tokens*2))
  x = torch.randint(0, num_tokens, size=(batch_size,T))
  f = enc_F(x)
  b = enc_B(x)

  # just get the text head computation graph
  _f = f.detach()
  _b = b.detach()
  _f.requires_grad = True
  _b.requires_grad = True

  loss = belief_state_objective(_f, _b, text_head, x)
  # compute text head gradients over all prefix/suffix pairs.
  loss.backward()
  # Update encoders with 1 backward pass.
  f.backward(_f.grad)
  b.backward(_b.grad)


                   Figure 13: Efficient computation of all prefix-suffix losses.


                                                21
