Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING DYNAMICS OF LLM F INETUNING
 Yi Ren                                                 Danica J. Sutherland
 University of British Columbia                         University of British Columbia & Amii
 renyi.joshua@gmail.com                                 dsuth@cs.ubc.ca



                                                  A BSTRACT

         Learning dynamics, which describes how the learning of specific training examples influ-
         ences the model’s predictions on other examples, gives us a powerful tool for understanding
         the behavior of deep learning systems. We study the learning dynamics of large language
         models during different types of finetuning, by analyzing the step-wise decomposition of
         how influence accumulates among different potential responses. Our framework allows a
         uniform interpretation of many interesting observations about the training of popular algo-
         rithms for both instruction tuning and preference tuning. In particular, we propose a hypo-
         thetical explanation of why specific types of hallucination are strengthened after finetuning,
         e.g., the model might use phrases or facts in the response for question B to answer question
         A, or the model might keep repeating similar simple phrases when generating responses. We
         also extend our framework and highlight a unique “squeezing effect” to explain a previously
         observed phenomenon in off-policy direct preference optimization (DPO), where running
         DPO for too long makes even the desired outputs less likely. This framework also provides
         insights into where the benefits of on-policy DPO and other variants come from. The analy-
         sis not only provides a novel perspective of understanding LLM’s finetuning but also inspires
         a simple, effective method to improve alignment performance. Code for experiments is
         available at https://github.com/Joshua-Ren/Learning_dynamics_LLM.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep neural networks usually acquire new knowledge by updating their parameters via gradient descent (GD).
This procedure can be described by learning dynamics, which links changes in the model’s predictions to the
gradients generated by learning specific examples. With the help of learning dynamics, researchers have not
only explained many interesting phenomena during training, e.g., the “zig-zag” learning path (Ren et al. 2022)
and the formation of compositional concept space (Park et al. 2024), but used these insights to propose novel,
improved algorithms in different problems (e.g. Pruthi et al. 2020; Ren, S. Guo, et al. 2023; Xia et al. 2024).
The study of large language models (LLM) is gaining popularity due to their surprising capabilities on various
tasks. To ensure the LLMs follow human instructions and align well with human preferences, finetuning has
attracted much recent attention. Practitioners often start with instruction tuning, where the model learns extra
knowledge necessary for the downstream task, and then preference tuning, where the model aligns its outputs
to human preference (Ouyang et al. 2022). Various finetuning algorithms have been proposed to fit into this
pipeline, with differing explanations as to why they improve the model’s performance.
Contrary to most existing analyses of LLM finetuning, which use the perspective of their training targets,
their status at the end of training, or their relationships to reinforcement learning (e.g. Ji et al. 2024; Rafailov
et al. 2024; Tajwar et al. 2024), this paper tries to understand LLMs’ evolution from a dynamical perspective.
Specifically, we formalize the learning dynamics of LLM finetuning by decomposing the change of the
model’s prediction into three terms which play different roles. This framework can be easily adapted to

                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


various finetuning algorithms with different goals, including supervised finetuning (SFT, Wei et al. 2022),
direct preference optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al. (2023), and its variants) and even reinforcement learning
based methods (e.g., PPO, Schulman et al. 2017). This framework helps explain several interesting and
counter-intuitive observations during training – including the “repeater” phenomenon after preference tuning
(Holtzman et al. 2020), hallucination (L. Huang et al. 2023), the decay in confidence of all responses during
off-policy DPO (Rafailov et al. 2024), and more.
Moreover, we also provide a new perspective on understanding why off-policy DPO and other variants
underperform their on-policy counterparts (S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. 2024). Our explanation starts by
observing an interesting “squeezing effect,” which we demonstrate is a consequence of gradient ascent (as
in DPO and similar algorithms) on models with cross-entropy loss following a softmax layer. In short,
for each token’s prediction, the negative gradient will push down the model’s predictions on (almost) all
possible output labels, moving this probability mass to the most-likely labels. This can be detrimental to the
alignment we are trying to achieve. This effect is most serious when the negative gradient is imposed on
an already-unlikely label, which is why the confidence of almost all responses decreases during off-policy
DPO. Inspired by this, we propose a simple, counter-intuitive, but very effective method to further improve
alignment performance.

2    D EFINITION OF L EARNING DYNAMICS AND AN MNIST E XAMPLE
Learning dynamics is usually an umbrella term describing how the change of a specific factor influences the
model’s prediction. In this paper, we narrow down it to describe “how the change in model’s parameter θ
influences the corresponding change in fθ ”, i.e., the relationship between ∆θ and ∆fθ . When the model
updates its parameters using gradient descent (GD), we have
                 ∆θ ≜ θt+1 − θt = −η · ∇L (fθ (xu ), yu ) ; ∆f (xo ) ≜ fθt+1 (xo ) − fθt (xo ),            (1)
where the update of θ during step t → t + 1 is given by one gradient update on the sample pair (xu , yu ) with
learning rate η. In short, the learning dynamics in this paper address the question:
                 After an GD update on xu , how does the model’s prediction on xo change?
Studying the learning dynamics can shed light on many important problems in deep learning and also help to
understand various counter-intuitive phenomena. Appendix A further discusses related work.
As a warm-up, we first consider a standard supervised learning problem, where the model learns to map x
to predictions y = {y1 , . . . , yL } ∈ V L , where V is the vocabulary of size V . The model usually outputs a
probability distribution by first generating a matrix of logits z = hθ (x) ∈ RV ×L and then takes the Softmax
of each column. We can track the change in the model’s confidence by observing log πθ (y | x).

Per-step influence decomposition. The learning dynamics of (1) become,
                              ∆ log π t (y | xo ) ≜ log πθt+1 (y | xo ) − log πθt (y | xo ), .                    (2)

For simplicity, we start from the L = 1 scenario, where the ∆θ and ∆ log π can be linked by the following
result, a version of a result of Ren et al. (2022) proved and further discussed in Appendix B. For multi-label
classification (L > 1), the updates separate; we can calculate L different ∆ log π t and stack them together.
Proposition 1. Let π = Softmax(z) and z = hθ (x). The one-step learning dynamics decompose as
                ∆ log π t (y | xo ) = −η At (xo ) Kt (xo , xu ) G t (xu , yu ) + O(η 2 ∥∇θ z(xu )∥2op ),          (3)
                |      {z        }       | {z } | {z } | {z }
                       V ×1                  V ×V       V ×V         V ×1

where At (xo ) = ∇z log πθt (xo ) = I − 1πθ⊤t (xo ), Kt (xo , xu ) = (∇θ z(xo )|θt )(∇θ z(xu )|θt )⊤ is the empirical
neural tangent kernel of the logit network z, and G t (xu , yu ) = ∇z L(xu , yu )|zt .


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                              Identical:
              Learn (𝐱 𝐮 =               , 𝐲𝐮 = 4) using SGD                                   𝐲 = 𝜋 𝐱𝐨 =
                                                                                𝜋𝜃𝑡+1 (𝐱𝐨 )

                                                  e𝑦=4
                                                                              𝜋𝜃𝑡 (𝐱 𝐨 )

                     𝜋𝜃𝑡 (𝐱 𝐮 )
                                                  Δ𝜋
                                                                                              Similar:
                    0          ...          4            ...        9                         𝐲 = 𝜋 𝐱𝐨 =

         Δ log 𝜋 𝑡 (𝐱 𝐨 ) = −𝜂𝒜𝑡 (𝐱 𝐨 ) 𝒦 𝑡 (𝐱 𝐨 , 𝐱 𝐮 ) 𝒢 𝑡 (𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐮 )

                                                                −
                   𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐮+     Strong influence 𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐮
                                                    (          , 𝐲)                           Dissimilar:
                        ,𝐲
                                                                                              𝐲 = 𝜋 𝑥o =
                       Weak
                     influence
                                     (    , 𝐲)
                                            ′
                                     𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐫𝐧𝐝


             (a) Adaptation vector created by (𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐮 )                  (b) One-step change with the
                                                                                                                  (c) Accumulated change of epochs   (d) Correlation of the accumulated change
                                                                             same 𝒢 𝑡 (𝐱 𝐮 , 𝐲𝐮 ) (large 𝜂)


    Figure 1: The per-step learning dynamics and the accumulated influence in an MNIST experiment.


At (xo ) = I − 1πθ⊤t (xo ) only depends on the model’s current predicted probability. The matrix Kt is the
empirical neural tangent kernel (eNTK, Jacot et al. 2018) of the model, the product of the model’s gradients
with respect to xo and xu . The analysis in this paper relies on the following assumption:

   During the training, the relative influence of learning xu on all other different xo is relatively stable.

The common “lazy eNTK” assumption discussed in Arora et al. (2019) is a sufficient but not necessary
condition for this paper. Appendix C provides a more detailed discussion and experimental verification for
both MNIST and LLM settings. We can then think of Kt as a model-specific similarity measurement between
different input samples: larger ∥Kt ∥F means the update of xu likely influences the model’s prediction on xo
more. Finally, G t is determined by the loss function L, which provides the energy and direction for the model’s
adaptation. For example, for cross-entropy loss LCE ≜ −y⊤                               t
                                                             u log π(y | xu ), we have GCE = πθ t (y | xu ) − yu ,
a length-V vector that points from the model’s current predictive distribution to the desired supervisory
distribution. For typical “hard” labels, yu is a one-hot vector eyu .

Accumulated influence and a demonstration on MNIST. Proposition 1 describes how the update of xu
changes the model’s prediction on xo for each learning step. Since a real model updates its parameters for
many steps, it is important to ask about accumulation of these per-step influences over time. We start by
analyzing a simple example of training a LeNet on the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al. 1998).
See Figure 1-(a), where the network πθt is updating its parameters using the loss calculated on one training
                                                t
example (xu , yu = e4 ). The residual term GCE    (xu , yu ) is then represented by the red arrows, which all start
from πθt (y | xu ) and point to e4 . We can then ask how the model’s predictions on different xo change after
this update. As in Figure 1-(b), for an xo in the same class with xu (i.e., the identical case), the predicted
probability of this correct label is “pulled up” by this update, as expected. On the other hand, if this xo is
similar to xu (i.e., ∥Kt ∥F is reasonably large) but comes from another class, then the predicted probability on
xu ’s class (not the correct label of xo ) would be “pulled up,” as in the second panel of Figure 1-(b). Last, for
examples that look dissimilar to xu (small ∥Kt ∥F ), this update will not change the model’s prediction on xo
much, as in the bottom panel in Figure 1-(b). The interactions among the updates of different inputs then form
an interesting pattern for the learned predictions. As illustrated in Figure 1-(c), when making predictions on
images coming from class 4, the model tends to assign higher confidence on class 9. That is because the
examples in class 9 on average look more similar to class 4 than examples in other classes. Hence the update
of examples in classes 4 and 9 will reinforce their mutual influence and lead to a bump in their predictions.
To verify this, we plot the average of π(y | x) for x from each of the classes in Figure 1-(d). The values of
some off-diagonal patches are significantly higher than others, which means the examples in those classes
look more similar, like 4 and 9, 5 and 3, 8 and 5, etc.

                                                                                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     L EARNING DYNAMICS OF LLM’ S F INETUNING
Although learning dynamics have been applied to many deep learning systems, extending this framework to
LLM finetuning is non-trivial. The first problem is the high dimensionality and the sequence nature of both the
input and output signals. The high-dimensional property makes it hard to observe the model’s output, and the
sequential nature makes the distributions on different tokens mutually dependent, which is more complicated
than a standard multi-label classification problem considered by most previous work. Furthermore, as there
are many different algorithms for LLM finetuning – SFT (Wei et al. 2022), RLHF (Ouyang et al. 2022), DPO
(Rafailov et al. 2023), etc. – analyzing them under a uniform framework is challenging. Finally, compared
with the training-from-scratch scenario, where a roughly uniform distribution over all possible outputs is
usually assumed, LLMs’ finetuning dynamics heavily rely on the pretrained base model, which could make
the analysis harder. For example, the pretrained model usually assigns little probability mass to unlikely
tokens, which is good for most applications but leads to risk of the “squeezing effect” we show later. We now
tackle these problems and propose a unified framework for different finetuning methods.

3.1    P ER - STEP D ECOMPOSITION OF THE SFT L OSS

The typical loss function used during supervised finetuning is the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of a given
                    +           +
completion y+                          L
             u = [y1 , . . . , yL ] ∈ V , conditioned on the prompt xu :
                                   L
                                   X                                        L
                                                                            X
              LSFT (xu , y+
                          u) ≜ −         log π(y = yl+ | y+
                                                          <l , xu ) = −           ey+ · log π(y | xu , y+
                                                                                                        <l ).   (4)
                                                                                    l
                                   l=1                                      l=1

Note that compared with the multi-label classification
                                                 Q     problem discussed before, where the joint distribution
of all labels can be factorized as π(y | x) = l π(yl | x), the sequential     Qnature of language modeling
makes the analysis more complicated, because we must have π(y | x) = l π(yl | x, y<l ). To solve this
problem, we can merge this factorization into the definition of the backbone hθ while keeping the format of
Proposition 1. Specifically, letting χ be the concatenation of x and y, the prediction of all tokens of y is
                              z = hθ (χ) ;      π (y | χ) = Softmax_column (z) .
Here z is a V ×L matrix where each column contains the logits of the prediction of the lth token. Our hθ , even
though it takes the entire sequence χ as its input, will force the model not to refer to the future tokens y>l when
making predictions on the l-th token, commonly implemented via “causal masking” (proposed in Vaswani
et al. (2017), details in Figure 10a of Appendix D). Then, we can calculate (∇θ zl (χo )|θt )(∇θ zl (χu )|θt )⊤
on each column of z and stack them to form a V × V × L tensor Kt (χo , χu ). The calculation of G t and At
also follows a similar procedure. Thanks to the causal mask implemented in hθ , the resulting decomposition
is almost identical to that in a multi-label classification problem. Assuming have a response yu of length L
associated with xu , stacked into χu , and yo of length M associated with xo , stacked into χo . The change of
the model’s prediction on the m-th token of yo can be represented as, when z gradients have bounded norm,
                                             L
                                             X
                [∆ log π t (y | χo )]m = −          η[ At (χo ) ]m [Kt (χo , χu )]l [G t (χu )]l + O(η 2 ),     (5)
                 |      {z        }                    | {z } | {z } | {z }
                       V ×M                   l=1     V ×V ×M         V ×V ×L           V ×L
       t
where GSFT (χu ) = πθt (y | χu ) − yu . Compared with Proposition 1, the main difference is that the eNTK
term also depends on the responses yu and yo , which allows us to answer questions like
                                                                                                       ′
    For a prompt xu , how does learning the response y+
                                                      u influence the model’s belief about a response yu ?

When tracking the model’s confidence on different responses given the question xu , learning from y+u will
impose a strong “upwards” pressure on y+
                                       u , as illustrated in the first panel of Figure 2. At the same time,


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the confidence of “similar responses” will also be slightly pulled up, like how learning a 4 influences the
prediction on 9 in the MNIST example. We will discuss how to understand the “similarity” between two
sequences of responses in the next section.

3.2   P ER - STEP D ECOMPOSITION OF THE DPO L OSS

Preference finetuning, which teaches the model to provide responses that align better with human preferences,
is also an important phase in LLM finetuning pipelines. Different from the SFT stage above, where the
training tells the model “what to do”, many preference finetuning methods also teach the model “what not
to do,” which makes the learning dynamics more complex. For intuition, we start by analyzing a typical
method, i.e., DPO (direct preference optimization, an RL-free method), under a similar framework. Following
Rafailov et al. (2023), the loss function of off-policy DPO is
                                                          πθt (y+     +
                                                                                  πθt (y−     −

                                                                 u | χu )                u | χu )
            LDPO (θ) = −E(xu ,y+     −      log σ   β log                 − β log                    ,    (6)
                                 u ,yu )∼D
                                                          πref (y+    +
                                                                 u | χu )         πref (y−    −
                                                                                         u | χu )
                 −
where y+ u and yu are pre-generated responses, and πref is the reference model, typically the result of SFT.
In the loss function, the πθt terms are also calculated using teacher forcing. Hence we can decompose the
learning dynamics for DPO similarly to Equation (5),
                               L
                               X
                                                                                         −
  [∆ log π t (y | χo )]m = −         η[At (χo )]m [Kt (χo , χ+       t           t               t            2

                                                             u )]l [GDPO+ ]l − [K (χo , χu )]l [GDPO- ]l + O(η )
                               l=1
            t
                 = β(1 − a) πθt (y | χ+      +                 t
                                                                    = β(1 − a) πθt (y | χ−      −

           GDPO+                      u ) − yu ;              GDPO-                      u ) − yu ,            (7)
where a is the margin (i.e., the σ(·) value) for the l-th token, which represents how well the current policy
                    −
separates y+ u and yu compared with the reference policy. Due to the monotonicity of σ(·), a larger margin
                                                            t                         t
leads to larger a, which in turn restrains the strength of GDPO+/- . In other words, GDPO+/- automatically provides
less energy on the examples that are already well separated. We then check the role of β, which controls the
regularizing effect on the KL distance between πθt and πref in the original RL loss (Rafailov et al. 2023).
                                                                                                t
When the margin is negative, larger β leads to a smaller a and hence provides stronger GDPO+/-       for the model
to “catch up” the separating ability of the reference model faster. But when the model is better and has a
positive margin, increasing β will increase a and hence create a negative influence on β(1 − a), which makes
the model update less. This aligns well with the claims of Rafailov et al. (2023): the stronger regularizing
effect tends to “drag πθ back towards πref ” when its predictions deviate from πref too much. The derivation
and the G t functions for other RL-free methods are given in Appendix B.2.2.
                                                         −
These analyses make no assumptions on where y+    u and yu come from. Hence our framework can be directly
extended to on-policy RL-free methods, which often perform better than their off-policy counterparts (S.
Guo, B. Zhang, et al. 2024; Tajwar et al. 2024). The main difference between these algorithms is how the
supervisory responses are generated. Off-policy methods typically use a fixed pre-collected dataset, with y+ u
and y−u are generated by another LLM or humans. In other words, it is likely that both the chosen and rejected
responses come from the “less likely” region of the model’s prediction. On-policy responses, though, are more
likely to have higher predicted probabilities under this model, as they were sampled from it. We will show
next that imposing large negative pressure on an unlikely prediction will lead to unexpected behavior, giving
a new explanation for why on-policy sampling is important for algorithms with large negative gradients.

3.3   T HE S QUEEZING E FFECT C AUSED BY N EGATIVE G RADIENT

As demonstrated by the first two panels in Figure 2, the use of large negative gradients is the main difference
between the learning dynamics of SFT and DPO. We will show later that this difference is the key to
understanding why the learning curves of SFT and DPO behave so differently. For example, Pal et al. (2024),

                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                         • On-policy DPO, IPO   • SPIN
               • SFT                       • Off-policy DPO, IPO

                       𝝅𝜽𝟎 (𝐲|𝐱𝐮 )                      Caused by          𝐲u− 𝐲u+               𝐲u−               𝐲u+
                                                      squeezing effect

                                     𝝅𝜽𝒕                                 • SPPO                 • SLiC
                                                                                                         Triggered when
                                                                                                          gap is smaller
                                                                                                              than 𝜹


                               𝐲u+               𝐲∗    𝐲u−        𝐲u+
                                                                           𝐲u−   𝐲u+            𝐲ref     𝐲u−      𝐲u+


Figure 2: The updating vector provided by the residual term G t of different algorithms. The gray y are
responses sampled from π in an on-policy way. In the second panel, we demonstrate the “squeezing effect”
caused by imposing a big negative gradient on a “valley” region of a distribution. For more details about this
counter-intuitive effect, please refer to Section 3.3 and Appendix E. Other panels demonstrate on-policy DPO
(and IPO), SPIN (Z. Chen et al. 2024), SPPO (Y. Wu et al. 2024), and SLiC (Y. Zhao et al. 2023).

Rafailov et al. (2024), and Tajwar et al. (2024) (and our Figure 4) reported that the confidence of both y+ u and
y−                                                                               +
  u gradually decreases when conducting DPO, while the confidence of yu rarely drops during SFT. This
trend becomes more serious if πθ0 is finetuned for longer before conducting DPO (reported in Figure 3 of
Rafailov et al. (2024) and verified by our Figure 17). Furthermore, we also find that for all the πθt (y | χu )
                                                −
we track (various responses similar to y+ u or yu ; details in the next section), none of them increase during the
DPO phase. This is different from SFT and quite counter-intuitive:

         If everything we observe is becoming less confident, where has the probability mass gone?

To answer this question, we first identify a phenomenon we call the squeezing effect, which occurs when using
negative gradients from any model outputting a distribution with Softmax output heads, even in a simple
multi-class logistic regression task. Specifically, in the L = 1 case when we impose a negative gradient on
label y−
       u , we can describe the changing of model’s predictive distribution πθ t+1 as follows:

   • Guarantee: the confidence of y−                  −
                                   u , i.e., πθ t+1 (yu ) will decrease.
   • Guarantee: the decreased probability mass is largely “squeezed” into the output which was most
     confident before the update: if y∗ = argmaxi∈[V ]\{y−
                                                         u}
                                                            πθt (y = i), then πθt+1 (y = y∗ ) will increase.
   • Trend: the rich get richer and the poor get poorer: generally, dimensions with high πθt tend to increase,
     and those with low πθt tend to decrease.
   • Trend: peakier πθt squeezes more. If the probability mass concentrates on few dimensions in πθt , which
     is common for a pretrained model, all πθt+1 (y ̸= y∗ ) decrease (only y∗ is “rich”).
   • Trend: smaller πθt (y−                                          −
                            u ) exacerbate the squeezing effect: if yu is unlikely under πθ t , the probability mass
     of all other πθt+1 (y ̸= y ) will be more seriously decreased, and the πθt+1 (y = y∗ ) increases more.
                                ∗


Appendix E illustrates the squeezing effect and analytically proves its existence for logistic regression models,
by directly computing πθt+1 /πθt in different situations. Section 4.2 also experimentally verifies the analysis
above in real LLM experiments. Note that in practical settings, where both positive and negative pressures
and the auto-regressive nature are strictly considered, the squeezing effect can become more complicated.
The differences between the two eNTK terms in Equation (7) also influence the relative strength and direction
of these two pressures. Razin et al. (2025) analyze a similar problem in a token-level setting, and their
conclusions align with ours well. We left a more detailed analysis to our future work.
We can now get a high-level overview of the learning dynamics of a typical off-policy DPO algorithm. Since
               −                                                  ∗
both y+                                                                                            +
      u and yu are not sampled from the model’s distribution, y sometimes can be dissimilar to yu , and the
 −
yu are likely located in a valley region of the model’s prediction. Then its learning dynamics would look like
the sketch in the second panel of Figure 2: the confidence on almost all y are pushed down. At the same time,

                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


all the decreased probability mass is squeezed to y∗ , which might make the model keep generating repeated
phrases, as reported by Holtzman et al. (2020). Variants of DPO algorithms often unintentionally mitigate this
squeezing effect by constraining the strength of the negative gradient or the positions of y−
                                                                                            u , which partially
explains their benefits. The last four panels in Figure 2 and Appendix B.2.2 have more details.

4     E XPERIMENTAL V ERIFICATIONS

We now verify our analysis in practical settings. We first create the training set Dtrain by randomly selecting
5000 examples from the training split of the dataset. We consider two common datasets, Antropic-HH
(Y. Bai et al. 2022) and UltraFeedback (G. Cui et al. 2023), in all experiments. Each example in Dtrain
contains three components: the prompt (or question) x, the preferred response y+ , and the less preferred
response y− . SFT finetunes with x and y+ , while DPO uses all three (subscripts of x and y are removed
for conciseness). We repeat the experiments on two series of models: pythia-410M/1B/1.4B/2.8B
(Biderman et al. 2023) and Qwen1.5-0.5B/1.8B (J. Bai et al. 2023).
To get a more detailed observation of the learning dynamics, we further create a probing dataset Dprob
by randomly selecting 500 examples from Dtrain , and generate several typical responses based on the
corresponding x, y+ , or y− . (We also study another probing dataset where all x come from the test set in
an ablation study in the appendix.) Then for each x in Dprob , we can observe how log πθt (y | χ) gradually
changes on different types of y. For example, one extended response type can be a rephrase of y+ , an
irrelevant response answering another question x′ , or just a randomly generated English sentence with the
same number of words with y+ . We explain why we need these extended responses and how they are
generated in detail in Appendix D.1. In short, Dprob helps us to get a more fine-grind inspection of the learning
dynamics, which can not only support our analysis above, but also shed more light on how the model’s
prediction evolves on the entire Y ∈ RV ×L , a very sparse and huge space.

4.1   L EARNING DYNAMICS OF SFT

The main lesson we learn from the analysis in Section 3.1 is that learning from y+   u not only increases the
model’s confidence on y+                                                           +
                          u , but also indirectly “pulls up” responses similar to yu with a smaller strength
(scaled roughly by ∥Kt ∥F ), similar to how learning a “4” influences the prediction of a “9” in the MNIST
example. At the same time, the increase of πθt (y+                                             +
                                                    u |χu ) naturally “pushes down” all y ̸= yu , because the
model’s predicted probability to all responses in Y-space must sum to one. The model’s behavior on different
y is mostly a trade-off among these pressures. To verify this claim, we finetune the model for several epochs
and evaluate the model’s prediction on all responses in Dprob every 25 updates (with a training batch size of 4,
the probing occurs every 100 examples). For each type of response, we average the model’s confidence on all
500 examples and report the mean value of their log-likelihood.
As demonstrated in the first panel of Figure 3, the model’s confidence on y+     u keeps increasing throughout the
whole learning process, which is straightforward because the main “pull-up” pressure is imposed directly on
y+                                                           +
  u . However, the behavior of some responses similar to yu is non-trivial. For example, we draw the following
types of responses in the same panel, i.e., the less preferred response for the same question (y−     u ), two types
                                                  +          +
of rephrases of y+u  generated    by  ChatGPT  (y gpts and y gptf ), another preferred   response randomly  selected
from the test set (y+
                    test ), or even a randomly generated   English     sentence (y hum ). The model’s confidence  in
these responses are all slightly increased at the beginning of training, and then gradually decrease as the
training goes on, even though the model never sees them during SFT. This counter-intuitive behavior can
be well explained by the learning dynamics we discussed before. Since all these examples are “similar” to
y+                                                                                                t
  u to some extent (at least, they are all common “standard English” sentences), their ∥K ∥F are reasonably
                          +
large. Then learning yu will indirectly increase the model’s confidence of these similar y. That is why the
corresponding πθt (y|χu ) are slightly increased at the beginning of training. However, as the training goes

                                                    7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Chosen v.s. rejected                         Non-human response            Whether y occured during training 90
                                                                                                             130
                                                                                                                                                                      SFT then DPO using similar hypers                          Accumulated influence
                         100                                          360
                                                                                                                                                            100                                                           yu+                            0.8
Averge log-probability                                                370
                                                                                                             140                                      100                                                                 yu                             0.6
                         120                                          380                                                                                   200                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +
                                                                      390                                    150                                      110                                                                                                0.2
                         140
                                                                                                                                                            300                                                          ygpts
                                                                      400                                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                             160                                      120   400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         yhum                             0.2
                                                                      410
                         160
                                              yu+             ygptf
                                                                +                                                                                                                                                        yj+ u
                                              yu
                                                                      420            yurnd
                                                                                       +                                    yj+ u                           500             yu+           ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                           +                yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                              ytest
                                                                +                                            170                                      130                                                                ytest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +
                         180                  ygpts
                                                +             yhum    430            yrnd
                                                                                      '                                     ytest
                                                                                                                              +                 yu+                         yu            ygpts             yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                            600
                                                                      440                                    180                                      140
                               0   1      2    3      4   5     6           0   1      2     3   4   5   6         0   1      2     3   4   5     6               0     2    4    6   8     10    12   14     16    18
                                       Number of epochs                             Number of epochs                       Number of epochs                            Number of epochs (<10 is SFT)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             yu +


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             yu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yhu
 Figure 3: First three: learning dynamics of SFT on different response types. Fourth: SFT 10 epochs then
 DPO. Last: the accumulated influence when SFT using different y (full results in Appendix C and D).


on, the model’s confidence on y+                                                        t
                                u keeps increasing and the update energy, the norm of GSFT in Equation (5),
gradually decreases. That means the indirect “pull-up” pressures are also diminished accordingly. Then, the
“push-down” pressure on all y ̸= y+
                                  u becomes dominant and all the related curves start going down.

To verify the existence of this global “push-down” pressure, we observe two types of responses; both have the
                                                                                        ′
same number of words as their y+   u . One is a purely random English word sequence yrnd . Another is a random
                                    +                    +
permutation of all the words in yu , which is called yurnd . Since both are not natural language, we expect the
∥Kt ∥F between them and y+                                                       +
                              u to be very small, which means learning from yu imposes almost no “pull-up”
pressure on them; thus the “push-down” pressure will dominate through the whole training procedure. These
analyses are well supported by the second panel in Figure 3, in which we see these πθt (y|χu ) all start from a
very small value, and keep decreasing throughout the training.
Another interesting type of responses is y+  j̸=u , a preferred response for another question xj̸=u in the training
set. For these responses, the model’s prediction on πθt (y+     j̸=u |χu ) will be kept influenced by two “pull-up”
pressures: one is from learning [xu ; y+
                                       u ], another   is from learning [xj̸=u ; y+
                                                                                 j̸=u ], where the latter might be even
                                                                    +
stronger as the gradient is directly calculated by observing yj̸=u . That explains why we see the confidence
on y+                                                                  +
     j̸=u keeps increasing with a smaller rate compared with yu in the third panel. Because the “pull-up”
pressure is always strong enough to counter the “push-down” one. These observations provide us with a
unique explanation of why specific types of hallucinations are amplified after SFT. Specifically, the increase
of πθt (y+
         j̸=u |χu ) means if we ask the model to answer a question xu , it might provide a response from (or
partially from) another unrelated question xj̸=u in the training set.
 Last, to further explore the “similarity” between different responses from the model’s perspective. we SFT
 the model using more types of responses and observe how πθ (y′ | χu ) changes accordingly. The results are
 demonstrated in Figure 3, where the blue and orange colors represent the positive and negative influence
 respectively. The x-axis is the updating response while the y-axis denotes the observing response. Hence the
 first column resembles how different [xu ; y′ ] changes when we SFT the model using [xu ; y+
                                                                                            u ]. One interesting
 finding is that all responses generated by ChatGPT are considered very similar to each other, regardless
 of how semantically different they are. Probably, LLM has its preferred idioms or phrases, which could be
 considered as a type of “fingerprint”. We left this interesting problem for our future work.

  4.2                              L EARNING DYNAMICS OF OFF - POLICY DPO

To verify our framework also explains the model’s behavior in preference tuning, we conduct similar
                                                           t                                                    −
experiments for DPO. Recall the residual term GDPO              introduces a pair of arrows on both y+u and yu , with
different directions. To show how these two pressures influence the model, we check two types of rephrases
           −    +      +       −           −
of y+u or yu (ygpts , ygptf , ygpts , and ygptf , used in the previous experiment). See the three curves in the first
panel in Figure 4, where the two rephrases decrease at a similar speed, faster than the decay of y+          u . That is
because the upward pressure is directly imposed on y+          u rather than these rephrases. Similarly, in the second


                                                                                                                             8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Chosen v.s. its rephrases         Rejected v.s. its rephrases         Rejected v.s. its rephrases             Chosen v.s. rejected       Where the probability mass gone?
                                                               120                                 120                                 120
                         140
Averge log-probability                                         140                                                                     140
                                                                                                   140                                                                      100
                         160
                                                               160                                                                     160
                                                                                                                                                                                           All other responses
                         180                                   180
                                                                                                   160
                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                       180
                                                                                                                                                                            150
                                           yu+                 200            yu                   180               ygpts             200                                  200
                         200               ygpts
                                             +
                                                               220
                                                                              ygpts                200               ygptf
                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                       220             yu+
                         220               ygptf
                                             +
                                                               240
                                                                              ygptf                220               ygptf             240
                                                                                                                                                       yu                   250         Argmax
                               0       2       4   6      8          0    2       4    6     8           0       2       4   6   8           0     2         4   6      8         0    2       4     6      8
                                      Number of epochs                   Number of epochs                    Number of epochs                    Number of epochs                     Number of epochs

 Figure 4: Learning dynamics of off-policy DPO. The last panel verifies the existence of the squeezing effect.


 panel, we observe that y−                                            t
                         u decays faster than its rephrases, because GDPO directly imposes a negative pressure
 on yu . Then in the third panel, we find the rephrases of yu consistently decay slower than those of y−
      −                                                        +
                                                                                                               u,
                                                                                                             −
 although none of them ever occur during training. That is because these responses are close to y+     u or yu in
                                                                                               −
 Y, which means their ∥Kt ∥F is relatively large. Hence the pressures imposed on y+   u and yu also introduce
                                                                                                    −
 a non-negligible influence on them. Last, in the fourth panel, the margin πθt (y+u |χu ) − π θ t (yu |χu ) keeps
                                                                        +       −
 increasing, which means the model is gaining the ability to separate yu and yu as the training goes on.
             t
Although GDPO   directly imposes a “pull-up” pressure on y+                           +
                                                              u , the value of πθ t (yu |χu ) does not increase a lot
                                                −
as it does in SFT. The downward arrow on yu indeed introduces a “push-down” pressure on responses that
are similar to y−                                                                                  t
                u , but the influence is unlikely to be that strong (it will be weakened by ∥K ∥F ) to make the
confidence on almost every observing responses decrease so fast, as demonstrated in the last panel of Figure 3
where we use similar η for both SFT and DPO. Then, where has the probability mass gone during DPO? The
key to answering this question is the squeezing effect discussed in Section 3.3: since the big negative gradient
is imposed on y−u , which is at this point probably in a region of low πθ t (y|χu ), the confidence of most y will
be decreased and πθt (y∗ |χu ) will increase very fast.
To verify this, we report the log-likelihood of y chosen by greedy decoding: each token is chosen by
maximizing the conditional probability given [xu ; y+                              +                        +
                                                       <l ] in real-time, where y<l is a sub-sequence of yu . As
illustrated by the last panel of Figure 4, the confidence of this “teacher forcing” greedy y increases very fast
(from -113 to -63), which is even faster than the increase of πθt (y+u |χu ) during SFT (from -130 to -90), within
8 epochs. However, the tokens with the highest confidence do not necessarily form a preferred response: it
will reinforce the prior bias in θ0 . This could be a reasonable explanation of the “degeneration” reported in
recent work (e.g. Holtzman et al. 2020): as πθt becomes more peaky at its most confident predictions, it is
easier to sample sequences with repeated phrases. Note that such behavior could also be understood as a
special type of self-bias amplifying (Ren et al. 2024), which would bring more serious consequences if it is
combined with a multiple-generation self-improving algorithm, e.g., self-reward (Yuan et al. 2024), iterative
DPO (Xiong et al. 2024), etc.
In summary, the behaviors of different types of responses all match our analyses well. More subtle trends of
different responses support our story well (both for SFT and DPO).Due to space constraints, we explain these
(and the full results on other models and datasets) in Appendix D.

  4.3                              M ITIGATING THE SQUEEZING EFFECT BY AUGMENTING THE TRAINING SET FOR SFT

Since the “squeezing effect” caused by the big negative gradient on unlikely predictions can damage the
                                                                                              −
model’s performance during DPO, we can first train the model on both [xu ; y+  u ] and [xu ; yu ] during the SFT
stage (making the negative response more likely), and then run the usual DPO. Following the analysis above,
                                                                                           −
we can expect during this new SFT stage, the region of those responses similar to y+u or yu will be “pulled up”
                                                                             −
simultaneously. This is what we want because in many cases, both y+ u  and y u  are reasonably    good responses
for the question xu ; the new SFT design hence helps to pull up a larger region that contains more suitable
responses compared with the baseline SFT. After that, the “push-down” pressure imposed during DPO can

                                                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                       50
                                        Chosen yu+               50
                                                                                    Rejected yu                                   Other responses             80
                                                                                                                                                                            Argmax response
                                                                                                              100
                       100                                       100                                                                                          90



     Log probability
                                                                                                              200
                       150                                       150                                                    All rephrases                         100
                                                                                                              300
                       200                                       200                                                                                          110
                                                                           yu is the                          400                                                                    Drop at the
                                                     baseline              peak now                                     Non-human                                                    start of DPO
                       250
                                                     extend
                                                                 250
                                                                                                              500
                                                                                                                         sequence                             120

                       300                                       300                                                                                          130
                             0   2       4      6       8   10         0      2        4     6       8   10         0         2         4    6       8   10         0   2       4      6       8    10
                                     Number of epochs                             Number of epochs                                Number of epochs                          Number of epochs


Figure 5: Learning dynamics of the baseline and the proposed method with training data extension. Key
trends to observe: 1.) Baseline and the extend method have similar behavior on y+    u during SFT; 2.) The
extend method considerably increase y−u during SFT; 3.) The squeezing effect of the extend method is weaker
(all other responses decay slower and the confidence on the “greedy-decoding” response increases slower).


efficiently decrease the model’s confidence on y−                                   −
                                                u and its similar responses. Since yu is no longer so unlikely
before DPO, the squeezing effect should not be as strong as in the baseline procedure.
We call our training pipeline “extend” and compare its learning dynam-
ics with the baseline setting in Figure 5. It is clear that the squeezing Table 1: Win-rate against baseline.
effect is mitigated, because the confidence of other responses all decays
slower during DPO, and we also observe a big drop in the greedy- DPO Ep. ChatGPT Claude
decoding response when DPO starts. To further show that mitigating               0         0.4729      0.4679
the squeezing effect indeed brings benefits, we compare the responses            2         0.6518      0.5151
generated by models trained using different methods by feeding them              4         0.6928      0.6045
to ChatGPT and Claude3. Specifically, we first SFT the model for                 6         0.6667      0.5432
two epochs using two methods discussed above and call the resulting
policy network πbase and πextend . Then, we conduct identical DPO
training on both πbase and πextend for several epochs. The win rate of the proposed method against the baseline
one is provided in Table 1. It is clear that before DPO, πbase is better, because πextend is explicitly trained
on those y− . However, the πextend performs better after DPO several epochs since the squeezing effect is
efficiently mitigated. Please refer to Appendix F for more details. In the future, this simple method inspired
by our analysis could be further improved by introducing more responses, e.g., rephrases of y+   u , etc., during
both stages, and also by combining with many existing RL-free methods we mentioned before.

5   C ONCLUSION
Learning dynamics, which depict how the model’s prediction changes when it learns new examples, provide a
powerful tool to analyze the behavior of models trained with gradient descent. To better utilize this tool in
the context of LLM finetuning, we first derive the step-wise decomposition of LLM finetuning for various
common algorithms. Then, we propose a unified framework for understanding LLM predictions’ behaviors
across different finetuning methods. The proposed analysis successfully explains various phenomena during
LLM’s instruction tuning and preference tuning, some of them are quite counter-intuitive. We also shed
light on how specific hallucinations are introduced in the SFT stage, as previously observed (Gekhman et al.
2024), and where the improvements of some new RL-free algorithms come from compared with the vanilla
off-policy DPO. The analysis of the squeezing effect also has the potential to be applied to other deep learning
systems which apply big negative gradients to already-unlikely outcomes. Finally, inspired by this analysis,
we propose a simple (but counter-intuitive) method that is effective in improving the alignment of models.


                                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was enabled in part by support provided by the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program, WestGrid,
and Compute Canada. We thank Shangmin Guo, Noam Razin, Wonho Bae, and Hamed Shirzad for their
valuable discussions and feedback. We also appreciate the constructive comments from the anonymous
reviewers, which helped improve this work.

R EFERENCES

Sanjeev Arora, Simon S. Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang (2019). “On
  Exact Computation with an Infinitely Wide Neural Net.” NeurIPS. arXiv: 1904.11955.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal Valko,
 and Daniele Calandriello (2024). “A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
 preferences.” International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, pages 4447–4455.

Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, and et.al (2023). “Qwen Technical Report.” arXiv: 2309.16609.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
  Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. (2022). “Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
  reinforcement learning from human feedback.” arXiv: 2204.05862.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan,
   Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. (2023). “Pythia: A
   suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling.” ICML. PMLR, pages 2397–2430.

Massimo Caccia, Lucas Caccia, William Fedus, Hugo Larochelle, Joelle Pineau, and Laurent Charlin (2020).
 “Language GANs Falling Short.” International Conference on Learning Representations.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu (2024). “Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models.” arXiv: 2401.01335.
Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend (2020). “On the Weaknesses of Reinforcement
  Learning for Neural Machine Translation.” International Conference on Learning Representations.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei (2017). “Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences.” NeurIPS.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and
  Maosong Sun (2023). “UltraFeedback: Boosting Language Models with High-quality Feedback.” arXiv:
  2310.01377 [cs.CL].

Dan Feldman (2020). “Introduction to core-sets: an updated survey.” arXiv: 2011.09384.

Zorik Gekhman, Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, Matan Eyal, Amir Feder, Roi Reichart, and Jonathan Herzig
  (2024). “Does Fine-Tuning LLMs on New Knowledge Encourage Hallucinations?” arXiv: 2405.05904.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong
  Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. (2025). “Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via
  reinforcement learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948.
Shangmin Guo, Yi Ren, Stefano V Albrecht, and Kenny Smith (2024). “lpNTK: Better Generalisation with
  Less Data via Sample Interaction During Learning.” ICLR.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre Rame,
  Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. (2024). “Direct language model alignment from online AI
  feedback.” arXiv: 2402.04792.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean (2015). “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.” arXiv:
  1503.02531.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi (2020). “The Curious Case of Neural Text
  Degeneration.” ICLR.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
  Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. (2023). “A survey on hallucination in large language
  models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions.” arXiv: 2311.05232.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler (2018). “Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks.” NeurIPS.
Haozhe Ji, Cheng Lu, Yilin Niu, Pei Ke, Hongning Wang, Jun Zhu, Jie Tang, and Minlie Huang (2024).
  “Towards Efficient and Exact Optimization of Language Model Alignment.” arXiv: 2402.00856.

Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Matthew Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang (2022). “Fine-
  Tuning can Distort Pretrained Features and Underperform Out-of-Distribution.” ICLR.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner (1998). “Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition.” Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11, pages 2278–2324.
Sheng Liu, Jonathan Niles-Weed, Narges Razavian, and Carlos Fernandez-Granda (2020). “Early-learning
  regularization prevents memorization of noisy labels.” NeurIPS.

Mohamad Amin Mohamadi, Wonho Bae, and Danica J. Sutherland (2022). “Making Look-Ahead Active
 Learning Strategies Feasible with Neural Tangent Kernels.” NeurIPS. arXiv: 2206.12569.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. (2022). “Training language models to follow instruc-
  tions with human feedback.” NeurIPS, pages 27730–27744.

Arka Pal, Deep Karkhanis, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Siddartha Naidu, and Colin White (2024).
  “Smaug: Fixing Failure Modes of Preference Optimisation with DPO-Positive.” arXiv: 2402.13228.
Core Francisco Park, Maya Okawa, Andrew Lee, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, and Hidenori Tanaka (2024).
  “Emergence of Hidden Capabilities: Exploring Learning Dynamics in Concept Space.” The Thirty-eighth
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Garima Pruthi, Frederick Liu, Satyen Kale, and Mukund Sundararajan (2020). “Estimating training data
  influence by tracing gradient descent.” NeurIPS.

Rafael Rafailov, Joey Hejna, Ryan Park, and Chelsea Finn (2024). “From r to Q∗ : Your Language Model is
  Secretly a Q-Function.” arXiv: 2404.12358.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn
  (2023). “Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.” NeurIPS.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Noam Razin, Sadhika Malladi, Adithya Bhaskar, Danqi Chen, Sanjeev Arora, and Boris Hanin (2025).
 “Unintentional Unalignment: Likelihood Displacement in Direct Preference Optimization.” The Thirteenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Wonho Bae, and Danica J. Sutherland (2023). “How to prepare your task head for
   finetuning.” ICLR.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Matthieu Labeau, Shay B. Cohen, and Simon Kirby (2020). “Compositional languages
   emerge in a neural iterated learning model.” ICLR.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, Linlu Qiu, Bailin Wang, and Danica J Sutherland (2024). “Bias Amplification in
   Language Model Evolution: An Iterated Learning Perspective.” NeurIPS.
Yi Ren, Shangmin Guo, and Danica J. Sutherland (2022). “Better Supervisory Signals by Observing Learning
   Paths.” ICLR.
Yi Ren, Samuel Lavoie, Michael Galkin, Danica J Sutherland, and Aaron C Courville (2023). “Improving
   compositional generalization using iterated learning and simplicial embeddings.” NeurIPS.
Yi Ren and Danica J. Sutherland (2024). “Understanding Simplicity Bias towards Compositional Mappings
   via Learning Dynamics.” NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Compositional Learning: Perspectives, Methods,
   and Paths Forward.

Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo (2024). “Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage?” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov (2017). “Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Burr Settles (2009). “Active learning literature survey.”

Fahim Tajwar, Anikait Singh, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Jeff Schneider, Tengyang Xie, Stefano Ermon,
  Chelsea Finn, and Aviral Kumar (2024). “Preference Fine-Tuning of LLMs Should Leverage Suboptimal,
  On-Policy Data.” arXiv: 2404.14367 [cs.LG].
Yunhao Tang, Daniel Zhaohan Guo, Zeyu Zheng, Daniele Calandriello, Yuan Cao, Eugene Tarassov, Rémi
  Munos, Bernardo Ávila Pires, Michal Valko, Yong Cheng, et al. (2024). “Understanding the performance
  gap between online and offline alignment algorithms.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08448.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin (2017). “Attention Is All You Need.” NeurIPS. arXiv: 1706.03762.

Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros (2018). “Dataset distillation.” arXiv:
  1811.10959.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M.
   Dai, and Quoc V Le (2022). “Finetuned Language Models are Zero-Shot Learners.” ICLR.
Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu (2024). “Self-play
  preference optimization for language model alignment.” arXiv: 2405.00675.

Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi, Suchin Gururangan, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen (2024). “Less: Selecting
  influential data for targeted instruction tuning.” arXiv: 2402.04333.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang (2024).
 “Iterative Preference Learning from Human Feedback: Bridging Theory and Practice for RLHF under
 KL-constraint.” ICML.

Zhaorui Yang, Qian Liu, Tianyu Pang, Han Wang, Haozhe Feng, Minfeng Zhu, and Wei Chen (2024).
  “Self-Distillation Bridges Distribution Gap in Language Model Fine-Tuning.” arXiv: 2402.13669.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston
 (2024). “Self-rewarding language models.” arXiv: 2401.10020.

Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei (2024). “Negative preference optimization: From catastrophic
  collapse to effective unlearning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05868.
Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao, Yu Zhang,
  Yulong Chen, et al. (2023). “Siren’s song in the AI ocean: a survey on hallucination in large language
  models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219.
Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu (2023). “Slic-hf:
  Sequence likelihood calibration with human feedback.” arXiv: 2305.10425.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A        M ORE R ELATED W ORKS
A.1       M ORE ABOUT LEARNING DYNAMICS

Instead of emphasizing the model’s convergence status and guarantees, learning dynamics focus more on its
relative behavior during training. Since many LLMs exhibit “emergent ability” during training in terms of
the amount of training data or inference time (Schaeffer et al. 2024), like the “aha moment” mentioned in
D. Guo et al. (2025), we hence believe the analysis of learning dynamics can provide a novel perspective on
understanding the LLM system.
Beyond their application to LLMs, learning dynamics are widely utilized in analyzing various machine
learning problems. For example, if we consider xu from the training set, and xo from the test set, this form of
learning dynamics provides a new perspective on generalization: the model generalizes better if the loss of
fθ (xo ) keeps decreasing when it learns from xu . By studying the influence of different xu at different stages
during supervised learning, Ren et al. (2022) explain a “zigzag” pattern of the learning path, which sheds
light on why the model can spontaneously pursue better supervisory signals and correct noisy labels in the
early stage of training (see also S. Liu et al. 2020). Kumar et al. (2022) and Ren, S. Guo, et al. (2023) apply
learning dynamics to explain why directly finetuning a well-trained backbone with a randomly initialized task
head might harm the out-of-distribution generalization ability. Ren et al. (2020), Ren, Lavoie, et al. (2023),
and Ren and Sutherland (2024) also explains where the simplicity bias favoring compositional representations
comes from during knowledge distillation (Hinton et al. 2015), providing a new perspective of understanding
why successive knowledge transferring can improve the model’s systematic generalization ability.
Besides explaining the model’s behavior, learning dynamics is also helpful for evaluating the quality or the
effectiveness of different training samples. For example, Pruthi et al. (2020) propose a quantitative metric
called TracIn to compute the influence of a training example on the predictions made by the model. This
metric is then applied by Xia et al. (2024) to search for the most influential examples in LLM instruction
finetuning. By expanding Equation (1) in the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime, S. Guo, Ren, et al. (2024)
propose a metric called lpNTK to measure the relative difficulty among different training samples. These
metrics and analyses inspired by learning dynamics are expected to be helpful in many related fields, like
coreset selection (Feldman 2020), active learning (Settles 2009) (see, e.g., Mohamadi et al. 2022), and dataset
distillation (T. Wang et al. 2018).

A.2       M ORE ABOUT LLM’ S FINETUNING

In this paper, we broadly define finetuning as any in-weight learning on top of a pretrained base model,
including supervised finetuning (SFT), direct policy optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al. 2023) and its variants,
etc. Since the analysis throughout this paper relies on the “teacher forcing” mechanism and the relatively stable
eNTK assumption, our framework cannot be directly applied to algorithms with token-wise supervision like
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF, Ouyang et al. 2022) and proximal policy optimization
(PPO, Schulman et al. 2017)1 . We leave the study of the token-wise learning dynamics, which aligns better
with the “squeezing effect” in real settings, to future work.
We also identify several related works that report similar observations on the phenomena discussed in this
paper. For example, Gekhman et al. (2024) and Yue Zhang et al. (2023) mentioned that learning new facts
during SFT tends to make the model hallucinate more, which aligns with our finding that the model tends to
use y+
     j̸=i when answering question i. Holtzman et al. (2020) related the peakiness of the model’s distribution
to LLM’s “repeater phenomena”, which also indirectly supports our claims well: more DPO leads to a more
serious squeezing effect, hence the model’s prediction becomes peakier on most tokens, which makes the
aforementioned phenomena more common.
    1
        If the implementation indeed applies the teacher forcing mechanism, our analysis still works.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, the “confidence decaying on y+   u ” attracts more attention in the community, because it is quite
counter-intuitive and the vanilla off-policy DPO algorithm works reasonably well in most cases. Many related
works study this phenomenon by analyzing the major discrepancy between off-policy DPO and PPO, i.e.,
where the samples used to train the model comes from, e.g., S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. (2024), Rafailov et al.
(2024), and Tang et al. (2024). They showed that when the responses are off-policy sampled, the learning
process may fail to benefit from the contrastive information in the data. In other words, we should be more
careful when working on the “valley” region of the model’s distribution. Other works try to analyze this
problem by inspecting the token-level influence between responses. For example, Pal et al. (2024) assumes
          −
y+                                                                                                  +
  u and yu are identical expect one token. Under this assumption, the model’s confidence of yu after the
identical token is guaranteed to decrease. They propose a solution by significantly enhancing the learning rate
(roughly x50 larger when their λ = 50) of the positive part when detecting yu located in a low-confidence
region. Razin et al. (2025) takes the similarity between the hidden embeddings and the geometry of the
readout layer of different responses into account. Most of the conclusions of their paper align with ours well.
The main discrepancy lies in the squeezing effect part, which we will discuss in our future work (they do not
contradict each other, but need a more detailed analysis to understand the whole story).


A.3    B ENIGN AND HARMFUL NEGATIVE GRADIENT

The “squeezing effect” can negatively impact our analysis when it is strongly imposed in a valley region
of the model. However, a well-regulated negative gradient is both beneficial and commonly observed in
many deep-learning systems. For example, it is common in many “machine unlearning” algorithms, e.g., in
Ruiqi Zhang et al. (2024). Moreover, even in the field of LLM finetuning, we can find many mechanisms
in different popular algorithms that can mitigate this effect. For example, the typical learning rate of DPO
is usually smaller than that used in SFT, which unintentionally mitigates the harmful squeezing effect. The
on-policy counterpart of the DPO-like algorithms is shown to perform better than their off-policy counterparts,
which also supports our claims. Furthermore, we find the PPO loss automatically avoids imposing a big
negative gradient (when its Ât is negative) on the valley region (when its πθ is small).
On the other hand, the effect that negative gradients make the model’s distribution peakier is independently
reported in many related works. For example, Equation 1 in Caccia et al. (2020) shows that we are minimizing
a negative thing in a standard GAN loss, which might explain why peakiness occurs. Furthermore, in
Table 1 and Table 2 of Choshen et al. (2020), we see the peakiness (measured by ∆ptop10 , ∆pmode ) of the
“PG-average” method is stronger than the standard PG method. Note that the “PG-average” method will
map a reward ranging from 0 to 1 to a centered one ranging from -0.5 to 0.5. Since the negative reward can
introduce a negative gradient, the peakiness increases.


B     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITIONS AND R ESIDUAL T ERM FOR D IFFERENT L OSSES

B.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1. Let π = Softmax(z) and z = hθ (x). The one-step learning dynamics decompose as

                ∆ log π t (y | xo ) = −η At (xo ) Kt (xo , xu ) G t (xu , yu ) + O(η 2 ∥∇θ z(xu )∥2op ),          (3)
                |      {z        }       | {z } | {z } | {z }
                       V ×1                V ×V       V ×V         V ×1


where At (xo ) = ∇z log πθt (xo ) = I − 1πθ⊤t (xo ), Kt (xo , xu ) = (∇θ z(xo )|θt )(∇θ z(xu )|θt )⊤ is the empirical
neural tangent kernel of the logit network z, and G t (xu , yu ) = ∇z L(xu , yu )|zt .


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. 2 Suppose we want to observe the model’s prediction on an “observing example” xo . Starting from
Equation (2), we first approximate log π t+1 (y | xo ) using first-order Taylor expansion (we use π t to represent
πθt interchangeably for notation conciseness):
           log π t+1 (y | xo ) = log π t (y | xo ) + ⟨∇ log π t (y | xo ), θt+1 − θt ⟩ + O(∥θt+1 − θt ∥2 ).
Then, assuming the model updates its parameters using SGD calculated by an “updating example” (xu , yu ),
we can rearrange the terms in the above equation to get the following expression:
∆ log π t (y | xo ) = log π t+1 (y | xo ) − log π t (y | xo ) = ∇θ log π t (y | xo )|θt θt+1 − θt +O ∥θt+1 −θt ∥2 ,

                      |        {z      } |         {z      } |            {z          }|   {z    }
                           V ×1               V ×1                      V ×d                d×1
where d is the number of parameters of the model. To evaluate the leading term, we plug in the definition of
SGD and repeatedly use the chain rule:
                                                                                          T
 ∇θ log π t (y | xo )|θt θt+1 − θt = ∇z log π t (xo )|zt ∇θ zt (xo )|θt − η ∇θ L(xu )|θt

 |         {z          }|   {z    }    |     {z        } |    {z      }     |   {z     }
          V ×d              d×1                 V ×V                 V ×d                   1×d
                                                                                                             T
                                     = ∇z log π t (xo )|zt ∇θ zt (xo )|θt −η∇z L(xu )|zt ∇θ zt (xu )|θt
                                       |      {z         }|     {z      } |    {z      }|     {z      }
                                              V ×V               V ×d                1×V            V ×d
                                                       t
                                                                        t               t
                                                                                                   T      T
                                     = −η ∇z log π (xo )|zt ∇θ z (xo )|θt ∇θ z (xu )|θt     ∇z L(xu )|zt
                                          |      {z       } |    {z     }|      {z      } |      {z       }
                                                  V ×V                  V ×d               d×V             V ×1

                                     = −ηAt (xo )Kt (xo , xu )G t (xu , yu )                                      (8)

For the higher-order term, using as above that
                                    θt+1 − θt = −η∇θ zt (xu )|T    t
                                                              θ t G (xu , ŷ)
                                             t
and noting that, since the residual term G is usually bounded (and the practical algorithms will also use
gradient clip to avoid too large gradient), we have that
                                                       T
          O ∥θt+1 − θt ∥2 = O η 2 ∥ ∇θ zt (xu )|θt ∥2op ∥G t (xu , ŷ)∥2op = O η 2 ∥∇θ z(xu )∥2op .



In the decomposition, using {π1 , . . . , πV } to represent the model’s prediction on different dimensions, we
can write our At as:
                                                      1 − π1     −π1     ···    −π1
                                                                                    
                                                      −π2      1 − π2 · · ·    −π2 
                      At (xo ) = I − 1(π t )⊤ =                         ..          ,                     (9)
                                                      ...        ...       .   ... 
                                                           −πV       −πV       ···   1 − πV

The second term in this decomposition, Kt (xo , xu ), is the product of gradients at xo and xu . Intuitively,
if their gradients have similar directions, the Frobenius norm of this matrix is large, and vice versa. This
matrix is known as the empirical neural tangent kernel, and it can change through the course of training as
the network’s notion of “similarity” evolves. For appropriately initialized very wide networks trained with
very small learning rates, Kt remains almost constant during the course of training, the kernel it converges to
is known as the neural tangent kernel (Arora et al. 2019; Jacot et al. 2018). Note that the assumption that
Kt (xo , xu ) is unchanged (usually used in theoretical analysis) might be too strong in the LLM’s finetuning.
Hence as stated in the main context, our qualitative analysis only assumes that “during the training, the
relative influence of learning xu on all other different xo is relatively stable”. We will validate this assumption
using experiments in Appendix C.
   2
     Note that this proposition assumes L = 1. For L > 1 case, we will have multiple task heads which leads to L
different Equation (3). The V × L matrix ∆ log π t can then be achieved by stacking them.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2       R ESIDUAL T ERM FOR D IFFERENT LLM F INETUNING A LGORITHMS

As stated in Section 3, one of the conundrums of decomposing the learning dynamics of LLM is its auto-
regression nature of the output sequence. Different from the multi-label classification problem, where yl for
different l is independently generated as long as the shared network is fixed, the yl for the LLM’s output
depends on y<l , which is usually sampled from the model’s prediction iteratively. However, in most of
the finetuning cases where the supervisory signal yu is given, the model will apply the so-called “teacher
forcing” mechanism when calculating the predicting probabilities. In other words, when generating the
output of each yl , the y<l is given rather than sampled on-policy. This mechanism makes it possible for us
to define χ = [x; y] and hence merge the auto-regressive nature of the sequence prediction into the shared
Kt (χo , χu ). After this step, the decomposition of LLM’s finetuning learning dynamics then becomes similar
to a multi-label classification task.

B.2.1      I NSTRUCTION FINETUNING USING AUTO - REGRESSION LOSS (SFT)
Here we derive the residual term, i.e., G t for different algorithms in LLM’s finetuning. We first rewrite
Equation (5) here:
                                              L
                                              X
                 [∆ log π t (y | χo )]m = −         η[ At (χo ) ]m [Kt (χo , χu )]l [G t (χu )]l + O(η 2 ),
                  |      {z        }                   | {z } | {z } | {z }
                        V ×M                  l=1     V ×V ×M         V ×V ×L         V ×L

                                                         t
where m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, l ∈ {1, . . . , L}, and G (χu ) = ∇z L(χu )|zt is a V × L matrix. As the auto-
regression nature of the SFT loss is already encoded in the causal mask used in hθ , as demonstrated in
Figure 10a. the columns in G t (χu ) are independent of each other, which can be separately calculated. Plus,
the summation over l can also be achieved by left-multiplying a length-L all-one vector 1. Specifically, the
SFT loss for each l is:
          [LSFT (χu )]l = − log π(yl = yu+ | χu ) = −e⊤
                                                      y+
                                                         log π(yl | χu ) = −e⊤
                                                                             y+
                                                                                log (Softmax(zl )) ,
                                                             u                           u


where yu+ is for the l-th dimension of y+
                                        u . The gradient of L on z can be then calculated as:
                                                                            ⊤
                           t
                         [GSFT (χu )]l = ∇zl [LSFT (χu )]l = ∇π [LSFT (χu )]l  ∇zl π
                                         |      {z      }     |     {z      }    | {z }
                                                1×V                           V ×1           V ×V
                                                           ⊤
                                     = − eyu+ ⊘ π              ∇zl π = π(yl | χu ) − eyu+ ,                   (10)

where ⊘ is element-wise division.
To calculate the equation above, we first recall the NLL loss of the l-th token is [LSFT ]l ≜ L = − log π(yl =
yl+ ) = −e⊤yl+
               log π, where π = Softmax(z). Then, ∇z L = ∇π L ∇z π . For each dimension of ∇z Ll , we
                                                       |{z}    | {z } |{z}
                                                             1×V       1×V V ×V
                       +                       +
have ∂L                       ∂L     1
     πi = 0 if πi ̸= yl and πi = − πi if πi = yl . By writing it in vector form, we have ∇z L =
−(ey+ ⊘ π)⊤ ∇z π. For ∇z π, we have:
      l


                                    π1 (1 − π1 ) −π2 π1                ···       −πV π1
                                                                                       
                                    −π1 π2      1 − π2 π2             ···       −πV π2 
                            ∇z π =                                    ..               .
                                        ...        ...                   .       ...   
                                     −π1 πV       −π2 πV               ···      1 − πV πV

                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining this matrix and the 1 × V vector (ey+ ⊘ π)⊤ , where the only non-zero term is π1k at the k = yl+
                                                    l
position. So, left multiplying by this vector is actually first selecting the k-th row of ∇z π, and then multiplying
 1
πk to it. In summary, we have:


           1
∇z L = −      [−πk π1 , −πk π2 , . . . , −πk (1 − πk ), . . . , −πk πV ]⊤ = [π1 , π2 , . . . , πk − 1, . . . , πV ]⊤ = π − ek
           πk


By stacking the terms with different l ∈ [L], we can get

                                  t
                                 GSFT (χu ) = ∇z LSFT (χu )|zt = πθt (y | χu ) − y+
                                                                                  u                                     (11)


B.2.2     D IFFERENT PREFERENCE FINETUNING ALGORITHMS

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al. (2023)) is usually considered the first RL-free alignment
algorithm for preference finetuning. Different from the standard RLHF (reinforcement learning with human
feedback (Christiano et al. 2017)), the training of off-policy DPO is more similar to SFT, where the model
keeps learning from a pre-generated preference dataset. Hence, we start from DPO to analyze the learning
dynamics of different preference finetuning algorithms (the on-policy versions of these algorithms could also
be explained using the proposed framework).
Following Rafailov et al. 2023, the training loss of DPO is:

                                                         πθt (y+     +
                                                                               πθt (y−     −

                                                                u | χu )              u | χu )
               LDPO (θ) = −E(xu ,y+   −      log σ β log             + − β log                    .                     (12)
                                  u ,yu )∼D
                                                         πref (y+
                                                                u | χu )       πref (y−    −
                                                                                      u | χu )



                                          t
Before calculating the residual term GDPO    , we need to re-calculate the learning dynamics decomposi-
                                                                                 −      −
tion, because the loss term now depends on both πθt (y+            +
                                                            u | χu ) and πθ t (yu | χu ), which involves
two different z terms. Specifically, we define πθt (yu | χu ) = Softmax_column(z+ ) and πθt (y−
                                                         +      +
                                                                                                        u |
χ−                           −
  u ) = Softmax_column(z ), where z
                                           +
                                             = hθ (χ+ u ) and z
                                                               −
                                                                  = hθ (χ−                    +          +
                                                                          u ) respectively (χu = [xu ; yu ]
      −         −
and χu = [xu ; yu ]). Then, starting from L = 1, the decomposition for the DPO loss (similar to Equation (8)
for SFT) could be written as:


                                                                                                        T
                    ∆θt = ∇z log π t (χo )|zt ∇θ zt (χo )|θt
∇θ log π t (χo )|θt |{z}                                                  − η ∇θ L(xu , y+ , y− )|θt

|      {z         }       |      {z         }|      {z     }                  |        {zu u }
        V ×d         d×1             V ×V                 V ×d                         1×d
                                                                                                −   −
                                                                                                         T
                           = ∇z log π (χo )|zt ∇θ z (χo )|θt −η∇[z+ ;z− ] L|zt ∇θ z+ (χ+
                                      t               t

                                                                                       u ); ∇θ z (χu ) |θ t
                             |      {z       }|      {z     } |        {z    }|             {z            }
                                  V ×V              V ×d              1×2V               2V ×d
                                                   h                                         T i                     T
                                                                                    −  −
                           = −η ∇z log π t (xo )|zt ∇θ zt (xo )|θt ∇θ z+ (χ+

                                                                           u ); ∇θ z (χu ) |θ t     ∇[z+ ;z− ] L|zt
                                |      {z         } |    {z      }|             {z              } |        {z        }
                                          V ×V                 V ×d                     d×2V                         2V ×1
                                                                −
                                                                                     T
                           = −ηAt (χo ) Kt (χo , χ+     t

                                                  u ); K (χo , χu ) ∇[z+ ;z− ] L|zt
                                                                            −          −
                           ≜ −ηAt (χo ) Kt (χo , χ+   t      +      t           t

                                                  u )GDPO+ (χu ) − K (χo , χu )GDPO- (χu )                              (13)


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             t                                    −
where [·; ·] are concatenation of two vectors or matrices, GDPO+  (χ+                      t
                                                                     u ) ≜ ∇z+ LDPO , and GDPO- (χu ) ≜
∇z− LDPO . To calculate the residual terms, we decompose the loss into:
                                    −
                   LDPO (xu , y+
                               u , yu | θ) = − log(a)
                                         a ≜ σ(b)
                                                                                −    −
                                         b ≜ β log πθt (y+     +

                                                          u | χu ) − log πθ t (yu | χu ) − c
                                                                       −
                                           = −β LSFT (χ+

                                                          u ) − LSFT (χu ) − c
                                                                                −    −
                                         c ≜ β log πref (y+    +

                                                          u | χu ) − log πref (yu | χu ,                      (14)
                                                                                            t
where c is not a function of θ. Using the chain rule, the l-th column of the residual term GDPO+ can be
                                 t
calculated as (the calculate of GDPO- is similar):

                                    t       ∂LDPO ∂a
                                   GDPO+ =           ∇ + b|zt
                                              ∂a ∂b z
                                              1
                                          = − a(1 − a)∇z+ bl |z+
                                              a
                                          = β(1 − a) πθt (y+     +     +

                                                           u | χu ) − yu .


By stacking values with different l, we can get the residual term of DPO as
            t
                 = β(1 − a) πθt (y | χ+          +            t
                                                                   = β(1 − a) πθt (y | χ−      −

          GDPO+                           u ) − yu ;        GDPO-                       u ) − yu
                              πθt (y+      +
                                                       πref (y+     +

                                     u | χu )                  u | χu )
               a = σ β log                 − − β log                                                          (15)
                              πθt (y−u | χu )          πref (y−     −
                                                               u | χu )


Similarly, we can calculate the residual terms for other off-policy preference optimization methods, like
Identity-preference Optimization (IPO (Azar et al. 2024)):
                                     "                                                  2 #
                                              πθt (y+     +
                                                     u | χu )      πθt (y−     −
                                                                          u | χu )  1
            LIPO = −E(xu ,y+   −          log             + − log              − −           .       (16)
                           u ,yu )∼D
                                              πref (y+
                                                     u | χu )      πref (y−
                                                                          u | χu ) 2β


                    t         t                     πθt (y+    +
                                                          u | χu )     πref (y+    +
                                                                              u | χu )  1
                   GIPO+/- = GDPO+/- ;    a = log         −    − − log        −    − −                        (17)
                                                    πθt (yu | χu )     πref (yu | χu ) 2β

For the Sequence Likelihood Calibration (SLiC (Y. Zhao et al. 2023)), we have:


                                                         πθt (y+    +

                                                               u | χu )
           LSLiC = −E(xu ,y+     −      max   0, δ − log                  −  β · log π θ t (y
                                                                                              ref | χref )    (18)
                             u ,yu )∼D
                                                         πθt (y−    −
                                                               u | χu )
                                                                        −
                                       max 0, δ + LSFT (χ+

                 = E(xu ,y+   −
                          u ,yu )∼D                       u ) − LSFT (χu ) + βLSFT (χref )                    (19)


                                                                                   πθt (y+

              t              t                                                           u)
             GSLiC+/- = a · GDPO+/- + β (πθt (y | χu ) − yref ) ;    a = 1 δ − log          > 0               (20)
                                                                                   πθt (y−
                                                                                         u)

In summary, these RL-free algorithms all relate to the SFT loss to some extent. For the DPO and IPO loss,
the directions of the updating signals are identical. A scalar controls the strength of this update, which
                                                                                                    −
usually correlated with the confidence gap between the model’s current confidence on y+     u and yu , i.e.,


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          π         (y+ |χ+ )
Gap(πθt ) ≜ log πθt (y−
                      u   u
                        |χ− )
                              . Generally, larger this value leads to a bigger a, making the norm of G t smaller.
                            θt        u   u
In other words, we see a “regularizing” effect in this term, where the model should not make Gap(πθt )
too large. The SLiC loss can be considered as a combination of SFT adaptation and preference adaptation.
Similarly, we can also see a hard version of the regularization effect mentioned above. If Gap(πθt ) > δ, the
                                                                                    −
indicator function will become zero, and the model stops pushing π(y+    u ) and π(yu ) away when it already
           +       −
separates yu and yu well.
Recently, authors of (Y. Wu et al. 2024) propose another interesting self-play alignment algorithm called
SPPO, which further improves the alignment performance on top of many on-policy DPO methods. Our
framework could also give an interesting explanation of why this method works so well. Specifically, the loss
function of SPPO can be written as:
                                    "                          2                             2 #
                                           πθt (y+     +
                                                  u | χu )  η            πθt (y−     −
                                                                                u | χu )  η
         LSPPO = −E(xu ,y+    −        log             + −       + log               − +          .      (21)
                          u ,yu )∼D
                                           πref (y+
                                                  u | χu )  2            πref (y−
                                                                                u | χu )  2


                                πθt (y+     +
                                                                                                               πθt (y−     −

                                       u | χu ) η                                                                     u | χu ) η
        t
       GSPPO =2             log        +    + −                      (πθt − y+
                                                                             u)+2                          log        −    − +                     (πθt − y−
                                                                                                                                                           u ).               (22)
                                πref (yu | χu ) 2                                                              πref (yu | χu ) 2

This loss looks similar to the IPO one, but the main difference between SPPO and other methods (e.g., DPO,
                                                                                              −    −
KTO, IPO, SPIN, etc.) is that there is no negative sign in front of πθt (y+     +
                                                                           u | χu ) or πθ t (yu | χu ). From its
                t
residual term GSPPO , it is more convenient to understand this algorithm as imposing two positive vectors on
              −
both y+u and yu , but the former has a longer norm, as illustrated in Figure 2. By doing so, the big negative
gradient no longer exists, and so does the squeezing effect. That is partly why this method is more stable and
performs better.


C      T HE “R ELATIVE S TABLE ” E NTK A SSUMPTION

We use this appendix to verify the core assumption of our analysis – during the training, the relative influence
of learning xu on all other different xo is relatively stable – on both MNIST and LLM finetuning settings. To
                                       t
make the notation concise, we use Kuo     to reprsent Kt (xo , xu ), Kt (χo , χu ) and other related variants.

 • Step1: Create probing dataset (#200)         • Step3: Calculate the NTK-norm tensor each epoch             • Step5: Visualize CoNTK : , u, 𝑖 for each 𝑖 in one figure.
   20 examples for each number                    [ Epoch, 200, 200, 1]       𝒦𝑡 𝑥 , 𝑥                          Align it with train/test loss, 𝒖,𝒐 𝓚𝒕𝒖𝒐 𝑭 ,
                                                                                           𝑢   𝑜   𝐹
                              ...                                                                               and          𝓚𝒕𝒖𝒐 − 𝓚𝒕−𝟏       together (observe different phases).
                                                                                                                       𝒖,𝒐           𝒖𝒐
            0 0 0 1 1 1               9 9 9     • Step4: Average the NTK-norm of different numbers                                         𝑭
                                                  CoNTK ≜ [ Epoch, 10, 10]
                                                                                                              • Fact 1: although eNTK might change during training, the
 • Step2: Calculate the NTK tensor each epoch                                𝒦 𝑡 𝑥𝑢 , 𝑥𝑜                                relative relationship of CoNTK : , u, 𝑖 on different 𝑖
                                                                                           𝐹
   [ Epoch, 200, 200, 10, 10 ]                                       𝑦𝑢 =𝑐                     10x10                    is generally stable after several epochs (e.g., 50 epoch)
                                                                                                              • Fact 2: the pairing effect of “4” and “9”, “5” and “8” is clear.
       𝑡       (𝑜, 𝑢)   𝒦 𝑡 (𝑥𝑢 , 𝑥𝑜 )                200x200                                                 • Fact 3: change of eNTK in the late training (similar as finetuning)
                                                                                                                        is way smaller than the beginning phase.


                                                                         t
  Figure 6: Experimental design of verifying the relative stability of ∥Kuo ∥F for fixed xu on different xo .


C.1        R ELATIVE S TABLE E NTK A SSUMPTION - MNIST E XPERIMENTS

For the MNIST example, we directly calculate the eNTK term using a pipeline demonstrated in Figure 6. The
results are showed in Figure 7, where the key findings are:

                                                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                               yu is 1                                                                            yu is 2                                                                    yu is 3
                  6000                                                     1                             2000                                         2                          2500                                             3
                                                                                                                                                   6 1                           2000                                       98
                  4000                                                                                   1500
                                                                                                                                                 98 43                           1500                                         7654 21
                                                                                                                                                   75 0                                                                              0
                                                             987 5432
                                                                                                         1000                                                                    1000
                  2000
                                                                6                                        500                                                                              500
                     0
                                                                           0
                                                                                                           0                                                                               0
                                               yu is 4                                                                            yu is 5                                                                    yu is 6
                  3000                                       9         4                                                                             5                                                                           6
                                                                                                         2000                                    98      1                       2000
                                                             876 1                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                   76 4 0                                                                   98 543210
                  2000                                                                                   1500
                                                                5 32                                     1000                                           2                        1000
                  1000                                               0                                   500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
                     0                                                                                     0                                                                               0
                                               yu is 7                                                                            yu is 8                                                                    yu is 9
                                                               7                                                                                  8                                                                         9
                                                             9                                           3000
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                 4000
                  2000                                               1                                                                           9 5                                                                            4
                                                              8 4                                        2000                                      76 432
                                                                                                                                                                                 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            87 5 3 1
                                                                 5 3                                                                                      0                      2000
                  1000
                                                                6 20                                     1000
                                                                                                                                                                                 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6 20
                     0                                                                                     0                                                                               0

                                                                             1.0
                                                                  train loss


                                                                                                                                                                Norm of the eNTK change
                   100                                            test loss 0.8                          1500                                                                             300
                                                                                     Mean norm of eNTK
Train/test loss


                  10 1                                                         0.6                       1000                                                                             200
                                                                               0.4
                  10 2                                                                                   500                                                                              100
                               test accuracy                                   0.2
                                                                                                           0                                                                               0
                         0       200       400        600        800       1000                                 0   200        400        600      800   1000                                   0   200   400        600        800   1000
                                           Training Epochs                                                                     Training Epochs                                                            Training Epochs


                                                      t
Figure 7: Results showing the relative stability of ∥Kuo ∥F for fixed xu on different xo (labeled by the colorful
digits near the lines).


                         1. The last three panels roughly indicate different phases throughout the training, where the first several
                            epochs (0 ∼ 30) are a bit messy, and the last several epochs (800 ∼ 1000) behave similarly to the
                            finetuning stage;
                                                                             t
                         2. Although
                                    t the norm t−1
                                                       of eNTK (Eu,o [∥Kuo ∥F ]) and the norm of eNTK’s         t
                                                                                                                        adaptation
                            (Eu,o ∥Kuo − Kuo ∥F ) changes a lot after 30 epochs, the ranking between ∥Kuo         ∥F on different o
                            are relatively stable, as demonstrated by the upper 9 panels;
                         3. The pairing effect between the “similar” inputs is clear, e.g., “4” and “9”, “5” and “8”, etc;
                         4. The pairing effect between the “dis-similar” inputs are also clear, e.g., “6” and “7”, “2” and “5”, etc.
                         5. The pairing effect mentioned previously is not strictly symmetry, which is because the inconsistent
                            A and G terms;
                         6. The accumulated influence demonstrated in the third panel of Figure 1 is strongly correlated to the
                            integral of all these curves.

C.2                          R ELATIVE S TABLE E NTK A SSUMPTION - LLM E XPERIMENTS
                       t
Directly calculating ∥Kuo ∥F for the LLM experiment requires huge amount of computation, because for
each token in each example, we need to multiply a V × d matrix to a d × V one, where d is the number of
                                                                                                t
parameters of the LLM. However, since we only care about the relative relationship between ∥Kuo   ∥F on

                                                                                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


different χo , where χu is fixed, based on the basic decomposition in Proposition 1, we can get a lower-bound
as follows (ignoring superscript t for conciseness, ignoring the influence of O(η 2 )):
                                         ∆ log π = −ηAo Kuo Go                                                     (23)
                                     ∥∆ log π∥2F = ∥ − ηAo Kuo Go ∥2F                                              (24)
                                                 ≤ η 2 ∥Ao ∥2F ∥Kuo ∥2F ∥Go ∥2F                                    (25)
We hence define two quantitive measurements to have a better understanding of Kuo , they are:
                         ∥∆ log π∥2F                                                 t+1
             LBKuo ≜                    ≤ η 2 ∥Kuo ∥2F ;    SignDeltauo ≜ Ev,l [log πv,l        t
                                                                                         − log πv,l ],             (26)
                        ∥Ao ∥2F ∥Go ∥2F
where the subscript v, l here represent the l-th token and v-th dimension for the prediction. In later experiments,
we will observe both LBKuo and SignDeltauo to have a better understanding of the strength (norm) and the
direction (sign) of the relative influence imposed via Kuo .
Regarding the calculation of LBKuo , ∥∆ log π∥2F is easy to track because, in the main context, we already
showed log π t for different responses. ∥Go ∥2F = ∥π − y+    2          +
                                                          u ∥F , where yu is defined as a stacking of L one-hot
vectors. The ∥Ao ∥2F is a bit complex. Recall the definition that Ao = I − 1π ⊤ , we can have:
                          ∥Ao ∥2F = Trace A⊤

                                                o Ao                                                       (27)
                                                       ⊤ ⊤         ⊤

                                   = Trace (I − 1π ) (I − 1π )                                             (28)
                                               ⊤        ⊤        ⊤      ⊤    ⊤

                                   = Trace I I − π1 − 1π + π1 1π                                           (29)
                                    = Trace(I ⊤ I) − 2Trace(1⊤ π) + V Trace(π ⊤ π)                                 (30)
                                    = V − 2 + V ∥π∥22 ,                                                            (31)
which is also trackable in our setting. Note that intuitively, the value of ∥π∥22 is inversely correlated to the
Shannon entropy of the distribution π: ∥π∥22 = 1 if π is one-hot; ∥π∥22 = √1V if π is uniform. Hence we
can also interoperate ∥Ao ∥2F as the peakiness of π(y | χo ). In the following experiment, we track the value
of LBKuo for different types of responses during SFT and DPO to show that the relative influence between
different response types is relatively stable. We show the experimental results in Figure 8, in which the key
findings are:

     1. In both SFT and DPO under different supervisory signals, the change of these two metrics are
        relatively stable, similar to those in Figure 7;
                                                                 +
     2. The clear pairing effect between y+  u (blue curve) and yj̸=u (red curve) exist;
                                                                                 − +          −
     3. In LBKuo , learning any natural language sequences (i.e., y+        u , yu , ygpts , ygpts ) influence the non-
                              +
        language sequence (yurnd , yrnd ) a lot, especially at the end of finetuning. However, from SignDeltauo
        we know such an influence is negative, which is caused by the pushing down pressure;
     4. An interesting “similarity pattern” occurs: by observing SignDeltauo , we see SFT using y+               gpts or
          −
        ygpts imposes more influence on the sequence generated using ChatGPT other than their original
                               −
        response (i.e., y+
                         u or yu ), which might be an interesting phenomenon to explore further;
     5. By observing the last row, where the model is trained using DPO, it is clear that the push-down
        pressure is dominant. Because almost all SignDeltauo terms have big negative values, and the only
        positive one is y+
                         u (roughly 0.5, much smaller than other positive values in the SFT cases).

We also provide some intermediate quantities in Figure 9 to further validate our analysis. The key trends are
provided in its caption for ease of reading.

                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                Tracking lower bound of eNTK: LBKuot      Accumulated Influence                                                                Tracking SignDeltauo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t             Accumulated Influence
                                               10                                                       400                                                                                                                    8
                                               9                                                                                                                      0.3


                   SFT using (xu, yu+ )


                                                                                                                                      SFT using (xu, yu+ )
                                                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                               8                                                        300                                                           0.2
                                               7                                                        250                                                                                                                    4
                                               6                                                        200                                                           0.1                                                      2
                                                        yu+           yu           ytest
                                                                                     +                                                                                          yu+          yu           ytest
                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
                                               5        yinit         ygpts        yhum                 150                                                                     yinit        ygpts        yhum
                                                                                                                                                                      0.0                                                      0
                                               4        ygpts
                                                          +           ygptf        yurnd
                                                                                     +                  100                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                  +          ygptf        yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            +

                                               3        ygptf
                                                          +           yj+ u        yrnd                  50                                                           0.1       ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                  +          yj+ u        yrnd                 2
                                                                                                          0
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40


                                                                                                                 yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m
                                                                                                                 y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init

                                                                                                                y ts
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                                yhteust
                                                                                                               ygp+ts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init
                                                                                                                  y tf

                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu
                                     20.0                                                               500                                                           0.8                                                    12.5
                            + )


                                                                                                                                                           + )
                                     17.5
            SFT using (xu, ygpts


                                                                                                                                           SFT using (xu, ygpts
                                                                                                        400                                                           0.6                                                    10.0
                                     15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7.5
                                     12.5                                                               300                                                           0.4                                                     5.0
                                     10.0                                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                        200                                                           0.2
                                          7.5                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                        100                                                           0.0
                                          5.0                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                          2.5                                                             0                                                                                                                   5.0
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40


                                                                                                                 yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m
                                                                                                                 y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init

                                                                                                                y ts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init
                                                                                                                yhteust
                                                                                                               ygp+ts
                                                                                                                  y tf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                               9                                                        350                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                       SFT using (xu, yu )


                                                                                                                                      SFT using (xu, yu )
                                               8                                                        300
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2                                                      4
                                               7                                                        250
                                                                                                        200                                                           0.1                                                      2
                                               6
                                                                                                        150                                                                                                                    0
                                               5                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                    2
                                               4
                                                                                                         50                                                           0.1
                                               3                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                          0
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40


                                                                                                                 yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m
                                                                                                                 y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                                y ts
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init
                                                                                                                yhteust


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                               ygp+ts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                  y tf

                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu
                                     20.0                                                               500
                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                                    12.5
                                     17.5


                                                                                                                                     SFT using (xu, ygpts)
            SFT using (xu, ygpts)


                                                                                                        400                                                                                                                  10.0
                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                     15.0                                                                                                                                                                                     7.5
                                     12.5                                                               300                                                           0.4                                                     5.0
                                     10.0                                                               200                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                          7.5                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                        100                                                           0.0                                                     2.5
                                          5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5.0
                                          2.5                                                             0                                                           0.2
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40
                                                                                                                 yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m
                                                                                                                 y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                                y ts
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                yhteust
                                                                                                               ygp+ts
                                                                                                                  y tf

                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu
                                               50                                                       1000
                                                                                                                                                                      2.0                                                     25
                                                                                                                                              SFT using (xu, yurnd)
                    SFT using (xu, yurnd)


                                               40                                                       800                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                      1.5

                                               30                                                       600                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                               20                                                       400
                                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                               10                                                       200
                                                                                                                                                                      0.0                                                      0
                                                                                                          0
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40
                                                                                                                 yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m
                                                                                                                 y+


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init
                                                                                                                y ts
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                yhteust
                                                                                                               ygp+ts
                                                                                                                  y tf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu
                                                                                                                                                                0.10
                                                                                                                                  DPO using (xu, yu+ , yu )
                   DPO using (xu, yu+ , yu )


                                                                                                        400                                                     0.05                                                           0
                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                0.00
                                               8                                                        300                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                               6                                                                                                                0.10
                                                                                                        200                                                                                                                    4
                                               4                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                        100                                                     0.20                                                           6
                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                          0
                                                    0            10           20           30      40                                                                       0           10           20           30    40
                                                                                                                 yrndd


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yrndd
                                                                                                               yurn+m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yuhrn+um
                                                                                                                 y+


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y+
                                                                                                               ygp+init


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+init
                                                                                                                y ts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                               yjg+ptf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yj +tf
                                                                                                                yhteust


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y st
                                                                                                               ygp+ts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygp+ts
                                                                                                                  y tf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y tf
                                                                                                                y +u


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yte+u
                                                                                                               ygpu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygpu
                                                                                                                 yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yu


                                                                                           (a)                                                                                                                    (b)

                                              t
Figure 8: Tracking the relative stability of Kuo by observing LBKuo (a) and SignDeltauo (b) under different
settings. The accumulated influence is the integral of the corresponding curve and x-axis (smoothed using
exponential moving average).


D    M ORE A BOUT E XPERIMENTS


This section provides more experimental details and results about the learning dynamics to support our
claim. We will first discuss how different types of responses are selected in our probing dataset Dprob . These
responses can fit into a 2-D space where one dimension is semantical relevance of the response to y+     u . We
then provide more results and discussions on different models and settings. The subtle differences between
the responses all support our story well.

                                                                                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Average Peakiness Change during SFT                  Average of log (y * ) and log (yc) during SFT                 Average of log (y * ) and log (yc) during DPO
                         290        yu+            yu             ytest
                                                                    +                                                                                                                   argmax
                                                                                   20                                                             20                                    except_argmax
                                    yinit          ygpts          yhum
                         280        ygpts
                                      +            ygptf          yurnd
                                                                    +                                                                                                                   linear fit of log (pc)
                                    ygptf
                                      +            yj+ u          yrnd             40                                                             40
                         270
                                                                                   60                                                             60
                Auo 2F


                         260

                         250                                                       80                                                             80

                         240                                                       100                            argmax
                                                                                                                  except_argmax              100
                                                                                                                  linear fit of log (pc)
                         230
                                0        10      20         30      40        50         0     10        20        30        40        50                0         10       20           30         40       50


Figure 9: Other metrics related to LLM’s learning dynamics. The first panel demonstrates how ∥Ato ∥2F
changes during SFT (higher means peakier π). It is clear that the peakiness of y+u , i.e., the supervisory signal,
increases fastest. The last two panels demonstrate the average log π(y∗ ) and its complementary (denoted by
log π(y∗ )C , which measures how many probability masses are left for other possible tokens). The second
one is for SFT and the third one is for DPO. It is clear that log π(y∗ ) and log π(y∗ )C changes faster in the
DPO case, which matches our observations in the fourth panel of Figure 3 well. The linear fit extrapolates the
log π(p∗ )C values because we suffer an underflow issue when estimating this term. We will fix them in the
next version. However, the trend of their changing speed is consistent across different settings.


              𝜋(𝒚𝒍 |𝒙, 𝒚𝟏:𝒍−𝟏 )                           𝜋(𝒚𝒍 |𝒙, 𝒚𝟏:𝑳 ; 𝐦𝐚𝐬𝐤)              0. Initial response
          𝑙                                           𝑙                                      1. Chosen response
                                    𝒚+
                                     𝒖                                                           1.1 Self-rephrase
 Supervision                                                                                     1.2 GPT-rephrase, semantics keeping
                    CE-Loss                                         CE-Loss                      1.3 GPT-rephrase, format keeping
                                                                                                                                                                            𝒴IF
                                                                                             2. Rejected response
 Predictions                                                                                     2.1 Self-rephrase
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                          Causal mask                                                                                                                  2          1.3              𝒴non−IF
                                           with prefix                                           2.2 GPT-rephrase, semantics keeping                                       2.3
                                                                                                                                                   1.2                                                                𝒴non−hum
                                                                 Model                           2.3 GPT-rephrase, format keeping                            2.2                    3
                  LLM                                                                        3. Irrelavent from train                                         0                                5
                                                                                                                                      1.1                                                4
                                                                                             4. Irrelavent from test
                                                                                                                                            2.1                                                                       Semantics
                                                                                             5. Random sentence                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                             6. Randomly permuted 𝐲u+ Format
                                                                                             7. Pure random tokens        Edit distance

       𝒙𝒖                  𝒚+
                            𝒖                                𝝌𝒖 ≜ (𝒙𝒖, 𝒚+
                                                                        𝒖)



                                          (a)                                                                                                                (b)

Figure 10: (a). How causal mask implementation helps us convert auto-regression modeling to multi-label
modeling. (b). The 2-D plane of Y by considering the distance in both format and semantics.


D.1       T HE S ELECTION OF R ESPONSE T YPES FOR THE P ROBING DATASET

Besides the sequential nature of the loss function, another conundrum in analyzing LLM learning dynamics is
the huge response space Y: the number of possible y ∈ Y is V L , but the vast majority of possible sequences
look nothing like natural language, and we expect the model to generate only a subset of natural language-like
responses. These properties prevent us from observing the changes of all possible y like what we did for
MNIST. Instead, we define several interesting regions of Y, and select corresponding typical responses to
observe. Intuitively, we can use the semantic relevance between y and xu as a heuristic. Such a measurement
can be understood as “how suitable this y is as a response to xu , compared to y+   u .” Then, starting from
the structure of common preference optimization datasets such as Antropic-HH (Y. Bai et al. 2022) and
UltraFeedback (G. Cui et al. 2023), we can divide Y into three sub-spaces and evaluate the following
types of responses (as in Figure 10b). The prompt templates used to generate them are illustrated in Figure 11.
We also provide examples of all 14 types of responses in Figure 12.

                                                                                                25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • YIF : reasonable responses following the instruction xu :
          0. yπ0 , the initial response generated by feeding xu to LLM before finetuning;
          1. y+  u , the chosen (i.e., the preferred) response to xu .
              1.1 y+                    +
                      selfr , rephrase yu using yπ 0 , algorithm from Z. Yang et al. 2024;
              1.2 y+                    +
                      gpts , rephrase yu using ChatGPT, keep the semantics while changing the format;
                      +                 +
              1.3 ygptf , rephrase yu using ChatGPT, keep the format while changing the semantics;
           2. y−u , the rejected (i.e., the less preferred, but still reasonable) response to xu .
              2.1 y−                   −
                     selfr , rephrase yu using yπ 0 , algorithm from Z. Yang et al. 2024;
                     −                 −
              2.2 ygpts , rephrase yu using ChatGPT, keep the semantics while changing the format;
              2.3 y−                   −
                     gptf , rephrase yu using ChatGPT, keep the format while changing the semantics;
       • Ynon-IF : irrelevant responses to xu that are still recognizably human language (in these datasets,
         roughly “internet-standard” English):
           3. y+j̸=u , the chosen response for a different question xj̸=u selected from the training set.
          4. y+ test , the chosen response of a question xtest selected from the test set.
          5. yhum , a “random” English sentence generated by ChatGPT with as many words as y+u.
       • Ynon-hum : token sequences that do not form meaningful human language:
          6. y+ urnd , a random permutation of the words (space-separated strings) of yu .
                                                                                           +
                ′
          7. yrnd , a random permutation of the words of a generated sentence as in yhum .

Furthermore, we also create another probing dataset (named Dprobtest ) where all x comes from the test set.
Compared with Dprobtest that we used in the main context, all the prompts and responses in Dprobtest are never
exposed to the model during finetuning. By comparing the learning curves of these two probing datasets, we
can figure out the difference between the model’s prediction of those directly influenced responses (y appears
during training) and the indirectly influenced ones (y that the model never sees during training). Finally,
we believe the level of the “on-policy” property (which is very important for the preference finetuning, as
discussed in Tajwar et al. (2024)) could also be introduced as the second axis in our 2-D plane. We left the
exploration of this interesting direction in our future work.

                                     +
        • Prompt for self-rephrase: 𝐲𝐬𝐞𝐥𝐟𝐫
           Below is an instruction that describes a task along with a reference answer. Using the reference answer as a guide, write your own
           response.
           ### Instruction: {𝐱}
           ### Reference Answers: {𝐲 + }
           ### Response:
                                                     +
        • Prompt for GPT-rephrase semantics keeping 𝐲𝐠𝐩𝐭𝐬
           Given the reference sentence, please generate an output sentence. Please use different words as much as possible while keeping the
           meaning of the reference sentence unchanged. Please only return the output sentence.
           ### Reference sentence: {𝐲 + }
           ### Response:
                                                  +
        • Prompt for GPT-rephrase format keeping 𝐲𝐠𝐩𝐭𝐟
           Given the reference sentence, please generate an output sentence. Please change the meaning of the reference sentence as much
           as possible while keeping the format of it. Please only return the output sentence.
           ### Reference sentence: {𝐲 + }
           ### Response:


Figure 11: The prompts used to generate y+        +           +
                                         selfr , ygpts , and ygptf . The rephrases of rejected samples are generated
similarly. The self-rephrase template comes from Z. Yang et al. (2024).


                                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Prompt: 𝐱                                                                            2. Rejected response
 Human: What will remove cigarette odor from a room?                                  If you tell me about your situation, I can try to give you more help.
 Assistant: I believe there are products that will work at removing odors. Can you       2.1 Self-rephrase
            tell me what’s going on?
 Human: What do you mean?                                                                I’m not sure what you mean. I’m not sure what you’re asking.
 Assistant:                                                                             2.2 GPT-rephrase, semantics keeping
 0. Initial response                                                                    Should you share details of your circumstances with me, I will endeavor to provide further assistance.
 I’m not a chemist, but I’m guessing that most of the cigarette odor comes from the      2.3 GPT-rephrase, format keeping
 burning tobacco. I know we can buy products that reduce the smell of smoke, and
 that is what most manufacturers claim. Would that also work to remove cigarette         If you share your circumstances with me, I'll do my best to provide you with additional assistance.
 odor in your apartment?                                                              3. Irrelavent from train set
 1. Chosen response                                                                   Let’s take a look at the next month’s release schedule. Are there any games you’re particularly
                                                                                      excited for?
 You mentioned something about a cigarette smell, can you tell me what happened?
                                                                                      4. Irrelavent from test set
    1.1 Self-rephrase
                                                                                      You’ve searched through quite a few results and haven’t come across a recipe you like yet.
    I believe there are products that will work at removing cigarette odor.
                                                                                      5. Random sentence
    1.2 GPT-rephrase, semantics keeping
                                                                                      The purple cat danced under the starry night sky with joyful abandon.
    You brought up the issue of a cigarette odor, could you provide me with
    more details?                                                                     6. Random permuted 𝐲𝐮+
                                                                                      me about mentioned can smell, tell happened? You cigarette something you a what
    1.3 GPT-rephrase, format keeping
                                                                                      7. Pure random tokens
    Can you provide details on the odor you noticed earlier?                          you a through few You’ve recipe yet. and across quite a searched come haven’t results like



Figure 12: Example of all possible responses for one x in our probing dataset. Note that the pure random
token is generated by first creating a random sentence, then randomly permuting its tokens.

D.2       M ORE RESULTS ON DIFFERENT SETTINGS : SFT CASE

Consistent learning dynamics for different models. In this subsection, we provide more results to support
our analysis on SFT in Section 4.1. The first thing to verify is the consistency of the trends of learning
dynamics across different settings. As illustrated in Figure 14, we conduct SFT on five models with
different sizes pretrained using different recipes. Note that Pythia-410M/1B/1.4B/2.8B are pretrained
using exactly the same dataset and pipeline (Biderman et al. 2023), while Qwen1.5-0.5B are pretrained
differently. Hence we can observe a slight difference between the curves from Pythia series and Qwen
series, e.g., those in yhum . However, the trends demonstrated in Figure 3 consistently hold for all models.
                                            −
Compare the rephrases of y+       u and yu . See Figure 15, where we put the rephrases of the same response
into the same figure. We can treat the red curve, i.e., the one of y generated by π 0 (x), as a baseline, whose
decaying suggests the policy model is deviating from the initial point. The first observation is that after
several updates, y+  u is the only one that keeps increasing fast, which means the “pull up” pressure generated
by [xu ; y+u ] do not have that strong influence on these rephrases compared to [xu ; y+ j̸=u ], even though these y
                            +                      +
are good rephrases of yu (recall the curve yj̸=n always increase in Figure 14). Furthermore, by carefully
comparing the decreasing speed of yπ0 and other curves, we find those rephrases decays slower than yπ0 in
the chosen case, but not the case for the rejected responses. This phenomenon also supports our analysis well:
                                                                                                            −
because we train the model using y+     u , their rephrases are “pulled up” more than the rephrases of yu . Such
a claim is also verified by the experiment in the last column of this figure, where we train the model using
[xu ; y−                 +                                                                        +
       u ] rather than yu . In these two panels, we see the decaying speed of rephrases of yu is now identical
to that of yπ0 while the decaying speed of rephrases for y−       u  is slightly slower. Last,   compare  the green
and orange curves (i.e., the format-keeping and semantics-keeping GPT rephrases), we find the predicting
probabilities of those format-keeping curves are usually larger than their semantic-keeping counterparts.
This is a sign that the model during SFT might care more about the format rather than the semantics of one
sentence. We will delve into this interesting phenomenon in our future work.
Compare Dprob and Dprobtest . To isolate the influence of the “pull up” pressure introduced by the training
updates, we also create another probing dataset Dprobtest using the same pipeline as Dprob . The only difference
between them is that all x in Dprobtest comes from the test set, and hence neither the prompts nor the responses
ever occur during training. See Figure 16, where the solid curves and dotted curves represent the learning

                                                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


dynamics of responses in Dprob and Dprobtest respectively. The color of the curves represents the model
we are finetuning. By qualitatively comparing the trend difference between curves coming from Dprob
                                                                            +                         +
and Dprobtest , we roughly observe that trend_diff(y+ u ) > trend_diff(yj̸=u ) > trend_diff(ygpts ) >
                   +
trend_diff(ygptf ), which aligns well with our hypothesis about how strong the “pull up” pressure influence
different responses.
                      Chosen v.s. rejected                              Non-human response                   Whether y occured during training80
                                                                                                             120
                                                                                                                                                                           Whether y is a dialog response                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Updates before inflection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            164.0
             90                                               340                                                                                                    134


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Inflection time of ytest
                                                                                                             130                                             90                                                             164.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                              350                                                                                                    136                                                    165.0
            100                                                                                              140                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            165.5                                 15
                                                              360                                                                                                    138
            110                                                                                              150                                             110                                                            166.0
                                                              370                                                                                                    140                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            166.5
            120                yu+                            380                yurnd
                                                                                   +                         160
                                                                                                                               yj+ u                         120
                                                                                                                                                                     142
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            167.0                                 5
            130                yu                             390
                                                                                 yrnd
                                                                                  '                          170
                                                                                                                               ytest
                                                                                                                                 +                 yu+       130
                                                                                                                                                                                        ytest
                                                                                                                                                                                          +                 yhum            167.5
                                                                                                             180                                             140     144                                                    168.0                                 0
                  0        2         4       6       8              0        2           4       6       8         0       2           4       6         8                  0.0   0.5    1.0    1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0                                                      0      5    10    15    20    25
                      Number of epochs                                   Number of epochs                              Number of epochs                                           Number of epochs                                                                             Inflection time of yhum

                                                                                         (a) Result of SFT on Antropic-HH.
                      Chosen v.s. rejected                   1200
                                                                        Non-human response                   Whether y occured during training150                      Whether y is a dialog response
                                                                                                                                                                   390.0                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Updates before inflection
            175                                                                                                                                                                                                             132
                                                                                                             260
                                                             1210                                                                                            175   392.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Inflection time of ytest
            200                                                                                              280                                                                                                            134


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                             1220                                                                                            200   395.0
            225                                                                                              300                                                                                                            136
                                                             1230                                                                                            225   397.5                                                                                     15
            250                                                                                              320                                                                                                            138
                                                             1240                                                                                            250   400.0
            275                                                                                              340                                                                                                            140
                                                             1250                                                                                                  402.5                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                             275
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            142
            300
                               yu+                           1260                yurnd
                                                                                   +                         360           yj+ u                             300
                                                                                                                                                                   405.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            144                               5
                                                                                                             380                                                   407.5
            325
                               yu                            1270                yrnd
                                                                                  '
                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                                           ytest
                                                                                                                             +                     yu+       325
                                                                                                                                                                   410.0
                                                                                                                                                                                        ytest
                                                                                                                                                                                          +                 yhum            146
            350                                              1280                                                                                            350                                                                                              0
                  0    1        2    3   4       5       6          0    1        2      3   4       5   6         0   1       2       3   4       5     6                  0     1      2       3      4     5         6                                              0         5     10    15    20    25
                       Number of epochs                                  Number of epochs                              Number of epochs                                           Number of epochs                                                                             Inflection time of yhum

                                                                                      (b) Result of SFT on UltraFeedback.

Figure 13: The learning dynamics of responses in different groups in the proposed probing dataset. Trends to
                                    −                                         +         ′
observe: 1.) y+   u increase and yu first increase then decrease; 2.) both yurnd and yrnd decrease and very small;
       +                                          +                       +
3.) yj̸=u increases with a smaller rate than yu , although the [xu ; yj̸=u ] never occurs during training; 4.) both
y+
 test and yhum has a bell-shape curve; 5.) the inflection of yhum is earlier. Because we find that most sentences
in yhum are descriptive ones while those in y+                                                                    +
                                                 test are question-answer style sentences. This suggest that the ytest
                                        +                            t
are semantically more similar to yu than yhum (i.e., larger ∥K ∥F ). Hence in general, the “pull-up” pressure
on y+ test is larger, and hence its inflection point is later than yhum .


                                                                                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                y0                                         yu+                                      ygpts
                                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                                                        110
                                                                                                                                                            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                             +                                       yu                                       ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                 85                                      110
          120                        qwen05           80                                        130                                                                              90
          125                        pythia410m                                                                                         115                                                                              115
                                     pythia1b                                                   135                                                                              95
          130                                         100                                                                               120
                                     pythia14                                                   140                                                                             100                                      120
          135                        pythia28                                                                                           125                                     105
                                                      120                                       145                                                                                                                      125
          140                                                                                                                                                                   110
          145                                                                                   150                                     130                                                                              130
                                                      140                                                                                                                       115
          150                                                                                   155                                     135                                     120                                      135
                0      1         2         3      4         0      1         2         3    4         0     1         2         3   4         0     1         2         3   4          0     1         2         3   4          0     1         2         3   4
                    Number of epochs                            Number of epochs                          Number of epochs                        Number of epochs                         Number of epochs                         Number of epochs
                               ygptf                  140
                                                                           yj+ u                                    ytest
                                                                                                                      +                                     yhum                                     yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                      +                                       yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
          100                                                                                   130                                                                             370
                                                                                                                                        150                                                                              340
                                                      150                                       135                                                                             380
          105                                                                                                                                                                                                            350
                                                      160                                       140                                     160                                     390
          110                                         170                                       145                                                                                                                      360
                                                                                                                                        170                                     400
          115                                                                                   150
                                                      180                                                                                                                       410                                      370
                                                                                                155                                     180
          120                                         190                                       160                                                                             420                                      380
                                                                                                                                        190
                0      1         2         3      4         0      1         2         3    4         0     1         2         3   4         0     1         2         3   4          0     1         2         3   4          0     1         2         3   4
                    Number of epochs                            Number of epochs                          Number of epochs                        Number of epochs                         Number of epochs                         Number of epochs

                                                                                           (a) Result of SFT on Antropic-HH.
                                y0                                         yu+                                      ygpts
                                                                                                                     +                                      ygptf
                                                                                                                                                             +                                        yu                                      ygpts
          300                                                                                                                                                                   260                                      150
                                                      200                                       130                                                                             280
                                                                                                                                        120                                                                              160
          320
                                                      250                                       140                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                        130                                                                              170
          340                  qwen05                                                                                                                                           320
                                                      300                                       150
                               pythia410m                                                                                               140                                                                              180
          360                                                                                                                                                                   340
                               pythia1b               350                                       160                                                                                                                      190
                               pythia14                                                                                                 150                                     360
          380
                               pythia28               400                                       170                                                                             380                                      200
          400                                                                                                                           160
                0          2           4       6            0          2           4        6         0         2           4       6         0         2           4       6          0         2           4       6          0         2           4       6
                    Number of epochs                            Number of epochs                          Number of epochs                        Number of epochs                         Number of epochs                         Number of epochs
                               ygptf                                       yj+ u                                    ytest
                                                                                                                      +                                     yhum                                     yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                      +                                       yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
          110                                                                                                                           130                                     1200                                     1240
                                                      325                                       380                                     140                                     1220
          120                                         350                                                                                                                                                                1260
                                                                                                400                                     150                                     1240
                                                      375                                                                                                                                                                1280
          130                                                                                   420                                     160
                                                      400                                                                                                                       1260
                                                                                                440                                                                                                                      1300
                                                      425                                                                               170                                     1280
          140
                                                                                                460                                     180                                                                              1320
                                                      450                                                                                                                       1300
          150                                                                                   480                                     190                                                                              1340
                                                      475
                0          2           4       6            0          2           4        6         0         2           4       6         0         2           4       6          0         2           4       6          0         2           4       6
                    Number of epochs                            Number of epochs                          Number of epochs                        Number of epochs                         Number of epochs                         Number of epochs

                                                                                       (b) Result of SFT on UltraFeedback.

                    Figure 14: Trend to observe: curves of different models exhibit similar trends.


                                                                                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            qwen05                                           pythia410m                                                        pythia1b                                        pythia14                                                      pythia28                                   pythia14 (train on yu )
                                       80                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                        70
                                                    yu+                  ygpts
                                                                          +                100
                                                                                                                                                        90                                                  80                                                                                                            115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                    y0                   ygptf
                                                                          +                110


                   Rephrases of yu+
                                      100                                                                                                              100                                                  90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      90                                                  120
                                                                                           120                                                         110                                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100                                                  125
                                      120                                                                                                                                                                  110
                                                                                           130                                                         120                                                                                                           110
                                                                                                                                                                                                           120                                                                                                            130
                                      140                                                  140                                                         130                                                 130                                                       120
                                                                                                                                                       140                                                 140                                                                                                            135
                                                                                           150                                                                                                                                                                       130
                                      160                                                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                                                       150                                                                                                           140                                                  140
                                            0       2        4       6           8               0       1       2       3       4   5       6               0     1           2   3       4   5       6         0     1       2       3       4       5    6              0         1         2        3       4                   0            1             2          3
                                       90                                                                                                               90
                                                                                           100                                                                                                              90                                                                                                             70
                                      100                                                                                                                                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                                                       100                                                 100                                                                                                             80
                                                                                           110
                   Rephrases of yu


                                      110                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                                       110                                                 110                                                                                                             90
                                      120                                                  120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     110                                                  100
                                      130                                                                                                              120                                                 120
                                                                                           130                                                                                                                                                                                                                            110
                                      140                                                                                                              130                                                 130                                                       120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          120
                                      150           yu                   ygpts             140
                                                                                                                                                                                                           140
                                                                                                                                                       140                                                                                                           130                                                  130
                                      160
                                                    y0                   ygptf             150
                                                                                                                                                                                                           150                                                                                                            140
                                            0       2        4       6           8               0       1       2       3       4   5       6               0     1           2   3       4   5       6         0     1       2       3       4       5    6              0         1         2        3       4                   0            1             2          3
                                                 Number of epochs                                        Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs                                    Number of epochs                                           Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs

                                                                                                                                     (a) Result of SFT on Antropic-HH.
                                                        qwen05                       100
                                                                                                         pythia410m                          100
                                                                                                                                                                       pythia1b                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pythia14                        100       175
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pythia28                        pythia14 (train on both yu+ and100yu )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                      260                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 240
                                                                                     110   320                                               110                                                   110     240                                             110                                                      110                                                       110
                                      270                                                                                                              280                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                           260                                                                                                            250
                   Rephrases of yu+


                                      280                                            120   340                                               120       300                                         120                                                     120       225                                            120                                                       120
                                                                                     130                                                     130                                                   130     280                                             130                                                      130   260                                                 130
                                      290                                                  360                                                         320                                                                                                           250
                                      300                                            140                                                     140                                                   140     300                                             140                                                      140                                                       140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     275                                                  270
                                                                                           380                                                         340                                                 320
                                      310                                            150                                                     150                                                   150                                                     150                                                      150                                                       150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300                                                  280
                                      320           yu+              ygpts
                                                                      +              160   400                                               160       360                                         160     340                                             160                                                      160                                                       160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     325                                                  290
                                      330           y0               ygptf
                                                                      +              170   420                                               170       380                                         170     360                                             170                                                      170                                                       170
                                                                                     180                                                     180                                                   180                                                     180       350                                            180                                                       180
                                            0           2        4               6               0           2               4           6                   0             2           4       6                 0         2               4           6                   0             2         4        6                   0.0        0.5           1.0       1.5
                                      280                                            100                                                     100                                                   100                                                     100                                                      100                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                       300                                                                                                                                                                235
                                                                                     110   330                                               110                                                   110     290                                             110       270                                            110                                                       110
                                      285                                                                                                              310                                                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                     120   340                                               120                                                   120     300                                             120       280                                            120                                                       120
                   Rephrases of yu


                                      290                                                                                                              320                                                                                                           290                                                  245
                                                                                     130   350                                               130                                                   130     310                                             130                                                      130                                                       130
                                                                                                                                                       330                                                                                                           300                                                  250
                                      295                                            140   360                                               140                                                   140     320                                             140                                                      140                                                       140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     310                                                  255
                                      300                                            150   370                                               150       340                                         150     330                                             150                                                      150                                                       150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     320                                                  260
                                                                     ygpts           160   380                                               160       350                                         160                                                     160                                                      160                                                       160
                                      305           yu                                                                                                                                                     340                                                       330                                                  265
                                                    y0               ygptf           170   390                                               170       360                                         170     350                                             170
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    170   270                                                 170
                                      310
                                                                                     180   400                                               180                                                   180                                                     180                                                      180   275                                                 180
                                            0           2        4               6               0           2               4           6                   0             2           4       6                 0         2               4           6                   0             2         4        6                   0.0        0.5           1.0       1.5
                                                Number of epochs                                     Number of epochs                                            Number of epochs                                    Number of epochs                                          Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs

                                                                                                                                 (b) Result of SFT on UltraFeedback.
                                                      −
Figure 15: Compare different rephrases of y+ u and yu under different models. Key trend to observe: 1.) For
                                      +         +
the first row, the decaying speed of ygpts and ygptf are smaller than yπ0 , which means the pull-up pressure
exists; 2.) For the second row, the decaying speed of y−            −
                                                          gpts and ygptf are similar to that of yπ 0 , because the
pull-up pressures on rejected samples are smaller; 3.) For the last column, since we SFT the model using the
rejected sample rather than the chosen one, the trend in (1) and (2) reverses.



                                            y0                                                           yu+                                                               ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                            +                                                          ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                              yu                                                                ygpts
       137.5                                                                 100                                                                                                                           115                                                             95
                                                                                                                                                 135                                                                                                                                                                                      115
       140.0                                                                 110                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                 140                                                       120
       142.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               105                                                            120
                                                                             120                                                                                                                           125
                                                                                                                                                 145
       145.0                          qwen_train                             130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           110                                                            125
                                      qwen_test                                                                                                  150                                                       130
       147.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               115
                                      pythia_train                           140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          130
       150.0                                                                                                                                                                                               135                                                             120
                                      pythia_test                                                                                                155
                                                                             150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          135
                                                                                                                                                                                                           140                                                             125
               0                        2               4            6                0              2               4               6                 0               2               4           6             0                 2               4             6               0                 2            4               6                    0              2               4   6
                    Number of epochs                                                       Number of epochs                                                  Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs                                                   Number of epochs                                                Number of epochs
        100
                                            ygptf                                                        yj+ u                                                             ytest
                                                                                                                                                                             +                                                         yhum                                                            yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                yrnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                 135                                                                                                                       360                                                            340
                                                                             150
        105                                                                                                                                      140                                                       150
                                                                             160                                                                 145                                                                                                                       380                                                            360
                                                                                                                                                 150                                                       160
        110
                                                                             170                                                                                                                                                                                           400
                                                                                                                                                 155                                                       170                                                                                                                            380
        115                                                                  180                                                                 160
                                                                                                                                                 165                                                       180                                                             420                                                            400
        120                                                                  190                                                                 170
                                                                                                                                                                                                           190
               0                        2               4            6                0              2               4               6                 0               2               4           6             0                 2               4             6               0                 2            4               6                    0              2               4   6
                    Number of epochs                                                       Number of epochs                                                  Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs                                                   Number of epochs                                                Number of epochs


Figure 16: Compare the learning dynamics of examples from Dprob and Dprobtest . Key trend to observe: for
Dprob , since many responses and prompts ever occur during training, the pull-up pressure is generally stronger.
                  +       +         +
Curves of y+ u , ygpts , ygptf and yj̸=u shows a clear trend. (Antropic-HH, SFT)


                                                                                                                                                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3    M ORE RESULTS ON DIFFERENT SETTINGS : OFF - POLICY DPO CASE

Similar to Appendix D.2, we also provide extra experiments for DPO in this part using the same probing
dataset. Note that as the responses of on-policy DPO change generation-by-generation, it is hard to observe
the dynamics of a pre-collected probing dataset. We left the exploration of how to effectively probe other
DPO variants in our future work.
Consistent learning dynamics for different models. Compare Figure 4 in the main context and Figure 18,
where we provide the results on many different models (Pythia-410M/1B/2.8B and Qwen1.5-0.5B).
Their trends on different πθt (y) are quite consistent:
                                                             −
      1.) in the first column, the margin πθt (y+                                             +
                                                u ) − πθ t (yu ) keeps increasing. The πθ t (yu ) first increase and
                                                                                  −
          then decrease, always with a smaller decay speed than that of πθt (yu );
      2.) in the second column, πθt (y+u ) decreases slower than the other rephrases, verifying the “pull up”
          pressure and the influence on other responses via Kt ;
      3.) in the third column, πθt (y−
                                     u ) decreases faster than the other rephrases, verifying the “push down”
          pressure and the influence on other y;
                                                                                 −
      4.) in the fourth column, the rephrases of y+
                                                  u decay slower than those of yu , supporting the claims that
          the rephrases near the chosen responses are influenced by the “pull up” pressure while the rephrases
          of the rejected ones are influenced by the “push down” pressure.

Learning dynamics of conducting SFT first, then DPO. As stated in (Ouyang et al. 2022), conducting
SFT before DPO is a common pipeline for alignment. Using [xu ; y+       u ] as the SFT dataset is also a common
practice in many existing works. Hence in this part, we plot the curves of different πθt (y) in both two stages
to demonstrate their differences. See Figure 17, where the difference between the experiments in these three
rows is how long the model is trained using SFT before DPO. The learning rate of both SFT and DPO are
controlled to be the same (i.e., 5 × 10−7 , the default value in (Tajwar et al. 2024)). All the curves are aligned
by the 10th epoch on the x-axis (i.e., the starting time for the DPO training) for the convenience of comparing
the trends across different settings.
We first check the curves of SFT and DPO parts separately and find that all the above relative trends still
hold in these experiments. We then compare the model’s behavior in these two phases respectively. In the
last two rows of Figure 17, where the epoch for SFT is non-zero, it is clear that the decaying speed of most
observing πθt (y) is much larger in DPO than those in SFT. The main reason for this is the existence of a
big negative gradient introduced in DPO. This gradient, especially conducted on a “valley” region of the
model’s prediction, will “push down” the whole curve significantly, except the one with the highest confidence
before updating. This non-trivial trend is named “squeezing effect”, which is elaborated on in Appendix E.
Furthermore, a more peaky πθ0 (y) and a smaller πθ0 (y− u ) will lead to a stronger “squeezing effect”, which
can be verified by comparing the curves of the last two panels: longer SFT makes the model’s prediction
peakier when DPO is conducted, which leads to a larger decay on all πθt (y) during DPO.


                                                    31
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            Chosen v.s. rejected                                                                                   Chosen v.s. its rephrases                                                                            Rejected v.s. its rephrases                                                                Rejected v.s. its rephrases                                          Irrelevant responses                                               Non-human responses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        160                                                                 350
                    100                                                                                                        100                                                                                                            100                                                                                   100
SFT for 0 epoch


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        180
                    150                                                                                                        150                                                                                                            150                                                                                   150                      ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                    200                                                                                                        200                                  yu+                                                                       200                      yu                                                           200                      ygpts                                      220               yj+ u                                             450
                    250                               yu+                                                                      250                                  ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       250                      ygpts                                                        250                      ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        240               ytest                                             500                      yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                    300                               yu                                                                       300                                  ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       300                      ygptf                                                        300                      ygptf                                      260               yhum                                              550                      yrnd
                    350                                                                                                        350                                                                                                            350                                                                                   350                                                                 280                                                                 600
                          0                            5                          10                  15                                  0                          5                10                           15                               0                   5                           10                         15          0                 5            10            15                      0          5                10                 15                  0                 5               10            15

                    100                                                                                                        100                                                                                                            100                                                                                   100                                                                 140                                                                 350
SFT for 1 epoch


                    150                                                                                                        150                                                                                                            150                                                                                   150                      ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +                                         160                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        180
                    200                                                                                                        200                                  yu+                                                                       200                      yu                                                           200                      ygpts                                      200               yj+ u                                             450
                    250                               yu+                                                                      250                                  ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       250                      ygpts                                                        250                      ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        220               ytest                                             500                      yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                    300                               yu                                                                       300                                  ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       300                      ygptf                                                        300                      ygptf                                      240               yhum                                              550                      yrnd
                    350                                                                                                        350                                                                                                            350                                                                                   350                                                                 260                                                                 600
                          0                            5                          10                  15                                  0                          5                10                           15                               0                   5                           10                         15          0                 5            10            15                      0          5                10                 15                  0                 5               10            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            350
SFT for 10 epochs


                    100                                                                                                        100                                                                                                            100                                                                                   100                                                                 150
                    150                                                                                                        150                                                                                                            150                                                                                   150                      ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            400
                    200                                                                                                        200                                  yu+                                                                       200                      yu                                                           200                      ygpts                                                        yj+ u                                             450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        250
                    250                               yu+                                                                      250                                  ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       250                      ygpts                                                        250                      ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ytest                                             500                      yurnd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        300
                    300                               yu                                                                       300                                  ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                                       300                      ygptf                                                        300                      ygptf                                                        yhum                                              550                      yrnd
                    350                                                                                                        350                                                                                                            350                                                                                   350                                                                 350                                                                 600
                          0                            5                          10                  15                                  0                          5                10                           15                               0                   5                           10                         15          0                 5            10            15                      0          5                10                 15                  0                 5               10            15
                                                Number of epochs                                                                                               Number of epochs                                                                                  Number of epochs                                                                           Number of epochs                                            Number of epochs                                                       Number of epochs


 Figure 17: The learning dynamics of conducting DPO after SFT the model for several epochs. We align
 the starting point of DPO (i.e., the 10th epoch from the x-axis) to better compare the curves. Key trend
 to observe: 1.) Confidence of all responses decays way faster when DPO starts, which is caused by the
 squeezing effect introduced via a big negative gradient; 2.) The more epochs we SFT the model, the more
 serious the squeezing effect is (confidence decays faster). (Antropic-HH, SFT → DPO)


                                Chosen v.s. rejected                                                    Chosen v.s. its rephrases                                                    Rejected v.s. its rephrases                                                Rejected v.s. its rephrases                                                                 Chosen v.s. rejected                       Chosen v.s. its rephrases                           Rejected v.s. its rephrases         120    120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rejected v.s. its rephrases
                                                                                                                                                                         100                                                                                                                                                                      300                                        330                                                 300
              100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   125                                                                                                                                                                                    140                                                 140    140
                                                                                            100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   325                                                                                            325
                                                                                                                                                                         150                                                                        150                                                                                                                                      340                                                                                               160    160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  350                                                                                            350
              150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   175                ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                                                                                                                  160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
qwen05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qwen05


                                                                                            150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   375                                        350                                                                                               180    180
                                                                                                                                                                         200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     375
              200                                                                                                yu+                                                                        yu                                                      200                ygpts                                                                      400                                        360                                           180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               200    200            ygpts
                                                                                            200
              250                   yu+                                                                          ygpts
                                                                                                                   +                                                     250                ygpts                                                   225                ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                         425         yu+                            370                               ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           200   425                               ygpts       220    220
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    250                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        240    240
              300
                                    yu                                                      250                  ygptf
                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                                                                                                            ygptf                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ygptf                                                                      450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              yu                             380           yu+                 ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           220
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 450            yu                 ygptf       260    260            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  475                                                                                            475
                     0         1            2          3          4         5          6          0          1           2          3          4         5          6          0        1           2          3          4         5          6          0        1           2          3          4         5          6                             0     2      4         6    8              0        2       4      6           8               0         2      4      6           8                0         2      4      6         8
              120                                                                                                                                                        120                                                                        120
                                                                                            140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            160                                                 160    160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    130                                                                                           400                                        415                                                 400
              140                                                                           150                                                                          140                                                                        140                                                                                                                                                                                    170
pythia410m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pythia410m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  420                                                                                            420                                           180    180
                                                                                            160                                                                                                                                                     150                ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                                                                    420
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  440
              160                                                                           170                  yu+                                                     160                yu                                                      160                ygpts                                                                                                                 425
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 440                                           200    200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  460
                                    yu+                                                     180                  ygpts
                                                                                                                   +                                                                        ygpts                                                   170                ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              yu+                            430                               ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +                460                               ygpts       220    220            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
              180                                                                                                                                                        180                                                                        180                                                                                           480                                                                                      200
                                    yu                                                      190                  ygptf
                                                                                                                   +                                                                        ygptf                                                   190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ygptf                                                                                  yu                             435           yu+                 ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +                480            yu                 ygptf       240    240            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  500                                                                                      210
                                                                                            200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  500
                     0         1            2          3          4         5          6          0          1           2          3          4         5          6          0        1           2          3          4         5          6          0        1           2          3          4         5          6                             0     2      4         6    8              0        2       4      6           8               0         2      4      6           8                0         2      4      6         8
              100                                                                                                                                                        100                                                                                                                                                                      350                                        370                                           140   350
                                                                                            120                                                                                                                                                     110                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        140    140
                                                                                            130                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   375                                                                                            375                                           160    160
              120                                                                                                                                                        120                                                                        120                                                                                                                                      380                                           160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  400
                                                                                            140                                                                                                                                                                        ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                                                                                                                        400                                           180    180            ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
pythia1b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pythia1b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    130
              140                                                                                                                                                        140                                                                                                                                                                      425                                        390                                           180                                                 200    200
                                                                                            150                  yu+                                                                        yu                                                      140                ygpts                                                                      450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 425
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               220    220
              160                   yu+                                                     160                  ygpts
                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                                                                         160                ygpts                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  475         yu+                            400                               ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +          200   450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ygpts       240    240            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    160                                                                                                                                                                                          475
              180                   yu                                                      170                  ygptf
                                                                                                                   +                                                                        ygptf                                                   170
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ygptf                                                                      500         yu                             410           yu+                 ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           220                  yu                 ygptf       260    260            ygptf
                                                                                            180                                                                          180                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               280    280
                    0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5        2.0    2.5       3.0       3.5         0.0      0.5     1.0       1.5        2.0    2.5       3.0       3.5         0.0    0.5     1.0       1.5        2.0    2.5       3.0       3.5         0.0    0.5     1.0       1.5        2.0    2.5       3.0       3.5                            0     2      4         6    8              0        2       4      6           8               0         2      4      6           8                0         2      4      6         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100                                                                                                                                                                                          320
              100                                                                           120                                                                          100                                                                                                                                                                      325                                        325                                           140   340                                           140    140
              120                                                                           130                                                                          120                                                                        120                                                                                           350                                        330                                                                                               160    160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 360
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
pythia28


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pythia28


                                                                                            140                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   375                                                                                      160                                                 180    180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             335                                                 380
              140
                                                                                            150                  yu+                                                     140
                                                                                                                                                                                            yu                                                      140                ygpts                                                                      400                                                                                            400                                           200    200            ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             340
              160                   yu+                                                     160                  ygpts
                                                                                                                   +                                                     160                ygpts                                                   160                ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                                                                         425         yu+                                                              ygpts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +          180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 420                               ygpts       220    220            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             345
              180                   yu                                                      170                  ygptf
                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                                                                         180                ygptf                                                                      ygptf                                                                      450         yu                                           yu+                 ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 440            yu                 ygptf       240    240            ygptf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    180                                                                                                                                      350                                                 460                                           260    260
                    0.0       0.5     1.0        1.5        2.0       2.5       3.0               0.0      0.5     1.0        1.5        2.0       2.5       3.0               0.0    0.5     1.0        1.5        2.0       2.5       3.0               0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5        2.0       2.5       3.0                                  0     2      4         6    8              0        2       4      6           8               0         2      4      6           8                0         2      4      6         8
                                    Number of epochs                                                             Number of epochs                                                           Number of epochs                                                           Number of epochs                                                                      Number of epochs                             Number of epochs                                     Number of epochs                                     Number of epochs


                                                                                  (a) Result on Antropic-HH.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (b) Result on UltraFeedback.

 Figure 18: The learning dynamics of DPO on different models. Key trends to observe: 1.) Confidence of
                                  −                                                      +        +
 y+                                                      +
  u decays slower than that of yu ; 2.) Confidence of yu decays slower than those of ygpts and ygptf , because
                                                                        −                               −
 the pull-up pressure is directly imposed on y+ u ; 3.) Confidence of yu decays faster than those of ygpts and
 y−                                                             −
  gptf , because the push-down pressure is directly imposed on yu ; 4.) Confidence of the rephrases of rejected
 responses decays faster than the rephrases of chosen responses.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     T HE S QUEEZING E FFECT I NTRODUCED BY B IG N EGATIVE G RADIENT

In DPO, the model gradually learns how to separate the chosen and rejected responses by imposing one
                                                                     −
positive and one negative adaptation vector centered at y+   u and yu respectively, as illustrated in the second
                                                                                                         −     −
panel in Figure 2. These two opposite pressures ensure the margin reward πθ (y+              +
                                                                                        u | χu ) − πθ (yu | χu )
keep increasing, which makes the model align better with human preferences. However, if we go deeper
                                        −     −
and consider πθ (y+        +
                    u | χu ) and πθ (yu | χu ) separately (actually we should, because their χu are usually
different), a very interesting phenomenon occurs. See the first column of Figure 18, we find although DPO
also contains a strong positive adaptation vector, the curve of πθ (y+     +
                                                                     u | χu ) all goes down after several updates,
which is very different from πθ (y+  u  | χ+
                                           u ) in the SFT  case. Such  an  observation is also reported in many
related works (Pal et al. 2024; Rafailov et al. 2024; Razin et al. 2025; Tajwar et al. 2024), but a clear-cut
explanation of it is still missing. Furthermore, although the relative behaviors of various rephrases matches
                                                                                   −
our analysis of learning dynamics well, merely the two pressures on y+    u and yu cannot explain why all these
observed πθ (y) keeps decreasing during training. So, it is natural to ask:

                                    Where has the probability mass gone?

E.1   T HE S QUEEZING E FFECT AND W HY IT E XISTS

To answer the above question, we can start from the properties of the basic Softmax function by analyzing a
simple multi-class logistic regression problem. Because no matter how complex the LLM is, its predictions
are made by converting the logits into probabilities using Softmax heads. Note that the analysis here only
considers the negative gradient, i.e., the one imposed by y−u in LLM’s finetuning. As also pointed by Razin
et al. (2025), the pull up pressure imposed by y+ u  will cancel the influence imposed by y− u when their χu
                                  +         −
are identical. However, when χu and χu are dissimilar, the squeezing effect discussed in this paper still
dominates. We left analyzing this intricate interaction between these two pressures is left to our future work.
Consider a simple V -class logistic regression problem where each high-dimensional input data x is converted
to a length-d feature vector via a deep neural network ϕ. In other words, we have ϕ(x) ∈ Rd×1 . The model
uses a linear read-out layer w ∈ Rd×V to convert the feature vector to logits z = w⊤ ϕ(x) and then generate
the probability prediction vector p using a Softmax head. We consider a common cross-entropy loss function
for each input pair (x, y). In summary, we have:

                    LCE (pt , y) = −e⊤      t
                                     y log p ;     pt = Softmax(zt );     zt = (wt )⊤ ϕ(x),                  (32)

where t is the index of the step during training and ey is a length-V one-hot vector determined by the ground
truth label y. To simplify our analysis, we assume a fixed ϕ and only update the parameters of the read-out
layer w using stochastic gradient descent:

                               wt+1 = wt − η∇w L = wt − ηϕ(x)(pt − ey )⊤ ,                                   (33)

where η is the learning rate which can be negative if we consider a negative gradient during training. With
Equation (32) and (33), we can write down each dimension of pt and pt+1 after some calculations. To
                                                                                                    pt+1
quantitatively analyze how the model’s confidence in each class changes, we define a ratio αi ≜      i
                                                                                                     pti
                                                                                                         and use
the following lemma to describe its behavior:
Lemma 1. The ratio of confidence change for each i can be represented as:
                                                   PV       zjt
                                              pt+1
                                               i      j=1 e
                                          αi ≜ t = PV         zjt
                                                                  .                                          (34)
                                               pi   j=1 βj e


                                                   33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the values of βj also depends on whether i equals y, hence for Case 1 (i = y) and Case 2 (i ̸= y),
we have (η ′ ≜ η∥ϕ(x)∥22 is the equivalent learning rate):
                          (                                           (    ′  t   t
                                                                        e−η (pj −pi )
                                ′    t  t
                            e−η (1+pj −pi ) if j ̸= y                                   if j ̸= y
           Case 1: βj =                               ; Case 2: βj =       ′  t   t
                                                                                                        (35)
                                   1         if j = y                   e−η (pj −pi −1) if j = y


Proof. To derive Equation (34), we need to have the analytical expression of each pt+1i   and pti . As p =
Softmax(z), we need to link zt+1 and zt first. With Equation (32) and (33), zt+1 can be recursively written
down as:


                              zt+1 = (wt+1 )⊤ ϕ(x)
                                                                                     ⊤
                                       = wt − ηϕ(x)(pt − ey )⊤                           ϕ(x)
                                                                                                    ⊤
                                       = (wt )⊤ ϕ(x) − η ϕ(x)(pt − ey )⊤                                 ϕ(x)
                                       = z − η∥ϕ(x)∥22 (pt − ey )
                                               t

                                       = zt − η ′ (pt − ey )                                                                                              (36)

where η ′ ≜ η∥ϕ(x)∥22 is the equivalent learning rate that depends on the norm of feature representation. Note
that z, p and ey are all length-V vectors and y is an integer ranging from 1 to V . Then we can write down
each zit+1 as:                              (
                                     t+1
                                              zit − η ′ pti + η ′ , if i = y
                                   zi =         t     ′ t
                                                                                                          (37)
                                              zi − η p i ,          if i ̸= y

Then, we can combine the definition of Softmax function and write down different pt+1
                                                                                  i   case-by-case. For
Case 1 where i = y, we have:
                    t+1                                  t        ′ t     ′                                                 t
         t+1     ez i                                  ezi −η pi +η                                                     ez i
        pi=y = PV             =P                   zjt −η ′ ptj
                                                                                        =P                 zjt −η ′ (1+ptj −pti )
                                                                                                                                                    ,     (38)
                      zjt+1                                               t   ′ t
                                                                  + ezy −η py +η
                                                                                    ′
                                                                                                                                    + ezy −0
                                                                                                                                            t

                j=1 e                   j̸=y e                                                    j̸=y e

                                   zt
combining the fact that pti = PKe i zt , we can derive αi and βj as the left part of Equation (35). Similarly,
                                           j
                                 j=1 e
when i ̸= y, we have:
               t+1                                 t    ′ t                                                             t
   t+1      ez i                            ezi −η pi                                                            ezi
  pi̸=y = PV             =P            zjt −η ′ ptj
                                                                                  =P             zjt −η ′ (ptj −pti )
                                                                                                                                                        , (39)
                 zjt+1                                        t
                                                       + ezy −η py +η
                                                                        ′ t   ′                                                 t   ′   t
                                                                                                                        + ezy −η (py −pi −1)
                                                                                                                                                t

           j=1 e              j̸=y e                                                    j̸=y e

which leads to the right part of Equation (35).



We can now better understand how each pi changes after this update. Specifically, if αi > 1, the corresponding
pi increases, and vice versa. To determine the value of αi , we can treat any βj > 1 as contributing to the
                                                                                        t
conclusion that αi < 1 while any βj < 1 against it. The value of the corresponding ezj and |βj − 1| controls
how strong the contribution is. With the preparations above, we derive the following observations on how the
confidence evolves when a gradient ascent (i.e., η < 0) is imposed on class y.

                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claim 1: The value of py is guaranteed to decrease, i.e., αy < 1. We start from the value of β in Case
1 as illustrated in Equation (35). It is clear that for any j ̸= y, we have βj > 1, because 1 + ptj − pti > 0.
Combining with βy = 1, it is straightforward to have Claim 1.

Claim 2: The value of pi∗ where i∗ = argmaxi∈[V ]\{y} pti is guaranteed to increase, i.e., αi∗ > 1. We
now use the value of β in Case 2, since i∗ cannot equal y by definition. When j ̸= y, we have ptj − pti∗ ≤ 0
for all possible j, because pti∗ is the largest among all pti̸=y of pt . Hence all βj̸=y must be smaller than one.
Combining with the fact that βy < 1 (because pty − pti∗ − 1 must be negative), we can prove that αi∗ > 1.
The two claims above demonstrate that the parameter update can be imagined as taking the probability mass
from py and redistributing that to other dimensions. From Claim 2, we know some of the mass is guaranteed
to be “squeezed” into the dimension with the highest pti∗ (if pty is the highest value, then pti∗ is the second
highest in pt ). But how other pi changes is still not clear yet. Will the probability mass from py is also split
into other pi (i.e., other pi increases)? Or will pi∗ absorb the mass not only from py but also from other
dimensions (i.e., other pi decreases)? To get a clearer picture, we need to track the adaptations of each pi . To
                                                                                                 t
achieve this, we now must scrutinize the distribution of pt , because it controls the value of ezj for different j.
                                          t
We chose three typical scenarios where p is strictly uniform, slightly non-uniform, and extremely peaky, and
leads to the following claims.

Claim 3A: When pt is a uniform distribution, the probability mass decreased from class y is uniformly
distributed to all other i ̸= y, i.e., all pt+1                                             t
                                            i̸=y increase the same value. With the uniform p assumption,
Equation (34) can be simplified to αi = PVV β . Note that the first two claims hold for any distribution
                                               j=1   j

pt , hence we only check the values of αi̸=y here to verify the “uniformly distributed mass” hypothesis.
                                                             V                              ′          η′
Substituting the values of βj to this new α leads to αi = V −1+e η ′ for all i ̸= y. Since η < 0 and e    < 1,
                                                          t
we must have αi̸=y > 1. Combined with the fact that all pi are the same, this claim can be proved.

Claim 3B: When pt is slightly non-uniform, pi with smaller pti tend to decrease, and vice versa. This
claim is a general trend and might not have any guarantees. However, analyzing such a scenario helps us to
understand the influence of pt better. Assume we are observing αi′ where i′ is not y nor i∗ . We consider two
subsets of [V ] \ {y}, i.e., B, which contains all j with pti′ ≤ ptj and S that contains all j with pti′ > ptj . Now
consider Case 2 in Equation (35), we have:

                                        βj=y ≪ βj∈S < 1;        βj∈B > 1.                                      (40)

Note that we misuse the ≪ notation to highlight the fact that βj=y would be much smaller than βj∈S , because
there is a negative one term in the exponential. With the above expression, we can imagine that if pti′ is
relatively small, the size of B would be large, which means there will be more βj > 1 contributing to the
conclusion that αi′ < 1. If the influence of βj∈B is strong enough to override the influence of other β
(especially βj=y which is way smaller than other β), αi′ would be smaller than one and hence pi′ decreases.
On the contrary, for those i′ with relatively large pti′ , the β < 1 terms becomes dominant and hence lead to
αi′ > 1, i.e., pi′ increases.
In the analysis above, we assume pt is only slightly non-uniform (i.e., not so peaky), which means the
                      t
values of different ezj are relatively comparable. However, in practical machine learning systems like LLM’s
finetuning, the distribution pt would be very non-uniform, which means most of the probability mass is
obtained by a few dimensions. That is because the LLM’s vocabulary size is usually very large and the
reasonable choice of the next word is only a small portion of the whole vocabulary. Thus we have the
following claim to describe this practical scenario.

                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Claim 3C: When pt is very peaky, which means most of the probability mass is obtained by i∗ , then
all other pi will decrease. In other words, the probability mass of all other pi is squeezed to pi∗ . We
                                                                             t
continue the analysis in Claim 3B but consider a more extreme influence on ezj . For this peaky pt , we might
                       t                                                zt
                                                                       e i∗
have an very large ezi∗ that dominates α. In other words, αi ≈               zt
                                                                                  = β1i∗ . Then for any i′ we want to
                                                                     βi∗ ·e i∗
observe, the αi′ ≈ β1i∗ < 1. In other words, the model’s predictions on all dimensions other than the one
with the highest confidence in pt will decrease.
Last, we analyze the influence of py to explain why “imposing a large negative gradient on the valley region”
makes the squeezing effect more serious.

Claim 4: Smaller pty makes those non-max pi easier to decay, i.e., a stronger squeezing effect. This is
also a general trend that is observed in the experiments in Figure 20. Intuitively, since the model is already
confident that y cannot be the correct label (i.e., py is very small), letting the model further decrease the
prediction on py does not make sense. We can also use the analysis above to understand how it happens. As
illustrated in Equation (40), where the value of β is decomposed into three subgroups. Recall the definition of
αi , we know all βj < 1 contribute to the hypothesis that pi increases after this update, where the strength
                                         t                                     t
of this contribution is controlled by ezj . Since a pty small means a small ezj , the influence of βj=y ≪ 1 is
significantly weakened under this scenario. In other words, αi < 1 is more likely to occur for all possible i,
which means the squeezing effect (all pj̸=y decreases) becomes more serious.

Claim 5: The learning rate with a larger absolute value |η| and a larger feature norm ∥ϕ(x)∥22 will
amplify all the trends, maybe more serious than our expectation. Throughout our analysis, the equivalent
learning rate η ′ < 0 is a shared scalar in all βj . Hence larger |η ′ | can amplify all the trends aforementioned.
Furthermore, recall the shape of an exponential function ex , where a small change of x (especially when x > 1)
                                                             ′     t     t                             ′ t  t
will make ex changes a lot. Then the terms βj̸=y = e−η (1+pj −pi ) in Case 1 and βj=y = e−η (pj −pi −1) in
Case 2 will play a stronger role if we use a larger learning rate |η| or the norm of features is larger.

E.2    V ERIFY THE S QUEEZING E FFECT USING A S IMPLE E XPERIMENT


      Figure 19: Illustration of how big positive and negative gradients influence the model’s prediction.

Let us analyze a simple example to get an intuition. We set V = 50, d = 5, |η| = 0.5, and a randomly
generated ϕ(x). In the first row of Figure 20, we consider the model updates its parameters using standard
SGD assuming the label of this x is 21. Specifically, we randomly generate w0 by sampling each parameter
from a standard Gaussian distribution and calculate w1 using Equation (33). The two curves in each panel
demonstrate the model’s predicted distribution before and after this update. As we expected, the positive
vector on the 21st class “pull up” p0 (y = 21) and “push down” all other p1 (y) at the same time. This trend is
quite consistent under different settings (i.e., different choices of V, d, x, η, w0 , etc.), which can be depicted
by the first panel in Figure 19.

                                                   36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    1.0
                                                         Probability change                                            Probability change in log scale
                                                                                                 100
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                10 1

        A: Positive gradient
                                    0.8
                                                                                           0
                                                                                                10 2
                                    0.6
                                                                                                10 3
                                    0.4                                                         10 4
                                    0.2                     yu+                                 10 5
                                                                                                10 6
                                    0.0                                                         10 7                            yu+
                                          0        10        20        30       40         50           0        10             20         30             40      50
                                    1.0
        B: Negative gradient flat


                                    0.8
                                    0.6                                          yu             10 2                                                       yu
                                    0.4
                                    0.2
                                                                                                10 3
                                    0.0
                                          0        10        20        30       40         50           0        10             20         30             40      50
                                    1.0
                                                   yu                                            100
        C: NG peaky on peak


                                    0.8                                                         10 2
                                                                                                                 yu
                                    0.6
                                                                                                10 4
                                    0.4
                                                                                                10 6
                                    0.2
                                                                                                10 8
                                    0.0
                                          0        10        20        30       40         50           0        10             20         30             40      50
                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                           yu
        D: NG peaky on valley


                                                                                                10 1
                                    0.8
                                                                                                10 3
                                    0.6
                                    0.4                                          yu             10 5
                                                                                                10 7
                                    0.2
                                                                                                10 9
                                    0.0
                                          0        10        20        30       40         50           0        10             20         30             40      50
                                    1.0
                                                                                                 10 3       yu
                                    0.8                                                          10 8
                                    0.6                                                         10 13
        Large V


                                    0.4       yu                                                10 18
                                                                                                10 23
                                    0.2                                                         10 28
                                    0.0                                                         10 33
                                                                                                10 38
                                          0        200      400       600      800     1000             0        200           400        600            800    1000
                                                         Index of vocabulary                                                Index of vocabulary

Figure 20: Experimental verification of the “squeezing effect” illustrated in Figure 19 using a simple multi-
class logistic regression task.


We then set η = −0.5 to simulate the negative gradient in DPO and consider three different settings. First,
we assume the model’s prediction on x is relatively flat, as demonstrated in the second row of Figure 20,
where the predicting probability of every class is around 0.02. The negative gradient is imposed on y = 42,
a randomly selected number. We see the negative adaptation vector “push down” p1 (y = 42) heavily and
re-assign those decreased probability mass evenly to all other classes, as illustrated in the second panel in
Figure 19.
Although the behavior described above follows our intuitions well, a flat p0 is not common in LLM’s
finetuning. Because finetuning usually starts from a pre-trained w, where the model’s prediction would likely
be non-uniform. So in the third row of Figure 20, we consider a more practical w0 that leads to a multi-mode
p0 . In this example, the model has relatively high confidence in classes 5 to 11 and low confidence in all
other dimensions. We set the target label as 11 (i.e., the one in the model has the highest confidence) and
use η = −0.5 to “push down” the model’s prediction on this class. As demonstrated by the blue curve,

                                                                                      37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


p1 (y = 11) decreases a lot as we expected. However, different from the flat p0 case, where the model evenly
assigns the reduced probability mass to all other y, the model in this example “squeezes” the mass to those
confident predictions, i.e., classes 6, 9, and 10, leaving the confidence of other classes almost unchanged.
Such a trend is consistent when the negative gradient is imposed on the “peaky” region of a non-uniform
distribution, as illustrated in the third panel in Figure 19.
The previous setting simulates the on-policy DPO well, where the rejected examples y−      u are sampled from
the high confidence region of the model’s predictions. Then, what will happen if we conduct off-policy
DPO and impose a big negative gradient on those classes that already have very low confidence? See the
fourth row of Figure 20, where we use the same w0 and η as in the previous case. The only difference is
that we change the label of x to 42, where p0 (y = 42) is very small (roughly 10−5 ) before training. The
behavior in this setting is quite interesting: we first observe a big increase on p1 (y = 11), which means the
model “squeezes” the probability mass to the most confident one in p0 , similar to the previous setting. More
interesting, the predictions on all other y are heavily “pushed down”, even including classes 6, 9, and 10,
whose confidence is relatively high before training. In the last two panels of Figure 20, we set V = 1000 and
find this trend is more obvious (that might be because the absolute value of the efficient learning rate, which
depends on ∥ϕ(x)∥, becomes larger). Since the vocabulary size of a common LLM is usually more than 50k,
the squeezing effect in real systems would be non-negligible even if the learning rate is small. Such a trend
is also quite consistent as long as we impose a big negative gradient on the “valley” region of the model’s
prediction, as illustrated in the last panel in Figure 19. Now we can answer the question of why all observing
πθt (y) decreases and where the probability mass has gone:

          For each token, the probability mass is squeezed to the one with the highest confidence.

Note that the tokens with the highest confidence do not necessarily form a preferred response: it just reinforces
the prior knowledge contained in θ0 , which could be a drawback for off-policy DPO.
The hypothesis above is not only supported by this simple logistic regression problem but also by many
consistent trends in LLM’s finetuning experiments. First, by comparing the average decaying speed of the
πθt (y) when the model SFT different epochs before DPO (in Figure 17), we notice that longer SFT leads to a
more peaky πθ0 (y) and hence leads to a faster decaying speed of all non-argmax responses. That is because
the longer SFT stage will eventually push down πθ0 (y−     u ) more. Hence in the DPO stage, the big negative
gradient is imposed on a deeper valley region, which makes the squeezing effect stronger. Second, to directly
verify this hypothesis, we trackPthe sum of the log-likelihood of the tokens with the largest confidence and call
it “argmax confidence”, i.e., l πθt (argmaxyl ∈Yl yl | x, y1:l−1 ). As illustrated in the last panel in Figure 4,
the argmax confidence keeps increasing while all other πθt (y) decreases: the missing probability mass is
found! Last, in the dataset-extension method we proposed in Section 4.3 and Appendix F, we train the model
                             −                                      −
using both [x, y+
                u ] and [x, yu ] during SFT to also “pull up” the yu region before conducting DPO. Then, we
observe compared with the standard training flow, i.e., SFT using [x; y+   u ] first and then DPO, the proposed
flow has a lower “argmax confidence” during DPO. That is because we pulled up πθ0 (y−      u ) during the modified
SFT stage, the big negative gradient is then imposed on the peaky region rather than the valley region of the
model’s prediction. Such a change in turn weakens the squeezing effect, as illustrated in Figure 5.

F     A S IMPLE M ETHOD TO I MPROVE A LIGNMENT
F.1   P INPOINTING THE DRAWBACK OF OFF - POLICY DPO

Based on our observations and analysis above, we speculate that “imposing big negative gradients on the
valley region” is one of the bottlenecks of off-policy RL-free methods. Starting from this hypothesis, we
believe introducing on-policy sampling has the potential to mitigate this problem, as demonstrated in SPIN
(Z. Chen et al. 2024) and other online algorithms (S. Guo, B. Zhang, et al. 2024). However, we also speculate

                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


that these methods improve the model’s performance not only by mitigating the squeezing effect. Hence
to figure out to what extent the squeezing effect can harm the model’s performance, we propose a simple
yet effective method to isolate its influence. As this method can directly mitigate this effect, it can also be
considered as an ablation study of this interesting phenomenon.


      Figure 21: Illustration of the proposed method and baseline. “E” is short for the “dataset extension”.


F.2     A SIMPLE METHOD INSPIRED BY LEARNING DYNAMICS

As illustrated in Figure 21, where the baseline method is a standard SFT-then-DPO pipeline. The proposed
method is very simple. We only need to augment the dataset used in SFT by adding (x, y−     u ) pairs for each
sample into it. All other settings are unchanged. The motivation for this method is also quite simple: as SFT
can pull up the region of supervised ŷ and we don’t want the model to impose big negative gradients on a
valley region, we can just pull up those y−u before DPO. Furthermore, as demonstrated in the third panel in
Figure 19 and Equation (15), the negative gradient in DPO would be strong enough to push down πθt (y−      u ),
                                                                         −
because the gradient will be large if the model cannot separate y+
                                                                 u and y u well. In other words, under  DPO’s
loss, there is no need to worry about the model overfitting those y−
                                                                   u during SFT.


F.3     E XPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION

To verify our analysis, we conduct experiments by finetuning a pretrained Qwen1.5-1.8B (J. Bai et al.
2023) model using Antropic-HH dataset (Y. Bai et al. 2022) (we use a subset containing 5000 random
examples from the training split). The pipelines of different methods are demonstrated in Figure 21. In
this experiment, we call the pretrained model B0 (and E0 , which is identical to B0 ), which is an official
checkpoint pretrained by J. Bai et al. (2023). Model B1 and E1 are the ones after SFT, which are different for
these two methods. Model B2−2/4/6 and E2−2/4/6 are the models finetuned using DPO for 2/4/6 epochs. All
the settings (except the starting model) of the DPO stage are the same for these two methods.
We first observe the learning dynamics of these two methods in Figure 5, where all the trends support our
                                                                                    −
analysis quite well. See the first two panels that compare πθt (y+   u ) and πθ t (yu ) respectively. It is clear that
                                                                +
these two methods have an almost identical curve on πθt (yu ) in the SFT stage but behave quite differently
on πθt (y−                                                      −
          u ): because we directly train the model using (x, yu ) in the proposed method. Then, after the SFT
stage, we conduct DPO using identical settings for these two methods. From the first three panels, we can
observe the decay speed of all curves of the proposed method is smaller than its counterpart in the baseline.
That is the benefit introduced by “pulling up” the πθ0 (y− u ) region before conducting DPO. With this specific
design, the big negative gradients in DPO are imposed on the peaky region (the behavior is like the third panel
in Figure 19) rather than the valley region (see the fourth panel), hence the squeezing effect is successfully
restrained. The results in the last panel of Figure 5 are also a strong verification of the whole picture. During
the SFT stage, the observed “argmax-probability” of the proposed method is higher than the baseline, because

                                                     39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             50
                                                 Chosen yu+                           50
                                                                                                                Rejected yu                                                  Other responses                   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Argmax response
                                                                                                                                                  100
                            100                                                       100                                                                                                                      90


          Log probability
                                                                                                                                                  200
                            150                                                       150                                                                     All rephrases                                100
                                                                                                                                                  300
                            200                                                       200                                                                                                                  110
                                                                                                     yu is the                                    400                                                                                            Drop at the
                                                                       baseline                      peak now                                                 Non-human                                                                          start of DPO
                            250
                                                                       extend
                                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                                  500
                                                                                                                                                               sequence                                    120

                            300                                                       300                                                                                                                  130
                                  0       2          4       6          8        10          0           2        4         6       8        10           0          2           4       6     8    10               0        2          4        6       8       10
                                              Number of epochs                                               Number of epochs                                            Number of epochs                                         Number of epochs

                                                                                                             (a) Result on Antropic-HH.
                            200
                                               Chosen yu+                              200
                                                                                                               Rejected yu                                                   Other responses             800        400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Argmax response
                                                                                                                                                        100
                            250                                                        250                                                                                                               900        420                           Slow at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    440                           start of DPO
          Log probability


                                                                                                                                                        200                                              1000
                            300                                                        300
                                                                                                                                                               All rephrases                             1100       460
                            350                                                        350                                                              300                                                         480
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1200
                            400                                                        400                                                                                                                          500
                                                                                                      yu is high                                        400
                                                                                                                                                                   Non-human                             1300
                            450
                                                                 baseline              450           enough now                                                     sequence                                        520
                                                                 extend                                                                                 500
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    540
                            500                                                        500                                                                                                               1500
                                  0   2          4       6         8        10                   0       2        4     6       8       10                     0         2           4   6     8   10                     0        2         4        6       8   10
                                      Number of epochs                                                       Number of epochs                                            Number of epochs                                          Number of epochs

                                                                                                       (b) Result on UltraFeedback.

Figure 22: Learning dynamics of the baseline and the proposed method with training data extension. The
one for SFT is the same as Figure 5 in the main context. Key trends to observe: 1.) Baseline and the extend
                                                                                                   −
method have similar behavior on y+ u during SFT; 2.) The extend method considerably increases yu during
SFT; 3.) The squeezing effect of the extend method is weaker (all other responses decay slower and the
confidence on argmax response increases slower).


we impose twice “pull up” pressure, i.e., those for (x, y− u ), compared with the baseline. However, at the
beginning of DPO, we observe a clear drop in the orange curve. That is because the negative gradients are
exactly imposed on those y−                                             −
                           u (in the second panel of Figure 5, πθ 0 (yu ) is already very high). Furthermore,
at the end of DPO, we see the “argmax-probability” of the proposed method is significantly lower than the
baseline setting, which implies that the squeezing effect is restrained in our setting.
In order to figure out whether the model trained using the proposed flow, which successfully restrains the
squeezing effect, indeed does alignment better, we conduct pair-wise comparisons of these models’ responses
and report their win rate as in (Rafailov et al. 2023). Specifically, we first randomly select 1000 test questions
from the test split of Antropic-HH and generate 1000 responses by feeding the prompts to each of these
models (we use the default sampling setting provided in (Rafailov et al. 2023)). Then, with the prompt
template provided in Figure 23, we evaluate the win rate of the responses pairs using GPT3.5-Turbo and
Claude3-Haiku. Here we report the average win rate of different comparisons (the degenerated responses
are not compared, so the number of compared examples is slightly smaller than 1000). Note that a win rate
greater than 0.5 means the method that comes first is preferred by the evaluator.

      1. Compare models after SFT: E1 v.s. B1 , win rate is 0.4729 and 0.4679;
      2. Demonstrate benefits of DPO:
                 a. B2−4 v.s. B1 , win rate is 0.6727 and 0.6411;
                 b. E2−4 v.s. E1 , win rate is 0.6898 and 0.7321;
      3. Compare the proposed method and baseline after DPO for different epochs:
                 a. E2−2 v.s. B2−2 , win rate is 0.6518 and 0.5151;
                 b. E2−4 v.s. B2−4 , win rate is 0.6928 and 0.6045;
                 c. E2−6 v.s. B2−6 , win rate is 0.6667 and 0.5432;
      4. Compare the best E2−4 with other 2 checkpoints:

                                                                                                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           a. E2−4 v.s. E2−2 , win rate is 0.6853 and 0.5517;
           b. E2−4 v.s. E2−6 , win rate is 0.6324 and 0.5316;
                                                                                    −
In the first comparison, we find the model trained using both (x, y+   u ) and (x, yu ) loses more (win rate
is smaller than 0.5), which makes sense because E1 assigns higher probabilities on those less preferred
responses. In the second comparison, the model fine-tuned using DPO indeed aligns with human value better.
The win rate of the proposed method is slightly higher, which might also be explained as E1 leaving more
space for improvement. Hence we then directly compare the models after DPO in these two methods in the
third group. In this group, all models in the proposed method win the baseline counterparts by a large margin,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed method. Furthermore, we find the evaluation made by
Claude is more reserved compared with GPT (the numbers are smaller). However, the trends among the
comparisons in this group are consistent: E2−4 brings the largest improvement, which is potentially the best
model. This fact is verified in the fourth group comparison, where we evaluate E2−4 against E2−2 and E2−6 .
The results demonstrate that both a too-long or too-short finetuning stage using DPO is not the best choice.


Figure 23: Prompt used for evaluating model’s response (from (Rafailov et al. 2023)), an example feedback
from GPT3.5-turbo, and two examples of the “degenerate” effect described in Holtzman et al. 2020.
Although both B2 and E2 inevitably generate such degenerate responses, we find this phenomenon is less
common in the proposed method.


                                                 41
