Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A F ORMAL F RAMEWORK FOR U NDERSTANDING
L ENGTH G ENERALIZATION IN T RANSFORMERS
  Xinting Huang1∗ Andy Yang2∗ Satwik Bhattamishra3 Yash Sarrof1
  Andreas Krebs4 Hattie Zhou5 Preetum Nakkiran6 Michael Hahn1†
 1
   Saarland University 2 University of Notre Dame 3 University of Oxford
 4
   University of Tübingen 5 Mila, Université de Montréal 6 Apple



                                             A BSTRACT

          A major challenge for transformers is generalizing to sequences longer than those
          observed during training. While previous works have empirically shown that
          transformers can either succeed or fail at length generalization depending on the
          task, theoretical understanding of this phenomenon remains limited. In this work,
          we introduce a rigorous theoretical framework to analyze length generalization in
          causal transformers with learnable absolute positional encodings. In particular, we
          characterize those functions that are identifiable in the limit from sufficiently long
          inputs with absolute positional encodings under an idealized inference scheme us-
          ing a norm-based regularizer. This enables us to prove the possibility of length
          generalization for a rich family of problems. We experimentally validate the the-
          ory as a predictor of success and failure of length generalization across a range
          of algorithmic and formal language tasks1 . Our theory not only explains a broad
          set of empirical observations but also opens the way to provably predicting length
          generalization capabilities in transformers.


1       I NTRODUCTION

A key problem in neural sequence modeling is generalization from shorter sequences seen during
training to longer sequences afterwards – length generalization. A wide range of empirical research
has found that transformers sometimes succeed and sometimes fail at length-generalization (e.g.
Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Anil et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024a; Kazemnejad et al., 2023; Zhou
et al., 2024b; Awasthi & Gupta, 2023; Jelassi et al., 2023; 2024; Chang & Bisk, 2024) with no theo-
retical explanation as to why. For instance, while transformer decoders can easily copy long strings
(Bhattamishra et al., 2024), length generalization is substantially more brittle: Transformers trained
to copy short strings often do not generalize well to longer strings when the input string includes
repeated substrings (Zhou et al., 2024a; Jelassi et al., 2024). Similarly, while transformers can in
principle simulate many finite-state automata (Liu et al., 2023), their success at length generaliza-
tion in practice varies widely across different automata (Liu et al., 2023; Bhattamishra et al., 2020).
Theoretical understanding of these phenomena is largely lacking, making it difficult to anticipate on
which problems transformers will succeed or fail at length-generalization.
An important step towards theoretical understanding was made in the RASP-L Conjecture (Zhou
et al., 2024a). This conjecture states that transformers are likely to length-generalize exactly on
those algorithmic tasks that can be solved by simple programs in RASP-L, a fragment of the RASP
language (Weiss et al., 2021) with substantial restrictions on the ways in which positional informa-
tion can be used. While Zhou et al. (2024a) provided empirical evidence in support of this idea, two
important gaps remain: First, while compelling empirical evidence supports a link between defin-
ability in RASP fragments and length generalization, no formal proof exists. Second, the RASP-L
language has not been fully formalized, so it is largely open how to prove that a certain problem is
not representable in it.
    ∗
      XH and AY are co-first authors.
    †
      Lead senior author. Contact: mhahn@lst.uni-saarland.de
    1
      Code is available at https://github.com/lacoco-lab/length_generalization


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We address both these gaps by presenting a general theoretical framework analyzing length gener-
alization as ultimate identifiability in the limit for a well-defined class of functions: When the input-
output behavior of a given function is observed at increasing input lengths, can a learner converge
on inferring the ground-truth function? We give a positive answer for a specific idealized learning
strategy: in this setting, transformers are guaranteed to length generalize given any function in the
aforementioned class. Later, we rigorously characterize the expressivity of this class.
We define an idealized inference procedure in which a sequence of transformers is fitted to reproduce
a target function on successively longer inputs while minimizing a specific norm-based regularizer,
producing an infinite sequence of transformers operating on longer and longer context windows. Our
results provide conditions under which the computations represented by these transformers converge
to a single underlying algorithm reproducing the target function. In this case, generalization is
guaranteed for sufficiently long inputs.
Our results apply to multilayer transformers, focusing on causal transformers trained from scratch
with absolute positional encodings (APE) or without positional encodings (NoPE). A key technical
challenge in analyzing length generalization for absolute positional encodings is the scaling of the
transformer’s parameter count with the input length. To address this, we define a transformer-like
limiting object, the Limit Transformer, which encapsulates the computations of a sequence of trans-
formers operating on longer and longer inputs into a single object. Our main theoretical result states
that the inference procedure will ultimately lead to length generalization for sufficiently long train-
ing inputs, provided the ground-truth function is expressible by a single Limit Transformer across
all input lengths:
Theorem 1 (Informal Version of Theorem 7). Let f be the target function expressible by a single
Limit Transformer at all input lengths, subject to restrictions on the use of positional information.
Choose transformers Tn (n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ) with context size n, where Tn reproduces the behavior of
f up to length n2 , while minimizing a norm-based regularizer. Then, for large n, Tn will match the
output of the target function f up to length ≤ n.
We then show that the expressivity of Limit Transformers can be understood for many previously
studied algorithmic tasks, as well as new ones. We extend a recently introduced RASP variant
(C-RASP, Yang & Chiang, 2024) to provide lower bounds, showing that, under the idealized in-
ference procedure, transformers will succeed at length generalization on various concrete problems.
Conversely, we employ communication complexity to obtain upper bounds on the class of functions
for which length generalization is predicted. While we have not proven this class is complete, ex-
periments confirm that the theory predicts both success and failure at length generalization across
various algorithmic tasks and formal languages. Overall, our results formalize the RASP-L Conjec-
ture and take a step toward a theoretical understanding of length generalization.

2   M ODEL OF T RANSFORMERS
Positional Encoding Scheme We study two positional encoding schemes. One uses no positional
encoding at all; we refer to this as NoPE (No Positional Encoding). The other one uses Absolute
Positional Encodings (APE), with learned per-position embedding vectors p1 , . . . , pN . We follow
Zhou et al. (2024a) in requiring transformers to be able to perform a task at different offsets within
a longer context. Whereas Zhou et al. (2024a) concatenated different examples of a task, we simply
encode an input x of length |x| = k ≤ N using positional encodings p1+o , . . . , pk+o where o
is an offset such that k + o ≤ N , and require that the transformer correctly performs the task
independently of the offset o ≥ 0. This mimics the computations in language models, where the
same reasoning task can typically appear at different places in a long context. For simplicity, we
treat positions outside of the input, including those preceding the offset, as empty.

Parameterization We focus on transformers with causal masking; for simplicity, we will use the
term “transformer” for these throughout. A transformer T is parameterized by a finite alphabet Σ,
a width d ∈ N, a token embedding matrix E ∈ R|Σ|×d , a context width N (T ) ∈ N ∪ {+∞},
positional encodings {pi ∈ Rd : 1 ≤ i < N (T ) + 1}, a depth L ∈ N, head count H ∈ N, key,
query, and value matrices {Kl,h , Ql,h , Vl,h ∈ Rd×d : 1 ≤ l ≤ L, 1 ≤ h ≤ H}, MLP matrices and
biases {Al ∈ Rd×d , Bl ∈ Rd×d ; bl ∈ Rd : 1 ≤ l ≤ L}, and an unembedding matrix U ∈ R|Σ|×d .
For matrices, we use ∥ · ∥ and ∥ · ∥F to denote the spectral and Frobenius norm respectively.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Computation of Activations and Outputs We assume a standard causal transformer, with a few
technical points: We explicitly scale attention logits with the logarithm of the input length, omit
layer norm, allow Heaviside activations in addition to ReLU activations, and assume that, while
the transformer may overall compute at infinite precision, attention logits are computed at fixed
fractional precision. We next define all computations formally. Reserving a special SOS symbol not
in Σ, written as “$”, we take the set of input strings to be S, the set of strings x ∈ Σ∗ where x1 = $
and $ does not occur in x2...|x| . We now define the computation of the transformer T on an input
x ∈ S where 1 ≤ |x| < N (T ) + 1 (that is – |x| ≤ N (T ) if N (T ) < ∞, and |x| is any finite length
otherwise). If L is the number of layers, then we write the output of layer l = 1, . . . , L at position
                          (l)
i = 1, . . . , N (T ) as yi ∈ Rd . Let o ≥ 0 be any offset such that |x| + o < N (T ) + 1 – that is, x
still fits into the transformer’s context width if encoded at offset o. Given this offset, we set
                                  (0)
                                 yi     = Exi + pi+o        i = 1, . . . , |x|                            (1)
where xi ∈ Σ is the input symbol at position i. Attention logits, at query position i and key position
j are computed as
        (l,h)       (l−1) TT            (l−1)
       ai,j     = (yj   ) Kl,h Ql,h yi          for 1 ≤ j ≤ i ≤ |x|; l = 1, . . . , L; h = 1, . . . , H   (2)

We assume standard softmax attention, but incorporate scaling with log |x| following prior work
finding it necessary to theoretically represent sparse functions and circumvent theoretical limitations
of soft attention (Chiang & Cholak, 2022; Edelman et al., 2022):

                                            Pi                      (l,h)           (l−1)
                                         H
                                               j=1 exp log |x| · ai,j        Vl,h yj
                       (l)     (l−1)
                                        X
                    Yi := yi         +                                                              (3)
                                                  Pi                        (l,h)
                                        h=1          j=1 exp   log |x|  · a i,j

After each attention block, the activations are passed through a one-layer MLP:
                                  (l)       (l)                    (l)
                                yi := Yi          + Bl · ψl (Al Yi       + bl )                           (4)
where we allow the activation function ψl to be, in each coordinate, either ReLU or Heaviside (see
Appendix D.1 for discussion of this). We omit layer norm, as it plays no important role in our
results, but it can be accounted for (See Appendix D.3). We assume an infinite-precision setup for
the activations, with the restriction that attention logits (2) and the output of the exp(·) function are
both rounded to p fractional bits of precision before further processing. This is a mild restriction
preventing tiny changes in attention patterns from potentially snowballing into large changes in the
output due to infinite precision (See Appendix D.2).
A transformer T maps strings x ∈ S (|x| ≤ N (T )) to vectors of next-token prediction logits,
                                              (L)
T (x, o) ∈ R|x|×|Σ| , where T (x, o)i = U yi (i = 1, . . . , |x|) for the unembedding matrix U ∈
R|Σ|×d , and o is the offset. Let F(Σ) be the set of all maps f mapping x ∈ S to f (x) ∈ R|x|×|Σ| .

3     T HEORETICAL F RAMEWORK

3.1   L IMIT T RANSFORMERS

Our theory addresses the setting of transformers with absolute positional encodings, where the width
may grow with the input length. Importantly, we cannot view the ground-truth function as realized
by a single transformer: Even if one assigned such a transformer an infinite number of positional
encodings, it would still effectively only be able to distinguish between a bounded number of po-
sitions, because the width of positional encodings within a single transformer is bounded. Instead,
we will derive a parameterization of transformers that allows us to convert sequences of transform-
ers operating on longer and longer sequences to a single limiting transformer-like object. Our key
technical idea is to reparameterize the transformer in terms of product functions, inner products of
parameter vectors as mediated by parameter matrices, such as
                                EσT K1,h
                                     T
                                         Q1,h Eτ           pTi K1,h
                                                                T
                                                                    Q1,h pj
                                                                                                          (5)
                               pTi K2,h
                                    T
                                        Q2,h V1 pj         Uσ V2 V1 Eσ

                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and various others; see Appendix F.1 for the full formal definition. We first note that the trans-
former’s computations are uniquely specified by such products. The number of products as in (5)
depends, among others, on |Σ|, L, H, N (T ), but crucially not on d. We will use this parameteri-
zation to translate sequences T1 , T2 , T3 , . . . of transformers running on inputs of length 1, 2, 3, . . .
to limiting transformer-like objects that are applicable at all input lengths, while keeping width d
bounded even if the widths of Tn diverge to infinity. This limiting object, a Limit Transformer,
differs from an ordinary transformer, as defined in Section 2, just in a few respects. Formally:
Definition 2. A Limit Transformer is a transformer T where:

         1. N (T ) = +∞
         2. All parameters (including positional encodings pi , and the output of ϕl,h ) are expressed in
            p-bit precision, for some p ∈ N
         3. Attention logits on input length N are computed as
                                      (l,h)       (l−1) T T            (l−1)
                                     ai,j     = (yj    ) Kl,h Ql,h yi          + ϕl,h (j, i)                  (6)
            where ϕl,h : N × N → R.

The most important point is the third one, which augments the attention logits (Eq. 2) with a second
term, ϕl,h (j, i), where ϕl,h is a potentially arbitrary function. Thus, a Limit Transformer can use
positional information in two ways: through bounded-width and bounded-precision positional en-
codings pi , and additionally through potentially more complicated functions ϕl,h . Our main result
will link length generalization to expressibility by Limit Transformers satisfying specific properties:
Definition 3. A Limit Transformer satisfies
         1. P ERIODIC if pi = pi+∆ for all i for some ∆ > 0
         2. L OCAL if each ϕl,h is translation-invariant and local.
Here, a function f : N × N → R is “translation-invariant” if f (i, j) = f (i + τ, j + τ ), ∀i ≤ j, ∀τ ≥
0, and “local” if there is τ such that f (i, j) = 0 when j > i + τ .

The parameterization in terms of inner products permits a translation from a transformer T to a
bounded-width Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL (Lemma 52 in the Appendix).
In this translation, products of the form pTi Kl,h
                                               T
                                                   Ql,h pj are encoded into the functions ϕl,h (i, j), per-
mitting the Limit Transformer to distinguish infinitely many different positions even while keeping
its width bounded. We note that Limit Transformer are a mathematical construct helping us prove
statements about standard transformers, and are not themselves trained or implemented.

3.2      D EFINITION OF I NFERENCE P ROCEDURE

To define the inference procedure, we specify the following hypothesis class at each input length n:
Definition 4 (Hypothesis Class). For each n = 1, 2, 3, . . . , define the hypothesis class Θn as the
set of transformers T (as defined in Section 2) where (1) N (T ) = n, (2) each parameter vector and
matrix of T is represented at p bits of precision, for some p ∈ N, (3) each product function involving
positional encodings is translation-invariant. That is, every product function involving exactly one
positional encoding is constant across positions, and for every 1 ≤ i, j, i + ∆, j + ∆ ≤ n,
                                 pTi M1 . . . Mk pj = pTi+∆ M1 . . . Mk pj+∆                                  (7)
whenever M1 . . . Mk is a product of parameter matrices linking the input layer.2

Note that the width d of the transformers T ∈ Θn is unconstrained. The most interesting requirement
here is the third one: We ask that, while the positional encodings pi will typically vary with position,
their contributions to the transformer’s computations are offset-independent. This is a stronger re-
quirement than for the input-output behavior to be offset-independent: we ask for the transformer’s
“algorithm” itself to be the same across offsets. This is a substantive condition, but we believe it
to be a natural requirement in the context of length generalization (Appendix G.6). Our inference
procedure will use a regularizer R favoring simpler hypotheses. The following will be sufficient:
   2            T            T   T
       Such as K1,h Q1,h , V2,h K3,h′ Q3,h′ V1,h′′ , and similar. See Appendix F.2 for a formal definition.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 5 (Regularizer). Let T ∈ Θn , thus N (T ) = n. Define R(T ) as the sum of (1) L + H; (2)
the precision p used in Definition 4; the precision p used for rounding attention logits and the output
                                                                T
of exp(·) (Section 2); (3) maxl,h rank(Vl,h ); (4) maxl,h ∥Kl,h   Ql,h ∥; maxl,h ∥Vl,h ∥; maxl ∥Al ∥F ,
∥Bl ∥F ; ∥U ∥; (5) maxi ∥pi ∥2 , maxσ ∥Eσ ∥2 , maxl ∥bl ∥2 ; (6) the term
                                       H N
                                     L X   (T )
                                     X   X                             2
                                                    pT1 Kl,h
                                                         T
                                                             Ql,h pj                                     (8)
                                     l=1 h=1 j=1


The idea of (8) is to discourage accidental attention between far-away positions that do not appear
together during training, which could hamper length generalization. Due to translation invariance,
this term entails a bound on products for all pairs pi , pj (i ≤ j) entering causal attention. While such
a regularizer is not part of standard training, standard initialization tends to lead to bounded values
for (8) when d is large (Appendix G.1); it thus captures an implicit bias of standard initialization and
training. Importantly, the width d does not explicitly enter R; as a consequence, for any sufficiently
large C, the number of transformers Tn ∈ Θn with R(Tn ) ≤ C is infinite, simply because d is
not constrained. Nonetheless, this regularizer will be sufficient for identification under our idealized
inference procedure, which observes the input-output behavior of the target function f on inputs of
length ≤ n2 and selects a transformer T with maximal context window n, T ∈ Θn that exactly fits
that input-output behavior while minimizing the regularizer R(T ):
Definition 6 (Inference Procedure). Given a function f ∈ F(Σ), the Inference Procedure obtains
a sequence of transformers T1 ∈ Θ1 , T2 ∈ Θ2 , . . . as follows. Define Un as the set of T ∈ Θn
matching the behavior of f on all inputs of length ≤ n2 . Then choose Tn ∈ Un such that
                                                   1
                                       R(Tn ) ≤      + inf R(T )                                         (9)
                                                   n T ∈Un

In (9), we do not simply ask for minimizing the regularizer, as the set of elements of Un with R(T )
smaller than a given value need not be finite and thus a minimum need not be attained by any
Tn . Importantly, we only ask Tn to match the behavior of f up to length n2 , formalizing the idea
of training on shorter inputs and testing on longer ones; our identifiability guarantee will provide
conditions under which Tn will end up matching f correctly up to length n – representing length
generalization. While we take the testing length to be twice the training length, there is nothing
special about this; our analysis works whenever the training length diverges to infinity.

3.3   M AIN R ESULT: C ONVERGENCE OF I NFERENCE P ROCEDURE

Our main result asymptotically characterizes length generalization under the inference procedure
from Definition 6. For functions representable by Limit Transformers satisfying L OCAL and P ERI -
ODIC , we guarantee that any run of the Inference Procedure will ultimately achieve length general-
ization, so that transformers with context length n chosen to fit the target function on inputs with
length ≤ n2 will, when n is sufficiently large, also perform correctly at all lengths ≤ n. Formally,
Theorem 7 (Guaranteed Length Generalization in the Limit). Let f ∈ F(Σ). Then the following
are equivalent:

      1. f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL.
      2. (Guaranteed Length Generalization) Applying the Inference Procedure from Definition 6
         to f generates a sequence T1 , T2 , . . . with supn=1,2,3,... R(Tn ) < ∞, for which there is
         some N0 such that, for all m > N0 , Tm matches f on all inputs of any length k ≤ m.

The formal proof is in Appendix B.1. Intuitively, if f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satis-
fying P ERIODIC and L OCAL, then, even though the Inference Procedure produces infinitely many
distinct transformers T1 , T2 , . . . , these can only traverse a finite set of underlying algorithms, each
described by some Limit Transformer. P ERIODIC and L OCAL ensure that the Limit Transformer’s
parameter count effectively remains finite, as its position-related parameters can be fully specified
in terms of p1 , . . . , p∆ and ϕ(1, 1), . . . , ϕ(1, τ ). The regularizer bounds width, depth, and precision
of the Limit Transformers; this keeps the set of algorithms traversed finite. Each of these finitely
many algorithms will either be ruled out at some input length n, or else match the behavior of f at


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


all input lengths. At some finite N0 , only the latter type of algorithm remains; hence, transformers
produced after this point will match the target function. The proof also entails a result on NoPE
length generalization: Applying the inference procedure to f while constraining pi ≡ 0 will lead
to length generalization when f is expressible by a Limit Transformer where all pi and all ϕl,h are
zero (Corollary 18). While Theorem 7 guarantees length generalization from length n2 to length
n for expressible problems, it does not rule out length generalization for inexpressible problems.
Such a statement becomes possible if we allow arbitrary scaling of training vs. testing lengths (Ap-
pendix B.4). Besides length generalization guarantees, Limit Transformers are also useful in pro-
viding expressiveness results for transformers with absolute positional encodings (Appendix B.5).

4     W HICH F UNCTIONS ARE I DENTIFIABLE ? E XPRESSIVENESS OF L IMIT
      T RANSFORMERS AND C-RASP
We have found that, if a target function f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC
and L OCAL, then Theorem 7 implies length generalization under our Inference Procedure. In order
to understand the ramifications of this result, we now study what functions Limit Transformers can
express – for these functions, Theorem 7 will then guarantee length generalization.

4.1   S IMPLE E XAMPLE : I NDUCTION H EAD

We consider the task of predicting the next token in proportion to the frequency at which different
tokens had previously followed tokens matching the current one:
                                              #{k < i : xk = xi , xk+1 = σ}
                        f (x1 . . . xN )i,σ =                                                    (10)
                                                  #{k < i : xk = xi }
A Limit Transformer solves this with the Induction Head construction (Olsson et al., 2022), in two
layers and one head: In the first layer, ϕ(i, j) = 1 if i + 1 = j and 0 else; the head copies the
preceding symbol. In the second layer, attention focuses on positions with the same symbol. The
transformer outputs next-token predictions in proportion to bigram frequencies in the context, up to
approximation error O( n1 ) (due to logit scaling). Hence, Theorem 7 guarantees that the Inference
Procedure will length-generalize on (10). A special case of (10) occurs when each symbol occurs
exactly once; here, such an induction head circuit suffices to copy a string (Zhou et al., 2024a), we
thus obtain a length generalization guarantee for copying such strings (see Section 5).

4.2   L ENGTH G ENERALIZATION FOR C-RASP

We next present a large class of functions for which Theorem 7 guarantees length generalization.
We extend the C-RASP formalism (Yang & Chiang, 2024) with positional information, and then
show that any function defined by a C-RASP program is expressible by a Limit Transformer; hence,
transformers will, by Theorem 7, length-generalize on those functions. We first define C-RASP:
Definition 8 (C-RASP). Let Σ be an alphabet, let Φ be a set of unary relations ϕ : N → {0, 1},
and let Ψ be a set of binary relations ψ : N × N → {0, 1}. A C-RASP[Φ, Ψ] program P
is defined as a sequence P1 , . . . , Pk of C-RASP operations. There are two sorts of operations:

           Boolean-Valued Operations                          Count-Valued Operations
 Initial        P (i) := Qσ (i)                      Counting     C(i) := # [j ≤ i, ψ(i, j)] P (j)
                        for σ ∈ Σ                                        for ψ ∈ Ψ ∪ {⊤}
 Boolean         P (i) := ¬P1 (i)                    Conditional   C(i) := P (i) ? C1 (i) : C2 (i)
                 P (i) := P1 (i) ∧ P2 (i)
                                                     Addition      C(i) := C1 (i) + C2 (i)
 Constant        P (i) := ⊤
                                                     Subtraction   C(i) := C1 (i) − C2 (i)
 Positional      P (i) := ϕ(i)
                                                     Constant      C(i) := 1
                         for ϕ ∈ Φ
 Comparison      P (i) := C1 (i) ≤ C2 (i)
A Counting operation returns the number of positions j ≤ i where P (j) and ψ(i, j) hold. A
conditional operation returns C1 (i) if P (i), and C2 (i) otherwise. We use the value of the last


                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Boolean-valued operation, at the last position of the string, to determine acceptance using a C-RASP
program. That is, if the program is run on input w with final operation L, then we accept w if and
only if L(|w|) is true. C-RASP[periodic, local] is the class of C-RASP programs where each ϕ(i)
is periodic in i, and each ψ(i, j) is translation-invariant and local (Definition 3). We also write
C-RASP[periodic, local] for the class of all languages accepted by some C-RASP[periodic, local]
program. As an example, we present a program recognizing L = Σ∗ abΣ∗ over Σ = {a, b}:

      C-RASP program for L = Σ∗ abΣ∗ over Σ = {a, b}

      Ca− (i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i − 1] Qa (j)                  # of immediately preceding a        (1)
      Pa− (i) := Ca− (i) ≥ 1                                  Position i − 1 holds an a           (2)
      Qab (i) := Qb (i) ∧ Pa− (i)                             A substring ab ends at position i (3)
      Cab (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qab (j)                            # of substrings ab                  (4)
        L(i) := Cab (i) ≥ 1                                   At least one ab precedes position i (5)

Any C-RASP[periodic, local] program can be translated to a Limit Transformer with correspond-
ing positional functions. We say a Limit Transformer T accepts an input if the value in the last
dimension in the last position of the output is greater than 0, and rejects otherwise.
Theorem 9. For every C-RASP[Φ, Ψ] program P with local functions Ψ and periodic functions Φ
there exists a Limit Transformer T∞ that satisfies P ERIODIC and L OCAL such that for all w ∈ Σ∗ ,
P accepts w iff T∞ accepts $w. If P uses no local or periodic relations, then T requires no functions
ϕl,h or positional encodings pi .

The proof is in Appendix B.6. As a consequence, the Inference Procedure will ultimately length-
generalize on inputs from a function f expressible by a C-RASP[periodic, local] program. If the
C-RASP program requires no positional functions (i.e., it is in C-RASP[∅]), then length generaliza-
tion will succeed even with NoPE transformers. We establish that various functions are in C-RASP:
Theorem 10. Membership in the following languages is definable in C-RASP[∅]: (1) MAJORITY,
(2) DYCK-1, (3) an bn cn .

The proof is in Appendix C.1. By Theorem 9, these positive results translate into length general-
ization guarantees. For these tasks, length generalization even with NoPE is empirically already
well-documented (Bhattamishra et al., 2020). Further, C-RASP[local] can implement versions of
the Induction Head task from Section 4.1 (Appendix C.2.1–C.2.2). C-RASP also helps understand
why transformers show varying abilities even on simple finite-state languages (Bhattamishra et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2023; 2024), a fact poorly understood theoretically. For instance, we find:
Lemma 11. Consider the alphabet Σ = {a, b, e}.
        1. P ARIT Y := b∗ (ab∗ ab∗ )∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]
        2. (aa)∗ ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] and (aa)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅]
        3. Σ∗ be∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]
        4. L ∈ C-RASP[∅] for piecewise testable L

The proof is in Appendix C.3. Notably, all of these languages are recognizable by simple finite-state
automata which are expressible by transformers (Liu et al., 2023), but empirical length generaliza-
tion behavior differs in line with C-RASP expressiveness (Section 5). PARITY (1) has long been
found difficult for transformers (e.g. Hahn, 2020; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Anil et al., 2022; Chiang
& Cholak, 2022; Delétang et al., 2023; Hahn & Rofin, 2024). Result (2) exemplifies the effect of dif-
ferent positional relations. The language Σ∗ be∗ (3) is a simple model of FlipFlop (Liu et al., 2024),
a language on which transformers empirically struggle to generalize perfectly despite its simplicity
for recurrent models (Liu et al., 2024; Sarrof et al., 2024). The class (4) is useful for determining
expressibility of languages in C-RASP[∅], as in Section E.1.2.

4.3     L IMITATIONS : L OGARITHMIC C OMMUNICATION C OMPLEXITY

Having shown that various functions are definable by Limit Transformers, we now provide a simple
technique for showing that various functions are not definable by Limit Transformers. Informally,
any function satisfying the conditions in Theorem 7 has logarithmic communication complexity:


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 12. Let T be a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL. On an input
x ∈ Σ2N , assume Alice has access to x1...N and Bob has access to xN +1...2N . Then Alice can
communicate C log N bits to Bob, where C depends on T but not N , so that Bob can compute each
                                (l)
activation in the second half, yi (N + 1 ≤ i ≤ 2N ).

The proof is in Appendix B.3. In principle, computing activations in the second half of the input
requires full knowledge of the first half of the input, because positions in the second half can freely
attend to positions in the first half. In this situation, one would expect Bob to need full knowledge
of N2 input symbols from Alice’s part, exponentially more than the C log N claimed in the theorem.
This is indeed needed if T performs the task of, say, checking if x1...,N and xN +1...2N are identical.
However, if T satisfies P ERIODIC and L OCAL, attention must largely be determined by the pres-
ence of tokens and token sequences; when an attention head’s behavior is determined by positional
information, it can only focus its attention on a local neighborhood or equally distribute it over a
periodic pattern. Intuitively, in such cases, the set of possible queries and keys can be grouped into
a finite partitioning, of size bounded independently of N . It then suffices for Alice to communicate,
for each possible group of keys, an aggregate of the value vectors at the positions where a matching
key is computed. The proof (Appendix B.3) formalizes this. As a corollary:
Corollary 13. The following problems are not expressible by Limit Transformers satisfying P ERI -
ODIC and L OCAL : (1) copying arbitrary strings, (2) addition of n-digit numbers.

This is proven in Appendix B.3. As a consequence, any run of the Inference Procedure on these
functions will output solutions T1 , T2 , T3 , . . . for which the depth, number of heads, parameter
norms or ranks, MLP dimensions, or precision p, must increase with the input length n; indeed,
length generalization is empirically challenging for these functions (Section 5).

5   E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the expressiveness of Limit Transformers and C-RASP as predictors of empirical
length generalization. Based on Theorems 7 and 9, we expect that APE transformers should length-
generalize on problems with a C-RASP[periodic,local] program, and that NoPE transformers will
be successful on problems with a C-RASP[∅] program. We test this prediction on a suite of algo-
rithmic problems and formal languages, largely from prior empirical work on length generalization
(Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2024a), but evaluated within a uniform framework.
For each task, the model is trained on inputs whose L EN is in the range [lmin , 50], where lmin is the
minimum length for this task. L EN is the length of the input in the algorithmic tasks (Appendix E.2),
and the overall sequence length in the formal language tasks. The model is tested on 3 test sets,
where L EN is in the range [lmin , 50], [51, 100], [101, 150]; these lengths are based on the source of
the regular languages benchmark (Bhattamishra et al., 2020). We trained using a standard AdamW
setup; see details in Appendix E.3. Hyperparameters are selected by searching in order of increasing
complexity until we find a setting that performs well up to length ≤ 100. We interpret results
on lengths [101, 150] as a measure of length generalization. Each model has as many positional
encodings as needed to encode the longest inputs (at least 150); each input is presented with a
random offset in agreement with the theoretical setup. On algorithmic sequence-to-sequence tasks,
we train with cross-entropy loss on the output. On formal languages, where next-symbol predictions
are generally not deterministic, we instead train the model to predict the set of legal next symbols,
with each such set coded as an atomic symbol (as in Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Sarrof et al., 2024).
At test time, predictions are considered correct on a sequence if and only if the output at every
step is correct; the random baseline is thus very low on the formal language benchmark. We report
accuracy as the fraction of test sequences where the predictions are correct at each step.
We first evaluate on 8 algorithmic problems, which largely overlap with Zhou et al. (2024a), but are
tailored to those where C-RASP expressiveness can be clearly settled. Tasks are defined formally in
Appendix E.2.1. A new problem here is BINARY MAJORITY INTERLEAVE, which interleaves
multiple MAJORITY functions and can be solved by C-RASP using periodic functions. Length
generalization behavior matches C-RASP expressiveness; C-RASP[∅] expressiveness predicts the
success of NoPE (see Figure 1). In agreement with prior empirical results (Zhou et al., 2024a;
Jelassi et al., 2023), COPY is difficult in the presence of repetition and easy when it is avoided;
these findings match C-RASP expressiveness (Corollary 13 and Section 4.1).


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Found CRASP[Periodic, Local] Program                    No CRASP[Periodic, Local] Program                  Found CRASP[] Program       No CRASP[] Program
             Binary                   Binary Majority
             Majority                    Interleave                  Majority                       Sort
 100                            100                        100                          100
    75                           75                         75                           75                          1           2          3     4           5            6
    50                           50                         50                           50
    25                           25                         25                           25
     0                            0                          0                            0
     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2   Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3
             Copy                         Copy                                                                       7           8          9     10          11           12
             Unique                       Repeat                      Parity                      Addition
 100                            100                        100                          100
    75                           75                         75                           75
    50                           50                         50                           50
    25                           25                         25                           25                          13          14        15     16         17
     0                            0                          0                            0
     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2   Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3     Bin 1    Bin 2     Bin 3


Figure 1: Experimental results (y axis: accuracy), at lengths ≤ 50 (Bin 1, training), [51, 100] (Bin
2), and [101, 150] (Bin 3, generalization), for APE (solid) and NoPE (dotted). Green lines indicate
that we found a C-RASP program (C-RASP[periodic, local] for APE, C-RASP[∅] for NoPE), red
lines indicate that we proved nonexistence, or found no program. Random baselines are indicated
in gray in (left), and very close to zero in (right). On the algorithmic problems (left), we repli-
cate prior empirical findings; C-RASP expressiveness predicts observed length generalization. On
the regular languages (right, with same x and y-axes as left, Table 2), length generalization tracks
C-RASP expressiveness established in Lemma 11 ((1) = (aa)∗ , (17) = Σ∗ be∗ ) and other results (see
Appendix E.1). C-RASP expressiveness performs much better than circuit complexity and standard
notions of regular language complexity in predicting length generalization (Appendix, Figures 3–4).


We next applied the experimental framework to 17 regular languages assembled by Bhattamishra
et al. (2020), who evaluated length generalization in transformers and LSTMs. Whereas LSTMs
perform strongly across the board, the behavior of transformers on these regular languages has so
far eluded theoretical understanding. While it is known that transformers struggle with PARITY, it
has remained unclear why they would struggle to length-generalize on some seemingly very simple
languages. We found C-RASP[periodic,local] programs for 13 of the languages and proved nonexis-
tence for the others (Appendix E.1.2). Length generalization succeeded in those cases where we had
found a C-RASP[periodic,local] program (see Figure 1 right). In those cases where a C-RASP[∅]
program exists, generalization also succeeded with NoPE. Generalization failed for languages where
no C-RASP program exists, such as Σ∗ be∗ (#17 in Figure 1; Lemma 11).

6        D ISCUSSION
Prior work has empirically found that transformers’ length generalization capabilities differ between
tasks, but theoretical understanding has been lacking. We have introduced a formal framework
analyzing length generalization in an idealized inference procedure. The framework explains the
commonality across diverse tasks where successful length generalization has been observed in prior
research, in terms of expressiveness in two simple mathematical formalisms, Limit Transformers and
C-RASP. We also proved that various problems, on which length generalization is less successful
empirically, are not expressible in one or both of these formalisms. Beyond length generalization,
the framework further sheds light on the expressiveness of APE transformers. Our results on length
generalization study an idealized regularizer and assume perfect fitting of the training distribution.
Making the guarantee from Theorem 7 more realistic by incorporating SGD training dynamics and
subsampling of training data is an interesting problem for future research.
Our results can be viewed as formalizing the RASP-L Conjecture (Zhou et al., 2024a). Both Limit
Transformers and C-RASP[periodic,local] formalize intuitions underlying RASP-L in restricting
how positional information can be used. An important advance over Zhou et al. (2024a) is that we
settle the expressiveness of these formalisms for many problems, and are able to explicitly prove a
variety of problems with poor empirical length generalization, such as copying with repeated strings,
to be inexpressible by Limit Transformers. Our results provide a step towards rigorously confirming
the idea that expressiveness in such restricted formalisms predicts length generalization.


                                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Expressiveness of Transformers A substantial line of research has studied the in-principle ex-
pressiveness of transformers (Strobl et al., 2024). Transformers express a subset of the class TC0
(Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023b; Strobl, 2023), but it is unknown if this inclusion is proper. All prob-
lems considered in Section 5 are in TC0 , but empirical length generalization behavior largely tracks
C-RASP[periodic,local] expressiveness, which defines a proper subclass of TC0 (Appendix C.3.1).
While it remains open if the expressive power of transformers exhausts TC0 , our results suggest a
separation between TC0 and those problems for which length generalization is possible with abso-
lute positional encodings. In particular, our results suggest that the existence of APE transformers
that perform a task across larger ranges of input lengths is linked to the expressiveness of Limit
Transformers (Section C). It is an open question how far new, yet-to-be-discovered positional en-
coding schemes may increase the range of length generalization; empirical evidence indicates that
NoPE and APE may be hard to beat by other general-purpose encodings (Kazemnejad et al., 2023).
The proof of Theorem 12 is closely linked to previous communication-complexity bounds for trans-
former layers (Sanford et al., 2023; 2024; Peng et al., 2024; Bhattamishra et al., 2024), which im-
portantly were shown only for individual layers, not multilayer transformers. Indeed, Bhattamishra
et al. (2024) showed that such a logarithmic bound is not in general possible for arbitrary multi-
layer transformers. In contrast, our result applies even at multilayer models, which is enabled by the
restrictions on the ways in which positional information can be used in a Limit Transformer.

Length Generalization of Transformers Various studies have empirically evaluated length gen-
eralization in transformers. Our work is most closely related to Zhou et al. (2024a), discussed
above. Bhattamishra et al. (2020) study length generalization on formal languages; we find that C-
RASP[periodic,local] expressiveness explains behavior on their benchmark well (Section 5). Anil
et al. (2022) show that language models, finetuned on various reasoning problems, do not length-
generalize well. Wang et al. (2024a) evaluate length generalization of NoPE transformers on real-
world tasks. Kazemnejad et al. (2023) explore length generalization across different positional en-
coding schemes, finding NoPE to perform surprisingly well. Zhou et al. (2024b) show that length
generalization for addition improves with specific encoding schemes and input formats. Jelassi et al.
(2024) show that transformers can succeed in length generalization on copying when inputs avoid
n-gram repetition. Chang & Bisk (2024) empirically find limitations in generalization in counting.
In contrast to the rich landscape of empirical studies, theoretical understanding of length general-
ization has been limited. Most relevant, Ahuja & Mansouri (2024) study length generalization in
simple neural architectures, including a one-layer transformer setup with linear (not softmax) atten-
tion. Our results, in contrast, apply to multi-layer softmax transformers and make statements about
many concrete problems that have been studied empirically. Some other works (e.g. Hou et al.,
2024; Xiao & Liu, 2023) provide length-generalizing constructions for certain problems, but leave
open whether learning would lead to such constructions. Wang et al. (2024b) show that GD training
leads to length generalization on a specific token selection task.

Limitations We study idealized asymptotic identification of a global minimum with perfect
knowledge of behavior on the training distribution (cf. Q.4 in App. A for more discussion). Extend-
ing Theorem 7 to account for subsampling of the training data and learning dynamics is an important
problem for future research. In particular, providing a practical upper bound on the threshold N0
at which length generalization is expected is an interesting problem. Our study focuses on absolute
positional encodings; extending it to other positional encodings (e.g. Su et al., 2024; Press et al.,
2021; Ruoss et al., 2023) is another important problem for future research.


7   C ONCLUSION

We have introduced a theoretical framework that unifies a broad array of empirical findings about
successes and failures of length generalization in transformers with absolute positional encodings.
Our framework is based on the analysis of an idealized inference procedure, for which length gen-
eralization provably happens whenever the ground-truth function is expressible with only limited
access to positional information. By providing upper and lower bounds on the expressiveness of
transformers trained using this inference procedure, we accurately predict the success and failure of
length generalization across a wide set of algorithmic tasks and formal languages.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONTRIBUTIONS
MH coordinated the project. MH and XH developed the conceptual framework of Theorem 7, with
input from the other authors. XH and YS contributed Section 5. AY contributed Section 4.2 with
input from MH and AK. MH, XH, AY, YS jointly developed the translation to Limit Transformers;
MH worked out the formalization. SB contributed Proposition 54, Lemma 56, and provided concep-
tual input throughout the project. AK contributed to settling the C-RASP expressiveness of formal
languages. PN and HZ provided conceptual and writing-level input over the course of the project.
MH drafted the remaining portions of the paper and the proof of Theorem 7, including definitions
and lemmas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project-
ID 232722074 – SFB 1102. MH thanks Lena Strobl, Dana Angluin, David Chiang, Mark Rofin,
Anthony Lin, and Georg Zetzsche for conversations on related topics. We thank Entang Wang for
comments on the draft. We also thank anonymous reviewers for their close reading and detailed
feedback.

R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja and Amin Mansouri. On provable length and compositional generalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.04875, 2024.
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh, Am-
  brose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
  in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38546–38556,
  2022.
Pranjal Awasthi and Anupam Gupta. Improving length-generalization in transformers via task
  hinting. CoRR, abs/2310.00726, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2310.00726. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.00726.
Pablo Barcelo, Alexander Kozachinskiy, Anthony Widjaja Lin, and Vladimir Podolskii. Logical
  languages accepted by transformer encoders with hard attention. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=gbrHZq07mq.
David A Mix Barrington, Kevin Compton, Howard Straubing, and Denis Thérien. Regular languages
  in NC1. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 44(3):478–499, 1992.
Christoph Behle, Andreas Krebs, and Mark Mercer. Linear circuits, two-variable logic and weakly
  blocked monoids. In Luděk Kučera and Antonı́n Kučera (eds.), Mathematical Foundations of
  Computer Science 2007, pp. 147–158, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
  ISBN 978-3-540-74456-6.
Christoph Behle, Andreas Krebs, and Stephanie Reifferscheid. Regular languages definable by
  majority quantifiers with two variables. In Volker Diekert and Dirk Nowotka (eds.), Developments
  in Language Theory, pp. 91–102, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN
  978-3-642-02737-6.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. On the ability and limitations of transformers
  to recognize formal languages. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020, pp. 7096–7116. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/V1/2020.EMNLP-MAIN.576. URL https://doi.org/
  10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.576.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Michael Hahn, Phil Blunsom, and Varun Kanade. Separations in the repre-
  sentational capabilities of transformers and recurrent architectures. CoRR, abs/2406.09347, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.09347. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.
  09347.

Michaël Cadilhac and Charles Paperman. The regular languages of wire linear AC0 . Acta Infor-
 matica, 59(4):321–336, 2022. doi: 10.1007/S00236-022-00432-2. URL https://doi.org/
 10.1007/s00236-022-00432-2.

Yingshan Chang and Yonatan Bisk. Language models need inductive biases to count inductively.
  CoRR, abs/2405.20131, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.20131. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2405.20131.

David Chiang and Peter Cholak. Overcoming a theoretical limitation of self-attention. In Smaranda
  Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022,
  Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pp. 7654–7664. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2022. doi: 10.18653/V1/2022.ACL-LONG.527. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2022.acl-long.527.

Arthur Conmy, Augustine Mavor-Parker, Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adrià Garriga-
  Alonso. Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:16318–16352, 2023.

Colin De la Higuera. Grammatical inference: learning automata and grammars. Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2010.

Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot
  Catt, Chris Cundy, Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, Joel Veness, and Pedro A. Ortega. Neural
  networks and the chomsky hierarchy. 2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
  WbxHAzkeQcn.

Benjamin L Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, and Cyril Zhang. Inductive biases and variable
  creation in self-attention mechanisms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5793–5831. PMLR, 2022.

Benjamin L Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The
  evolution of statistical induction heads: In-context learning markov chains. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2402.11004, 2024.

Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020.

Michael Hahn and Mark Rofin. Why are sensitive functions hard for transformers? In Proceedings
 of the 2024 Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2024),
 2024. arXiv Preprint 2402.09963.

Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention trans-
  formers: Perspectives from circuit complexity. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:800–810, 2022.

Kaiying Hou, David Brandfonbrener, Sham M. Kakade, Samy Jelassi, and Eran Malach. Universal
  length generalization with turing programs. CoRR, abs/2407.03310, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2407.03310. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.03310.

Samy Jelassi, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Carles Domingo-Enrich, Yuhuai Wu, Yuanzhi Li, and François
  Charton. Length generalization in arithmetic transformers. CoRR, abs/2306.15400, 2023. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2306.15400. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.15400.

Samy Jelassi, David Brandfonbrener, Sham M. Kakade, and Eran Malach. Repeat after me: Trans-
  formers are better than state space models at copying. In Forty-first International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=duRRoGeoQT.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Inkit Padhi, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Payel Das, and Siva
 Reddy. The impact of positional encoding on length generalization in transformers. In Al-
 ice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 -
 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
 4e85362c02172c0c6567ce593122d31c-Abstract-Conference.html.

Amirhossein Kazemnejad, Inkit Padhi, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Payel Das, and Siva
 Reddy. The impact of positional encoding on length generalization in transformers. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Andreas Krebs. Typed semigroups, majority logic, and threshold circuits. PhD thesis, Universität
  Tübingen, 2008.

K-J Lange. Some results on majority quantifiers over words. In Proceedings. 19th IEEE Annual
  Conference on Computational Complexity, 2004., pp. 123–129. IEEE, 2004.

Ming Li and Paul Vitányi. An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applications. 3
 edition, 2008.

Bingbin Liu, Jordan T. Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers
  learn shortcuts to automata. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=De4FYqjFueZ.

Bingbin Liu, Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Exposing attention
  glitches with flip-flop language modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.

Robert McNaughton and Seymour A Papert. Counter-Free Automata (MIT research monograph no.
  65). The MIT Press, 1971.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought.
 In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Mathematics of Modern Machine Learning, 2023a. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=CDmerQ37Zs.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers. In Thirty-
 seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.

William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision trans-
 formers. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 2023c.

Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David McAllester, and Nati Srebro. Exploring general-
  ization in deep learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.

Binghui Peng, Srini Narayanan, and Christos Papadimitriou. On limitations of the transformer
  architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08164, 2024.

Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases
  enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409, 2021.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Anian Ruoss, Grégoire Delétang, Tim Genewein, Jordi Grau-Moya, Róbert Csordás, Mehdi Ben-
  nani, Shane Legg, and Joel Veness. Randomized positional encodings boost length generalization
  of transformers. arXiv preprint, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Clayton Sanford, Daniel J. Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky.       Representational strengths
  and limitations of transformers.  In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Glober-
  son, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  73bf692447f174984f30499ec9b20e04-Abstract-Conference.html.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. One-layer transformers fail to solve the induc-
  tion heads task. arXiv preprint, 2024.
Yash Sarrof, Yana Veitsman, and Michael Hahn. The expressive capacity of state space models: A
  formal language perspective. CoRR, abs/2405.17394, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.17394.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.17394.
Marcel Paul Schützenberger. On finite monoids having only trivial subgroups. Inf. Control., 8(2):
 190–194, 1965.
Noam Shazeer. GLU variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.
Lena Strobl. Average-hard attention transformers are constant-depth uniform threshold circuits.
  CoRR, abs/2308.03212, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2308.03212. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2308.03212.
Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. What Formal Lan-
  guages Can Transformers Express? A Survey. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 12:543–561, 05 2024. ISSN 2307-387X. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00663. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00663.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
Pascal Tesson and Denis Thérien. Diamonds are forever: The variety DA. In Semigroups, algo-
  rithms, automata and languages, pp. 475–499. World Scientific, 2002.
Masaru Tomita. Dynamic construction of finite-state automata from examples using hill-climbing.
 In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 105–108,
 1982.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Jie Wang, Tao Ji, Yuanbin Wu, Hang Yan, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, and Xiaoling
   Wang. Length generalization of causal transformers without position encoding. In Lun-Wei
   Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics, ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 11-16, 2024, pp. 14024–
   14040. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024a. URL https://aclanthology.
   org/2024.findings-acl.834.
Zixuan Wang, Stanley Wei, Daniel Hsu, and Jason D. Lee. Transformers provably learn sparse token
  selection while fully-connected nets cannot. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qjqlhWDcId.
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021.
Changnan Xiao and Bing Liu. Conditions for length generalization in learning reasoning skills.
  CoRR, abs/2311.16173, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.16173. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2311.16173.
Andy Yang and David Chiang. Counting like transformers: Compiling temporal counting logic
  into softmax transformers. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=FmhPg4UJ9K.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Andy Yang, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. Masked hard-attention transformers recognize ex-
  actly the star-free languages. arXiv Preprint, 2023.
Hattie Zhou, Arwen Bradley, Etai Littwin, Noam Razin, Omid Saremi, Joshua M. Susskind, Samy
  Bengio, and Preetum Nakkiran. What algorithms can transformers learn? A study in length
  generalization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024,
  Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024a. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=AssIuHnmHX.
Yongchao Zhou, Uri Alon, Xinyun Chen, Xuezhi Wang, Rishabh Agarwal, and Denny Zhou.
  Transformers can achieve length generalization but not robustly. CoRR, abs/2402.09371, 2024b.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.09371. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.
  09371.


                                               15
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                  1

2   Model of Transformers                                                                         2

3   Theoretical Framework                                                                         3
    3.1 Limit Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
    3.2 Definition of Inference Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
    3.3 Main Result: Convergence of Inference Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5

4   Which Functions are Identifiable? Expressiveness of Limit Transformers and C-RASP             6
    4.1 Simple Example: Induction Head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
    4.2 Length Generalization for C-RASP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
    4.3 Limitations: Logarithmic Communication Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           7

5   Experiments                                                                                   8

6   Discussion                                                                                    9

7   Conclusion                                                                                   10

A FAQ                                                                                            17

B Proofs about Limit Transformers                                                                19
  B.1 Proof of Theorem 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
  B.2 Result for NoPE Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
  B.3 Logarithmic Communication Complexity for Limit Transformer . . . . . . . . . .             23
  B.4 Statement of Main Theorem for Arbitrary Training Lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25
  B.5 Corollary about Expressivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
  B.6 From C-RASP to Limit Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          26

C Expressivity Proofs for C-RASP                                                                 28
  C.1 C-RASP Constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
      C.1.1 Majority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
      C.1.2 Dyck-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
      C.1.3 an bn cn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
      C.1.4 Existential Quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
      C.1.5 Piecewise Testable Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         29
  C.2 C-RASP[periodic, local] Constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30
      C.2.1 Induction Head (Argmax Version) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          30
      C.2.2 Induction Head (All possible next symbols) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30
      C.2.3 (aa)∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
  C.3 Expressibility of Regular Languages in C-RASP[periodic,local] . . . . . . . . . .          31
      C.3.1 Link to Majority Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
      C.3.2 Inexpressibility of Σ∗ be∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
      C.3.3 Inexpressibility of PARITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37

D Discussion of Design Choices                                                                   39
  D.1 MLP Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       39
  D.2 Fixed Precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
  D.3 Layer Norm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     40

E Additional Details for Experiments                                                             40
  E.1 Regular Languages from the Bhattamishra et al 2020 Benchmark . . . . . . . . . .           40
       E.1.1 Language Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      40
       E.1.2 C-RASP Expressiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41
  E.2 Algorithmic Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    45
       E.2.1 Task Definitions for Algorithmic Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         45


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        E.2.2 Limit Transformers and C-RASP expressiveness on algorithmic tasks . . .               46
    E.3 Details of Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       47

F Translating between Transformers and Limit Transformers                                           49
  F.1 Product Parameterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        49
  F.2 Formal Definition of Hypothesis Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         52
  F.3 From Limit Transformers to Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           53
  F.4 From Transformers to Limit Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           57
       F.4.1 Proving Lemma 52 (I): Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            59
       F.4.2 Proving Lemma 52 (II): Construction of T∞ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            60
       F.4.3 Proving Lemma 52 (III): Proving Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            63

G Additional Supporting Results                                                                     71
  G.1 Regularizer at Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     71
  G.2 Empirical Length Generalization of Positional Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           73
  G.3 Bound for Encodings Norm in Terms of Function Complexity . . . . . . . . . . .                73
  G.4 Positional Abilities in NoPE vs APE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         75
  G.5 Conceptual Relation to Solomonoff Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           76
  G.6 The Role of Translation Invariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        77
       G.6.1 Non-Offset-Invariant Transformers Failing to Length-Generalize . . . . . .             77
       G.6.2 Translation-Invariance in Trained Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           79
  G.7 Comparing APE and NoPE on Induction Head Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                81


A    FAQ

(1) What is the point of introducing Limit Transformers?
Limit Transformers are a mathematical formalism helping us prove a length generalization guarantee
(Theorem 7) for a broad class of functions, not just one specific function. They thus serve as an
object that can help us prove things about standard transformers.
(2) What is the relation between Limit Transformers and C-RASP? Why use two different for-
malisms?
They serve two distinct purposes - one is easier to prove a length-generalization guarantee with, and
the other is easier to prove expressivity results with. Limit Transformers are closely connected to
standard transformers, and provide a convenient formalism for formalizing a length generalization
guarantee in our inference setup (Theorem 7); they also provide bounds on APE transformer ex-
pressiveness as a side result (Appendix C). C-RASP is a formalism based on the RASP language
(Weiss et al., 2021), intended to provide a formal abstraction of the kinds of computations that trans-
formers can perform in a human-readable format. Limit Transformers with P ERIODIC and L OCAL
express all the functions definable in C-RASP[periodic,local], though it is open if this inclusion is
strict. We provide rigorous tools for understanding the expressiveness of both formalisms. For Limit
Transformers, we prove a logarithmic communication complexity bound (Theorem 12). C-RASP
brings additional use in understanding expressiveness from two angles. First, one can conveniently
prove functions expressible by writing down programs, as we did in Section 4.2. Second, to prove
negative results, we can bring to bear a set of deep results about logics using majority quantifiers
(Krebs, 2008), which allow us to provably settle expressiveness of many problems. Positive results
translate into positive results about Limit Transformer expressiveness and hence, under our ideal-
ized learning setup, length generalization. While it is open if problems not expressible in C-RASP
cannot in principle show length generalization, experimental results suggest that such an implication
might hold in many cases.
(3) Why are Limit Transformers needed – can’t one just consider transformers whose parameters
have infinite precision and hence can accommodate infinitely many different positional encodings
pi ?
The key advantage of Limit Transformers is that they effectively have finite parameter counts when-
ever they satisfy L OCAL and P ERIODIC, which is useful in establishing Theorem 7. In an ordinary
transformer, due to fixed width, effectively distinguishing unboundedly many positions requires in-


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


finitely many parameters pi . Even then, a function as simple as ϕ(i, j) = δij cannot be exactly
represented for infinitely many i, j by a product pi QT Kpj at bounded width d.
We used Limit Transformers as a tool specifically to prove results about APE transformers. We note
in Corollary 18 that the analogous results for the special case of NoPE transformers do not require
the use of Limit Transformers. Understanding what is needed to derive results for other positional
encoding schemes (such as relative positional encodings) is left for future work.
(4) Why is the idealized setup considered for the analysis, as opposed to more practical frameworks
of learning?
Proving guarantees in a more practical setting (SGD training dynamics, subsampling of training
data) would, of course, be ideal. However, such guarantees have been notoriously difficult to estab-
lish for deep learning models (Neyshabur et al., 2017). Standard frameworks for learning, such as
PAC-learning, assume that the training and test distributions are the same, which precludes out-of-
distribution guarantees such as length generalization. Even within the PAC-learning framework, ob-
taining nontrivial guarantees for deep neural networks remains challenging without making strong
assumptions. Instead of analyzing the learning and generalization of Transformers trained with
gradient-based methods, our work aims to understand the length generalization properties of Trans-
formers from an architectural perspective. A substantial body of work (cf. Section 6) has empirically
investigated the length generalization properties of Transformers and found a complex array of em-
pirical behavior, while theoretical understanding has been very limited. Hence, consolidating the
theoretical relation between these empirical observations and the computational model of Trans-
formers seems like an important direction. Our work provides a formal framework, based on an
idealized model of learning, that separates the tasks on which Transformers succeed and those on
which they fail to length-generalize. The learning model considered in our work is closely related to
the “identification in the limit” setting, which has been widely studied for decades in the context of
learning automata and grammars (De la Higuera, 2010). Our framework is successful in explaining
a wide range of empirical observations (Figure 1). This is a substantial advance, as no prior theo-
retical framework has been able to explain the empirical patterns in Figure 1 to the extent that our
framework can. We hope that further work can build on these insights to establish guarantees that
reproduce this success while narrowing the gap between theoretical analysis and practical learning.
(5) Why does the length generalization condition in Theorem 7 ask for supn R(Tn ) < ∞? Isn’t
asking for length generalization sufficient?
If supn R(Tn ) = ∞, a transformer T minimizing R(T ) while fitting behavior at some length will
be unlikely to work at substantially longer lengths, because performing the task correctly at longer
and longer lengths requires unbounded increase in R(T ). It might still happen that generalization
from length n2 to length n is possible in certain problems not expressible by Limit Transformers.
However, this will depend on the problem and the specific scaling of test lengths relative to training
lengths; for problems not satisfying the conditions in Theorem 7, length generalization will fail
when the test length is made sufficiently longer than the training length, even as the training length
diverges to infinity. We make this formal in Section B.4.
(6) Given a task, how can one settle Limit Transformer and C-RASP expressiveness?
Showing that a task is definable by Limit Transformers or C-RASP simply requires providing an
explicit construction, as we exemplify for various tasks (Section C.1). For showing that a task is not
definable in these formalisms, we provide a battery of methods which allow us to provide an answer
for many tasks: communication complexity (Theorem 12) applies to both formalisms; for showing
non-definability in C-RASP, reduction to specific languages already proven not to be expressible
(such as Parity and Lbb , see Appendix E.1.2) is frequently useful. Although Theorem 4.2 shows
that every function expressible in C-RASP is expressible by Limit Transformers, it is not known
whether or not this inclusion is strict.
(7) Why does the guarantee specifically apply to P ERIODIC and L OCAL Limit Transformers? What
is special about such positional relations?
Local positional relations are important because, if a product function of the form pTi QT Kpj ,
where the rank of Q, K is not constrained, takes nonzero values at unboundedly long distances j −i,
there is no general reason why the function should length-generalize. Independent initialization of
the pi ’s tends to lead to values close to zero for most of these products (Appendix G.1); our Inference


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Procedure incorporates this via the term (8). Given this, one expects a learned model to still exhibit
small products at distances not present in the training distribution, and hence a failure of length
generalization in the presence of nonlocal product functions. In the translations between standard
transformers and Limit Transformers, such local positional relations correspond to the functions
ϕl,h .
The situation is different for products involving Vl,h matrices, whose rank is penalized by R(·);
these are able to represent not local, but periodic functions. Periodicity falls out of the setup: In the
finite-precision setup, a translation-invariant product function of the form pTi M1 . . . Mk pj must
be periodic in j − i whenever one of the matrices M1 . . . Mk has bounded rank as the number of
positions considered diverges to infinity, with period bounded in terms of the rank (Lemma 48).
Hence, in a transformer T ∈ Θn , any product function involving one or more Vl,h matrices needs to
be periodic with period bounded in terms of R(T ). In the translations between standard transformers
and Limit Transformers, such periodic relations are encoded into bounded-width bounded-precision
positional encodings pi of the Limit Transformer; finite width and precision are sufficient due to
periodicity.

B     P ROOFS ABOUT L IMIT T RANSFORMERS
B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7

We re-state and then prove Theorem 7:
Theorem 14 (Guaranteed Length Generalization in the Limit, restated from Theorem 7). Let f ∈
F(Σ). Then the following are equivalent:
      1. f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL.
       2. (Guaranteed Length Generalization) Consider the inference procedure from Definition 6
           applied to f with R, generating a sequence T1 , T2 , . . . . For any such sequence, there is
           some N0 such that, for all m > N0 , Tm matches f on all inputs of any length k ≤ m, and
           supn=1,2,3,... R(Tn ) < ∞.
Remark 15. We note that a limit transformer T∞ representing f need not itself be offset-invariant.
It is sufficient to have
                                          T∞ (x, 0) = f (x)                                         (6)
Lemma 47 shows that such a function has a sequence of transformers Tn ∈ Θn which are offset-
invariant, even without assuming T∞ to be offset-invariant.

High-Level Proof Sketch The key to the proof is a compactness property: Any sequence
T1 , T2 , . . . (Ti ∈ Θi ) where supi R(Ti ) < ∞ has a subsequence of transformers whose behav-
ior across inputs can be summarized into a single Limit Transformer. For 1⇒2, given a sequence
generated by the Inference Procedure, we show that R stays bounded and use the compactness
property to show that a subsequence exhibits behavior equivalent to f . To show that, in fact, all pos-
sible sequences Tn generated by the Inference Procedure ultimately exhibit behavior equivalent to
f , when n is large, we show that subsequences failing to length-generalize would exhibit increasing
attention dot products between far-away positions as input length increases. However, due to the
penalty on attention dot products in R, any such sequence would, for large n, need to have a higher
value of R than sequences avoiding such an increase. For 2⇒1, we obtain the Limit Transformer
from the compactness property applied to the sequence generated by the Inference Procedure. The
penalty on attention dot products enforces that it satisfies L OCAL; the bounds on the MLP and value
matrices enforce that the positional encodings in the Limit Transformer can be taken to be periodic.

Preliminaries and Formal Proof We now proceed to the formal proof. We make crucial use of
the two technical Lemmas 47 and 52, which provide translations between ordinary transformers and
Limit Transformers.
The following definition will be used:
Definition 16. If T ∈ Θi , then define R− (T ) to be R(T ) minus the term in Eq. (8). That is,
                                           X X
                       R(T ) = R− (T ) +                  |pT1 Kl,h
                                                                T
                                                                    Ql,h pj |2                       (7)
                                              l,h 1≤j≤N (T )



                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The following lemma will be used for both directions of the main theorem:
Lemma 17. Let T1 , T2 , . . . , where Tn ∈ Θn , be a sequence generated by the Inference Procedure
based on the functional behavior of a function f ∈ F, and such that
                                                     sup        R(Tn ) < ∞                              (8)
                                                  n=1,2,3,...

Then f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL, and there is some
N0 such that, for all m > N0 , Tm matches f on all inputs of length k ≤ m.

Proof. As we will be reasoning over the ϕl,h functions of different limit transformers, we use a
              (T )
superscript, ϕl,h , to indicate the relevant limit transformer.
From the sequence T1 , T2 , . . . generated by the Inference Procedure, we obtain, using Lemma 52,
Limit Transformers T̃1 , T̃2 , . . . such that supi R∞ (T̃i ) < ∞ where
                                  T̃i (x, o) = Ti (x, o),            ∀i, o, x; |x| + o ≤ i              (9)
and, in each Tn , T̃n ,
                                             (T̃ )
                                            ϕl,hn (i, j) = pTi Kl,h
                                                                T
                                                                    Ql,h pj                            (10)

Each limit transformer T̃i consists of two parts: (i) the collection of its parameter vectors and ma-
                             (T̃ )
trices, (ii) the functions ϕl,hi . We will write P(T̃i ) for the collection of parameter vectors and
matrices of T̃i . Let A := supi R∞ (T̃i ) < ∞. Then {P(T̃ ) : R∞ (T̃ ) ≤ A} is finite, because
A bounds (1) the number of parameters, (2) their magnitudes, (3) the precision at which they are
represented. Hence, only a finite number of Limit Transformer parameter settings P(T̃i ) will be
traversed as i → ∞. The remainder of the proof is devoted to showing that, in fact, the number of
                                                                              (T̃ )
limit transformers T̃i itself is finite. For this, we need to show that each ϕl,ki only traverses a finite
                                                                       (T̃ )
set of distinct functions as i → ∞. Each function ϕl,ki is local; however, a priori, they might not
be local for any single finite τ across the different T̃n . We will show that this is not possible, i.e.,
we will show that all ϕT̃l,kn are local for a single finite τ . This will occupy us for the remainder of the
proof.
Now note that
                                                     1
                            R(Tn ) ∈ inf (R(T )), + inf (R(T ))
                                      T ∈Un          n T ∈Un
Because inf T ∈Un R(T ) is bounded and monotonically increasing in n, inf T ∈Un (R(T ))) converges
to a limit, say R̃. Since 1/n → 0, the width of the interval converges to 0. The Squeeze Theorem
then implies that R(Tn ) → R̃.
For each τ and each n, we consider
                                             X min(n,τ
                                                 X )                 (T̃ )
                                Dn (τ ) =                       |ϕl,hn (1, i)|2 ≤ R(Tn )
                                              l,h      i=1


     (T̃ )
As ϕl,hn has precision bounded in terms of R(Tn ), {Dn (τ ) : n ∈ N} is a discrete set. An important
consequence is that any accumulation point of the sequence (Dn (τ ))n∈N must equal Dn (τ ) for
infinitely many n.
Consider R− (Tn ) (Equation 7). Let
                                               R0 := lim inf R− (Tn )                                  (11)
                                                           n→∞

and let ν1 , ν2 , ν3 , . . . be such that
                                                    lim R− (Tνi ) = R0                                 (12)
                                                   i→∞
Then, for some D0 ,
                                                    lim Dνi (νi ) = D0                                 (13)
                                                    i→∞


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and
                             R̃ = lim R(Tn ) = lim R(Tνi ) = R0 + D0                                       (14)
                                   n→∞               i→∞

Indeed,
                                           D0 = lim sup Dn (n)                                             (15)
                                                    n→∞

because3
             D0 + R0 = lim (R− (Tn ) + Dn (n)) = lim inf R− (Tn ) + lim sup Dn (n)                         (16)
                           n→∞                               n→∞                   n→∞

Define, for each τ ∈ N,
                                         D∞ (τ ) = lim inf Dνi (τ )                                        (17)
                                                       i→∞

                                                                   (T̃ )
As this function is monotonically increasing, and as each ϕl,hn has precision bounded in terms of
R(Tn ), there must be τ∞ such that D∞ (τ∞ ) = limτ →∞ D∞ (τ ).
Now define a sequence Tn′ as follows. For each n, recall from the definition of D∞ that
                                  lim inf Dνj (n) = D∞ (n) ≤ D∞ (τ∞ )
                                   j→∞

As ϕl,h has bounded precision, there are infinitely many νi such that Dνi (n) = lim inf j→∞ Dνj (n).
Hence, we can select i(n) ∈ N such that νi(n) ≥ n and

                                        Dνi(n) (n) = lim inf Dνj (n)
                                                        j→∞

 Then, for each n, define Tn′ as the restriction of Tνi(n) to positions up to n. As Tνi(n) agrees with
                                ν
the behavior of f up to length i(n)
                                  2   ≥ n2 , we also find that Tn′ agrees with the behavior of f up to
       n
length 2 . Then

                           lim sup R(Tn′ ) = lim sup R− (Tn′ ) + Dνi(n) (n)
                             n→∞                 n→∞
                                             = lim sup R− (Tνi(n) ) + D∞ (τ∞ )
                                                 n→∞
                                             =R0 + D∞ (τ∞ )
Since Tn was created by the Inference Procedure, we have
                                      lim sup R(Tn′ ) ≥ lim R(Tn )                                         (18)
                                        n→∞                n→∞

On the other hand, since R(Tn′ ) ≤ R(Tνi(n) ), we also have

                                      lim sup R(Tn′ ) ≤ lim R(Tn )                                         (19)
                                        n→∞                n→∞

giving
                               lim sup R(Tn′ ) = lim R(Tn ) = D0 + R0                                      (20)
                                n→∞                 n→∞

Hence,
                                     R0 + D∞ (τ∞ ) = lim sup R(Tn′ )
                                                           n→∞
                                                       = lim R(Tn )
                                                           n→∞
                                                       =R0 + D0
    3
      In general, if an + bn converges and an , bn are bounded, then the limit lim(an + bn ) equals lim sup an +
lim inf bn . For, assume lim sup an + lim inf bn > lim(an + bn ) (similar if > is replaced by <). Then
let i(n) be a subsequence such that ai(n) → lim sup an . Then lim(an + bn ) = lim(ai(n) + bi(n) ) =
lim sup an + lim bi(n) ≥ lim sup an + lim inf bn > lim(an + bn ), contradiction.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            (T )
and D∞ (τ∞ ) = D0 . Now assume there are infinitely many n such that ϕl,hn is not τ∞ -local, hence,
infinitely many n such that Dn (n) ≥ Dn (τ∞ ) + 2−2p . Then:
                                    D0 = lim sup Dn (n)
                                            n→∞
                                        ≥ lim sup Dn (τ∞ ) + 2−2p
                                            n→∞
                                        ≥ lim inf Dνi (τ∞ ) + 2−2p
                                           i→∞
                                        =D0 + 2−2p
This is a contradiction. Here, the first inequality holds because Dn (n) ≥ Dn (τ∞ ) whenever n ≥
τ∞ , simply because Dn (·) is monotonically increasing for each individual n. The second inequality
holds because (νi )i∈N is a subsequence of (n)n∈N ; hence a lim sup over the larger sequence upper-
bounds the lim inf over the subsequence. Overall, and as announced at the beginning of the proof,
                                          (T̃ )
we thus have shown that the functions ϕl,hn must be local for a uniform τ∞ .
                (T̃ )
Because each ϕl,hn (i, j) equals an inner product pTi Kl,h  T
                                                               Ql,h pj , all values are expressed at pre-
                         4                                                           T
cision bounded by (R0 ) , and are bounded in absolute value by ≤ ∥pi ∥2 ∥Kl,h           ∥∥Ql,h ∥∥pj ∥2 ≤
     4
(R0 ) . There are only a finite set of functions that satisfy these properties and are are local for this
τ∞ .
Above, we have remarked that each limit transformer T̃ consists of (i) the collection P(T̃ ) of pa-
                                                                 (T̃ )
rameter matrices and vectors, (ii) the collection of functions ϕl,h (i, j). Hence, we know that,
                                          Q := {T̃i : i ∈ N}                                        (21)
is finite. Let Q∞ ⊆ Q be the set of Limit Transformers that equal T̃i for infinitely many different
i. By definition of the Inference Procedure, every element of Q∞ is functionally equivalent to f at
all input lengths. Because Q is finite, there is N0 such that T̃i ∈ Q∞ for each i ≥ N0 . Hence, Ti is
functionally equivalent to f at all lengths ≤ i as soon as i exceeds the threshold N0 .

We now prove the theorem.

Proof of the Theorem. Both directions are corollaries of Lemma 17.

2⇒1: This directly follows from Lemma 17.

1⇒2: By Lemma 47, for each i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , there are Tbi ∈ Θi such that R := supi R(Tbi ) < ∞
such that
                       Tbi (x, o) = f (x, o), ∀i, o, x; |x| + o ≤ i                             (22)
such that
                                                       (T )
                                pTi Kl,h
                                     T
                                         Ql,h pj = ϕl,h (i, j)                                  (23)
By L OCAL,
                                         R(Tbi ) < ∞                                            (24)
and we conclude
                         lim sup R(Ti ) ≤ lim sup R(Tbi ) < ∞                                   (25)
                                 i→∞                i→∞
where Ti refers to the sequence generated by Inference Procedure in Lemma 17. Lemma 17 now
provides N0 > 0 and a function g such that for all m > N0 ,
                                 Tm (x, o) = g(x), ∀x : |x| + o ≤ m                                 (26)
On the other hand, for any string x ∈ S, we have
                                     f (x) = Tn (x, 0), ∀n ≥ 2|x|                                   (27)
Hence, f ≡ g and for all m > N0 ,
                                 Tm (x, o) = f (x), ∀x : |x| + o ≤ m                                (28)



                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2   R ESULT FOR N O PE T RANSFORMERS

Corollary 18. For ease of the reader, we mark the differences to Theorem 7 in blue font.
Let f ∈ F(Σ). Then the following are equivalent:

      1. f is expressible by a Limit Transformer where all pi ≡ 0, ϕl,h ≡ 0.
      2. (Guaranteed Length Generalization) Consider the inference procedure from Definition 6
         applied to f with R while constraining all pi ≡ 0, generating a sequence T1 , T2 , . . . . For
         any such sequence, there is some N0 such that, for all m > N0 , Tm matches f on all inputs
         of any length k ≤ m, and supn=1,2,3,... R(Tn ) < ∞.

Note that a Limit Transformer where all ϕl,h ≡ 0 is also an ordinary transformer as defined in Sec-
tion 2. Hence, in the special case of NoPE transformers, our proof boils down to an argument using
standard transformers, effectively without Limit Transformers. In contrast, Limit Transformers are
key to our proof in the more general case of APE transformers.

Proof. Retracing the proof of Lemma 47 shows that, when translating a Limit Transformer to an
ordinary transformer, the positional encodings can be taken to be zero when pi ≡ 0, ϕl,h ≡ 0 in the
Limit Transformer. Retracing the proof of Lemma 52 shows that, when pi ≡ 0 in a transformer, the
resulting Limit Transformer will have zero positional encodings and zero outputs for all ϕl,h . The
proof of Theorem 7 then applies equally to show Corollary 18.

B.3   L OGARITHMIC C OMMUNICATION C OMPLEXITY FOR L IMIT T RANSFORMER

Theorem 19 (Restated from Theorem 12). Let T be a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and
L OCAL. On an input x ∈ Σ2N , assume Alice has access to x1...N and Bob has access to xN +1...2N .
There is a communication protocol in which Alice and Bob exchange at most C log N bits, where
                                                                                               (l)
C depends on T but not N or x, and Bob can compute each activation in the second half, yi
(N + 1 ≤ i ≤ 2N ). Further, C is bounded linearly by R∞ (T ).

                                                  (l)
Proof. We first establish that all activations yi are computed at O(log N ) precision. This holds
because (i) parameters are at fixed precision, (ii) the output of exp(·) in the softmax attention compu-
tation is computed at fixed fractional precision, (iii) and hence attention weights can be represented
at O(log N ) precision.
We first consider the attention logits, in the case where j < N ≤ i:
                        (l,h)                 (l−1) TT         (l−1)
                       ai,j       = Roundp [(yj   ) Kl,h Ql,h yi       + ϕl,h (i, j)]
where Roundp [. . . ] rounds each entry to the closest number with p fractional bits. It is certainly
sufficient to have access to
                                            T
                 (l,h)              (l−1)        T       (l−1)
                ai,j = Roundp′ [yj        ] Kl,h   Ql,h yi     + Roundp′ [ϕl,h (i, j)]

where p′ depends on p and the largest singular value of Kl,h  T
                                                                Ql,h , which is a finite constant. We can
thus partition the positions j = 1, . . . , N − 1 into a bounded number of sets, indexed by

                     (l−1)
      1. Roundp′ [yj          ]

      2. max(N − j, N − L) where L = max{k : ϕl,h (1, k) ̸= 0}.

Let K ∈ N be the number of these sets; we then write these sets as A1 , . . . , AK . Note that, while
these sets are always disjoint, their elements are input-dependent as they depend on the activations
  (l−1)
yj      .
Due to the finite precision rounding of logits and the locality of positional relations, we can maintain
a finite set of keys and queries (though not values). This is fundamental to getting a logarithmic
communication bound.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We show the claim by induction over the layers.
We can write
                                      H     Pi                  (l,h)       (l−1)
                      (l) (l−1)              j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j )Vl,h yj
                                      X
                    Yi =yi      +               Pi
                                      h=1          j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j )



The residual stream is known to Bob by inductive hypothesis. We need to understand the term
inside the sum. The green terms are fully known to Alice, the blue ones are fully known to Bob by
inductive hypothesis:
                      Pi                   (l,h)         (l−1)
                        j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j )Vl,h yj
                             Pi
                               j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j )
                              PN −1                   (l,h)       (l−1)
                                j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j )Vl,h yj
                    = PN −1                         Pi
                        j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j ) +      j=N exp(log |x| · ai,j )
                                 Pi                       (l,h)      (l−1)
                                    j=N exp(log |x| · ai,j )Vl,h yj
                      + PN −1                           Pi
                            j=1 exp(log |x| · ai,j ) +      j=N exp(log |x| · ai,j )



Alice thus needs to communicate the green terms. More formally, for every set r = 1, . . . , K, Alice
communicates

     1. the number of relevant positions, |Ar | ∈ {1, . . . , N − 1}
        P             (l−1)
     2.    i∈Ar Vl,h yj     .

For each r, communicating (1) takes O(log N ) bits. The vectors in (2) are bounded in norm by
the l-th power of the maximum spectral norm of any parameter matrix, times the maximum ℓ2
norm of any parameter vector. Overall, this is bounded in terms of R∞ (T ), thus O(1) for fixed T .
                (l−1)
Further, each yj      is expressed in O(log N ) precision as shown above. Expressing (2) requires
O(log N ) fractional bits (as the sum will not need more fractional bits than the individual vectors)
and O(log N ) integer bits (due to the bound on the norm). Overall, Alice needs to communicate
K · O(log N ) bits. As K is independent of N , this is O(log N ) for a fixed Limit Transformer T .
Alice can partition the positions into a bounded number of partitions, and for each of them needs to
transfer the number of positions in that partition.


Corollary 20 (Restated from Corollary 13). The following problems are not expressible by Limit
Transformers satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL: (1) copying strings with repeated n-grams, (2)
addition of n-digit numbers.

Proof. Formally, we define copying as the task of, given a prefix $x#, autoregressively predicting
x. Copying with repeated n-grams means that there is no restriction on the repetition of consecutive
subspans of x of any length; this is in contrast to copying tasks with restrictions on the repetition
of n-grams (for some n) in x (Jelassi et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a), which we study separately
(Appendix E.2).
Formally, we define addition as the task of, given a prefix $x + y =, where x, y are binary strings,
to output the sum of the numbers denoted by x, y in binary.
The communication complexity lower bound for copying follows from a standard communication
complexity lower bound for determining string equality. The bound follows for addition since the
special case of adding 0 to a number amounts to copying.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark 21. Analogous bounds follow for various other algorithmic and formal language problem.
For instance, the special case of multiplying with 1 amounts to copying; hence, such a bound holds
for multiplication. For the unbounded-depth Dyck over two bracket types, we can consider a word
of the form (i1 . . . (iN )jN . . . )j1 , which is in the Dyck language if and only if ik = jk for all k, again
allowing a reduction to the communication complexity lower bound for determining string equality.

B.4    S TATEMENT OF M AIN T HEOREM FOR A RBITRARY T RAINING L ENGTHS

Our main theorem considers generalization from length n2 to length n. Here, we discuss an alterna-
tive version applying to arbitrary scaling of training vs testing lengths. In particular, in such a setup,
we explicitly obtain failure of length generalization for inexpressible functions, though potentially
requiring testing on lengths more than twice the lengths used in training. We use the following
definition:
Definition 22. A training length is a function t : N → N satisfying limt→∞ t(n) = +∞ and
t(n) ≤ n for all n.
If t(n) is a training length, then the t(n)-Inference Procedure determines Tn ∈ Θ(n) to match f at
all inputs of lengths ≤ t(n) while minimizing R(Tn ) up to n1 .
The special case of t(n) = n2 is the Inference Procedure from Definition 6.
We then state:
Theorem 23. Let f ∈ F(Σ). The following are equivalent:
      1. f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL.
      2. Let t(n) be any training length. Then the t(n)-Inference Procedure will output solutions
         T1 , T2 , . . . such that, for some N0 , for all m > N0 , Tm matches f at all lengths ≤ m.
          Intuitively, this says that, when selected to fit the behavior of f on sufficiently long inputs
          of length t(n), the output of the Inference Procedure will generalize to unboundedly longer
          inputs of length n, where n can be arbitrarily larger than t(n).
Corollary 24. Assume f ∈ F(Σ) is not expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC
and L OCAL. Then, for some training length t(n), the t(n)-Inference Procedure outputs a sequence
Tn where infinitely many Tn fail to match f at length n.
Remark 25. There are two important differences compared to Theorem 7. First, the second condi-
tion refers to length generalization for all arbitrary training lengths t(n), not specifically training
length n2 . Second, the second condition does not ask for supi R(Ti ) < ∞, but simply asks for Tn to
ultimately length generalize.

Proof of Theorem 23. 1⇒2 The proof of Theorem 7 remains valid in this direction without any
changes, as it does not specifically rely on the training lengths being half the overall context size.
2⇒1 We show the contrapositive. Assume f is not expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying
P ERIODIC and L OCAL. Then, using the same arguments as in the proof of Lemma 174 , any sequence
Tn ∈ Θn that matches f will have lim inf n→∞ R(Tn ) = ∞ (†). Now consider k ∈ N; we will
assign every k a number nk > k, starting with n0 = 0. For each n > k, there is T̂k,n ∈ Θn that
matches f up to length k while Uk := supn R(T̂k,n ) < ∞ for every fixed k. Now select nk > nk−1
such that no T ∈ Θnk with R(T ) ≤ Uk + 1 matches f at length nk ; this is possible because of
(†). We thus obtain a sequence (k, nk ) ∈ N × N. By construction, there are infinitely many distinct
different values nk . Then define
                                     t(n) := max ({k : nk ≤ n})                                    (29)
Then t(n) is a training length. By definition, the t(n)-Inference Procedure will, whenever n is one of
the nk ’s, find a transformer Tnk with R(Tnk ) ≤ Uk + n1k that fails to match f at length n = nk .
   4
     Assume there is a sequence Tn ∈ Θn that matches f and has lim inf n→∞ R(Tn ) < ∞. Translating each
element to a Limit Transformer leads to a sequence where, except perhaps for the functions ϕl,h , only a finite
number of settings will be traversed. Now, as in the proof of Lemma 17, one can use D∞ (τ ) to construct a
sequence of Limit Transformers that are local for a single τ . The important difference to Lemma 17 is that
here we are not assuming the sequence (Tn )n to be constructed by the inference procedure, but we nonetheless
obtain such a sequence.


                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.5   C OROLLARY ABOUT E XPRESSIVITY

We have introduced Limit Transformers as a formalism for distilling computations of transformers
performing on longer and longer sequences into a single limiting object, helping understand length
generalization. Here, we show that they also provide a simple lower bound for the expressiveness of
causal transformers across input lengths:
Corollary 26. Let f ∈ F(Σ). Assume f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC
and L OCAL. Then at each input length N , there exists a transformer TN performing f on all inputs
of length up to N such that:

      1. The parameters of TN are expressed at p bit precision, with p independent of N
      2. The number of heads and layers of TN is bounded independently of N .
      3. The width d of TN is bounded as O(N ).

We note that an important aspect is that TN performs correctly not just at length N , but at all lengths
up to N . This distinguishes the result from constructions guaranteeing the existence of a transformer
at a fixed length. For instance, Bhattamishra et al. (2024) provide a transformer for testing equality
between length N -strings (which could also be used for copying), but this construction uses specific
positional encodings that depend on the input length. In contrast, the result here provides conditions
under which a transformer can perform a task at all lengths up to a given bound; in this stronger
setup, no APE transformer for copying with uniform complexity bounds as provided by Corollary 26
is known, and the problem is indeed not expressible by Limit Transformers satisfying P ERIODIC and
L OCAL (Corollary 13). In contrast, Corollary 26 provides APE constructions performing correctly
up to any given length for a wide class of problems including C-RASP[periodic,local].
Another important feature is that the construction provides a fixed precision for the parameters, as
is the case in real-world implementation. We note that, if parameters are at fixed precision, it is
generally not possible to find a single transformer across all input lengths in the APE setting; hence,
it is unavoidable that the width of the transformers will need to increase as the input length increases.
Importantly, many other aspects of the transformer’s complexity, such as the number of heads and
layers, remain bounded.

Proof. The statement is an immediate corollary of Lemma 47, which provides transformers
T1 , T2 , . . . with bounded R(TN ), which by Definition 5 entails a uniform bound on precision,
heads, and layers. The construction provided in the proof of Lemma 47 provides a width bounded
as O(N ).

B.6   F ROM C-RASP TO L IMIT T RANSFORMERS

The proofs are adaptations of the proofs from Yang & Chiang (2024).
Theorem 27 (Restated from Theorem 9). For every C-RASP[Φ, Ψ] program P with local functions
Ψ and any periodic functions Φ there exists a Limit Transformer T∞ that satisfies P ERIODIC and
L OCAL such that for all w ∈ Σ∗ , P accepts w iff T∞ accepts $w. If P uses no local or periodic
relations, then T requires no functions ϕl,h or positional encodings pi .
Remark 28. We note that the Limit Transformer T∞ provided by the proof of Theorem 27 emulates
the C-RASP program P at zero offset: That is, P accepts w iff a predetermined entry in the last
output dimension of T∞ ($w, 0) is above some threshold. In principle, its computations may not be
offset-invariant, i.e., for the constructed T∞ , the output T∞ ($w, o) may depend on o. Importantly,
the proof of Theorem 7 does not require a Limit Transformer computing f to be offset-invariant, but
just requires it to compute f when the offset is zero. This is because Lemma 47 ensures that, for any
Limit Transformer T∞ satisfying L OCAL and P ERIODIC, even if it is not offset-invariant, there are
transformers Tn ∈ Θn whose behavior matches T∞ (·, 0).

Proof of Theorem 27. C-RASP has two sorts of operations, a Boolean sort and a Count sort. We will
simulate each operation in the transformer by storing the Boolean values as {0, 1}, and storing the
           c
counts as i+1 . That is, we say that a Limit Transformer T∞ simulates a C-RASP program P if for
every operation Pk of P there is a dimension dk in T such that when Pk (i) when run on w is true iff


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                             c
T∞ ($w)i+1,dk = 1 (and 0 otherwise) for Boolean operation and Pk (i) = c iff T∞ ($w)i+1,k = i+1
for count operations.
The theorem will be shown by induction on the length of P . As a clarifying note, we use 0-indexing
everywhere in this proof. If P is of length 0, we only have initial Qσ (i) vectors, which can be
simulated by appropriately setting the word embedding. Otherwise, assume all programs of length
≤ k are simulated by some transformer, and we have cases for each type of operation Pk+1 (i)
can be. All cases are identical to Yang & Chiang (2024) except for comparison, conditional, and
counting.
First, we must address the SOS token $. There exists an transformer layer which sets the entire
vector to 0 in the initial position, while leaving all other layers untouched. For instance, we may use
a conditional operation, as described later in the proof.
If Pk+1 (i) := ϕ(i), a periodic positional function in Φ, then it is simulated in T∞ by appropriately
setting pi in the positional encoding.
If Pk+1 (i) := P (i) ? C1 (i) : C2 (i), we can implement the following function: for P ∈ {0, 1} and
V ∈ [0, 1]

                                                               V    P =0
                                       f (P, V ) =
                                                               0    P =1

This is achieved by f (P, V ) = ReLU(V − P ). Thus, the desired Conditional Output can be defined
in a single FFN as f (P, V1 ) + f (−P, V2 ), where the first layer and ReLU compute each f term and
the second layer adds them together.
If Pk+1 (i) := C1 (i) ≤ C2 (i). By the inductive hypothesis C1 (i) and C2 (i) are stored in dimensions
d1 and d2 as the value Ci+1
                         1 (i)
                               and Ci+1
                                     2 (i)
                                           . It suffices to check that Ci+1
                                                                         2 (i)
                                                                               − Ci+1
                                                                                   1 (i)
                                                                                         ≥ 0.
To compute this, we use the heaviside activation function, which we used in our model of MLPs as
discussed in D.1.

                                                   1
                                      hs(x)


                                                   0

                                                 −1
                                                       −2 −1 0 1 2
                                                             x

Thus, there exists an MLP which, letting x1 and x2 be the values in dimensions d1 and d2 , computes
(hs(x2 − x1 ) + 1)/2 in the dimension reserved for Pk+1 , which will be the Boolean value in {0, 1}
corresponding to C1 (i) ≤ C2 (i).
If C(i) := # [j ≤ i] P (j) (using ψ(i, j) = ⊤), then the desired sum is computed using uniform
attention, since the boolean representation of P (j) is just 0 or 1. We enforced that P (0) is false, so
it does not contribute to the sum. This is described in more detail in Yang & Chiang (2024), though
the case here is simpler.
If C(i) := # [j ≤ i, ψ(i, j)] P (j), we can think of it as implementing # [j ≤ i] ψ(i, j) ∧ P (j).
Suppose ψ is a local function of the following form

                                                           1       j =i−ℓ
                                      ψ(i, j) =
                                                           0       else

Then C(i) will either be 1 or 0 depending if P (i − ℓ) is true or false. If we set the query and key
matrices to 0 we get

                                              sij = log N · ψ(i, j)


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We assume the log is base 2, but the argument is similar for others. Then we can have attention
compute

                                                                                    ψ(i,j)
                                                                              N ( ln 2 ) · P (j)
                              X                                         X
                                    exp (log N · ψ(i, j)) · P (j)
                              j≤i                                       j≤i
                     ci,k =         X                               =                   ψ(i,j)
                                                                                    N ( ln 2 )
                                                                              X
                                          exp (log N · ψ(i, j))
                                    j≤i                                       j≤i


If P (i − ℓ) and ¬P (j) for j ̸= i − ℓ, then we have a lower bound:


                                                    N ( ln 2 )
                                                         1

                                                                  ≤ ci,k
                                               N ( ln 2 ) + i − 1
                                                    1


If ¬P (i − ℓ) and P (j) for j ̸= i − ℓ then we have an upper bound:

                                                               i−1
                                               ci,k ≤
                                                        N (  1
                                                            ln 2 )+i−1

            1
Since N ln 2 ≥ i, and we know that P (i−ℓ) ⇐⇒ ci,k ≥ 12 , we can construct an MLP that computes
                                          0      1
the correct value. It will output either i+1 or i+1 , in the dimension reserved for Pk+1 (i), for instance
by using a conditional operation that checks that the output of the attention layer ci+1,k ≥ 21 , which
was shown in an earlier case.


C      E XPRESSIVITY P ROOFS FOR C-RASP

C.1     C-RASP C ONSTRUCTIONS

C.1.1      M AJORITY

MAJORITY is the language of strings over Σ = {0, 1} with at least as many 1’s as 0’s.

      MAJORITY

      C1 (i) := # [j ≤ i] Q1 (j)                                                                           (1)
      C0 (i) := # [j ≤ i] Q0 (j)                                                                           (2)
      M (i) := C1 (i) ≥ C0 (i)                                                                             (3)


C.1.2      DYCK -1

Dyck-1 is the language of strings over Σ = {0, 1} with at least as many 1’s as 0’s.

      Dyck-1

      C( (i) := # [j ≤ i] Q( (j)                                        The number of ( up to position i (1)
      C) (i) := # [j ≤ i] Q) (j)                                        The number of ) up to position i (2)
       V (i) := C( (i) < C) (i)                                         Violation: there are more ) than ( (3)
      CV (i) := # [j ≤ i] V (j)                                         The number of Violations           (4)
      M (i) := CV (i) = 0                                               Matched: zero Violations           (5)
       B(i) := C( (i) = C) (i)                                          Balanced: same number of ( and ) (6)
       D(i) := M (i) ∧ B(i)                                             String is Matched and Balanced (7)



                                                             28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1.3   an bn cn

Let Σ = {a, b, c}. This is another example of a counter language which C-RASP can express and
which transformers have been observed to length generalize on (Bhattamishra et al., 2020).

   an bn cn

    Ca (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qa (j)                                                                    (1)
    Cb (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qb (j)                                                                    (2)
    Cc (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qc (j)                                                                    (3)
     A(i) := Cb (i) + Cc (i) = 0                                                                  (4)
     B(i) := Cc (i) = 0                                                                           (5)
    CA (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qa (j) ∧ A(j)                                                             (6)
    CB (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qb (j) ∧ B(j)                                                             (7)
    Ga (i) := CA (i) = Ca (i)                                                                     (8)
    Gb (i) := CB (i) = Cb (i)                                                                     (9)
   Gabc (i) := Ca (i) = Cb (i) = Cc (i)                                                          (10)
     L(i) := Ga (i) ∧ Gb (i) ∧ Gabc (i)                                                          (11)



C.1.4   E XISTENTIAL Q UANTIFICATION

This is generally a useful primitive, so to save a little space we can add a macro for existential
quantification towards the left in C-RASP. This is easily defined using counting:

            ←
            −
   P (i) := ∃ A(i)

   C(i) := # [j ≤ i] A(j)                                                                          (1)
   P (i) := C(i) ≥ 1                                                                               (2)


                                      ←
                                      −
And we abbreviate this using P (i) := ∃ A(i). We demonstrate its use below.


C.1.5   P IECEWISE T ESTABLE L ANGUAGES

Piecewise testable languages are Boolean combinations of languages of the form
Σ∗ a1 Σ∗ a2 Σ∗ . . . Σ∗ an Σ∗ . This allows us to check for the presence of noncontiguous sub-
strings, which contrasts with the proof in C.3.2 that implies the presence of contiguous substrings
cannot be expressed in C-RASP[∅].
It suffices to show programs for languages of the form L = Σ∗ a1 Σ∗ a2 Σ∗ . . . Σ∗ an Σ∗ , since
Boolean combinations are recognizable using Boolean operations of C-RASP. For L we have the
following C-RASP program which has the final accepting operation Ln :

   Σ∗ a1 Σ∗ a2 Σ∗ . . . Σ∗ an Σ∗
              ←
              −
    L1 (i) := ∃ Qa1 (i)                     a1 occurred                                            (1)
              ←
              −
    L2 (i) := ∃ Qa2 (i) ∧ L1 (i)            a2 occurred, preceded by a1                            (2)
         ..
          .                                                                                        (3)
             ←
             −
   Ln (i) := ∃ Qan (i) ∧ Ln−1 (i)           an occurred, preceded by an−1 , . . . , preceded by a1 (4)



                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2     C-RASP[PERIODIC, LOCAL] C ONSTRUCTIONS

C.2.1     I NDUCTION H EAD (A RGMAX V ERSION )
As an example consider Σ = {a, b, c}. Predicate N EXTa (i) is true iff the next token should be an
a. First we can define predecessor
                                    CPa (i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i − 1] Qa (j)
                                 P REDa (i) := CPa (i) ≥ 1


Then we can count bigram occurence by counting


                                   Cab := # [j ≤ i] Qb (j) ∧ P REDa (j)


Then each N EXTa (i) predicate can be defined by checking the current symbol and finding the
most frequently occuring bigram.

      N EXTa (i) (Argmax) over Σ = {a, b, c}

                   ..
                    .                                                                         (1)
      M OREaa,ab (i) := Caa (i) ≥ Cab (i)                                                     (2)
      M OREaa,ac (i) := Caa (i) ≥ Cac (i)                                                     (3)
         N EXTa (i) := Qa (i) ∧ M OREaa,ab (i) ∧ M OREaa,ac (i)                               (4)

This corresponds to testing, for the f in Equation 10, for which σ the entry f (x1 . . . xN )N,σ is
maximal.

C.2.2     I NDUCTION H EAD (A LL POSSIBLE NEXT SYMBOLS )
Consider Σ. For a ∈ Σ, predicate N EXTa (i) is true iff the next token can possibly be an a. As in
Section C.2.1, first, we can define predecessor
                                    CPa (i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i − 1] Qa (j)
                                 P REDa (i) := CPa (i) ≥ 1


Then we can check for bigram occurence by counting
                             CBIGRAMab := # [j ≤ i] Qb (j) ∧ P REDa (j)
                              EXIST Sab := CBIGRAMab (i) ≥ 1


If a bigram σa ever occured previously in the string, nonzero probability is assigned to predicting a
when at symbol σ. Then each N EXTa (i) predicate can be defined as follows

      N EXTa (i) (All Possible) over Σ = {a, b, c}

                ..
                 .                                                                            (1)
                      _
      N EXTa (i) :=         [Qσ (i) ∧ EXIST Sσa (i)]                                          (2)
                      σ∈Σ

      W
where σ∈Σ can be expressed using the Boolean operations ∧ and ¬ as defined in Section 4.2. This
corresponds to testing, for the f in Equation 10, for which σ we have f (x1 . . . xN )N,σ > 0.


                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Generating based on this program Consider an input prefix of the form #x#, where # denotes
a separator symbol. If we iteratively generate the next symbol a by selecting a ∈ Σ where N EXTa
holds at the last position, we generate a string #x#y where all bigrams in #y had already occurred
in #x, a simple version of the in-context Markov chains studied by (Edelman et al., 2024).

Special Case: Unique Copying In the special case of an input prefix where each symbol occurs
at most once in x, the generation procedure defined above will copy x, and (assume we stop at #)
resulting in an overall string of the form #x#x#. This is essentially the RASP-L construction of
unique copying noted by Zhou et al. (2024a).

Necessity of Positional Relations Intuitively, an induction head circuit requires positional in-
formation; indeed, we observe length generalization in unique copying with APE but not with
NoPE (Figure 1). Formally, we can prove as follows that the predicate N EXTa defined above
for each a ∈ Σ, while definable in C-RASP[local], is not definable in C-RASP[∅]. Consider
Σ = {a, b}; then the predicate N EXTb can be used to define the (disjoint) union of the languages
Σ∗ abΣ∗ a, Σ∗ bbΣ∗ b. As the first one is definable in C-RASP[∅]5 and the union is disjoint, the sec-
ond would be definable if N EXTb is. This contradicts the fact that Σ∗ bbΣ∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅], because
Σ∗ bbΣ∗ ̸∈ M\ AJ 2 [<] (Lemma 6.11 in Krebs (2008)) and the inclusion C-RASP[∅] ⊆ M      \   AJ 2 [<]
(see Section C.3.1).

C.2.3     (aa)∗

The following function that checks parity of a position mod 2 is a periodic function.


                                            ϕ(i) := i ≡ 0      mod 2

So the following program recognizes (aa)∗

      (aa)∗

      C¬a (i) := # [j ≤ i] ¬Qa (j)                                                                          (1)
        A(i) := C¬a (i) = 0                                                                                 (2)
       D(i) := ϕ(i) ∧ A(i)                                                                                  (3)

The Boolean value of the last operation in the last position of the string is the accepting value. This
is true if the string is of even length and contains only a’s. Overall, we have constructed a program
in C-RASP[periodic, local].

C.3     E XPRESSIBILITY OF R EGULAR L ANGUAGES IN C-RASP[ PERIODIC , LOCAL ]

Lemma 29 (Restated from Lemma 11). Consider the alphabet Σ = {a, b, e}.

        1. P ARIT Y := b∗ (ab∗ ab∗ )∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]

        2. (aa)∗ ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] and (aa)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅]

        3. (a|b|e)∗ be∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]

        4. L ∈ C-RASP[∅] for piecewise testable L


Proof. 1–3 are shown in Lemmas 36 (for 3.), 38 (for 2.), 41 (for 1.), and Appendix C.2.3 (for 2.). 4.
is shown in Appendix C.1.5.
   5
     It is sufficient to check whether a and b both are present, and whether one b has a a in its preceding context;
as Σ = {a, b}, this is equivalent to ab being a substring


                                                        31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.3.1    L INK TO M AJORITY L OGIC
In understanding the exressiveness of C-RASP, we draw on an established body of work on log-
ics using MAJORITY quantifiers. Merrill & Sabharwal (2023a); Strobl (2023) show that the ex-
pressiveness of transformers is upper-bounded by uniform TC0 , which can be defined as the logic
FOM[BIT]. This logic is defined in terms of MAJORITY quantifiers and various predicates. C-
RASP[periodic,local] can be viewed as a highly restricted fragment of this logic. Specifically, it is
contained in M\ AJ 2 [<, +1, MOD], which was studied by Krebs (2008); Behle et al. (2007; 2009);
results about that logic help understand the expressiveness of C-RASP:
Definition 30. M\   AJ 2 [<, +1, MOD] is the logic defined by the constructs
       1. The construct
                                                M
                                                [ aj x ⟨ϕ1 , . . . , ϕc ⟩

       2. The predicates Qa (x) for a ∈ Σ
       3. Numerical predicates Succ(y, x) and M odm,r (x) for m, r ∈ N:
       4. Boolean connectives
       5. First-order quantifiers6
such that only two variables (say, x and y) can appear within a formula. We define the semantics,
when x ∈ Σ∗ , by defining
       1. for the majority quantifier:
                                                                c
                                                              n X
                                                              X     1            if w|x=i |= ϕj
                        w |= M
                             [ aj x ⟨ϕ1 , . . . , ϕc ⟩ ⇔0 <
                                                                            −1   else
                                                              i=1 j=1

       2. for the predicates:
                                w|x=i |= Qa (x)         ⇔ wi = a
                                w|x=i |= M odm,r (x)    ⇔ i ≡ r (mod m)
                                w|x=i,y=j |= Succ(y, x) ⇔ j + 1 = i

Semantics of Boolean connectives and first-order quantifiers follow the standard definition.
A language L ⊆ Σ∗ is definable in M\ AJ 2 [<, +1, M od] if there is a formula ϕ without free variables
such that w ∈ L if and only if w |= ϕ.

The logic M
          \ AJ 2 [<] results by omitting the numerical predicates defined under (3).
It is straightforward to convert C-RASP programs into formulas of M  \ AJ 2 [<, +1, MOD]. As we
shall see later in Section C.3.3, the inclusion is strict because P ARIT Y is expressible even in
M
\   AJ 2 [<].
Proposition 31. C-RASP[periodic, local] ⊆ M   \ AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD]
We make two remarks about corollaries of the result:
Remark 32. First, the proof, simply by omitting the positional relations, also yields a corresponding
inclusion without positional relations: C-RASP[∅] ⊆ M \  AJ 2 [<].
Second, the result implies that C-RASP[periodic, local] defines a subclass of TC0 , in fact, all
C-RASP[periodic, local] programs translate into uniform TC0 circuits with a linear number of gates
by results in Krebs (2008, Theorem 4.33 and Figure 4.4). The inclusion is strict, e.g., PARITY has a
linear-size TC0 circuit but is not definable by C-RASP[periodic, local], as we show below.
   6
     These can be simulated by majority quantifiers with two variables by Proposition 5.5 in Krebs (2008),
which is based on Corollary 3.3 in Lange (2004). Nonetheless, as the simulation is unobvious, they are useful
for writing formulas in M
                        \ AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD].


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Proposition 31. First, every periodic positional function ϕ(i) is a Boolean function
M odm,r (i) ⇐⇒ i = r mod m. For local functions ψ(i, j), it suffices to only consider func-
tions of the form ψ(i, j) ⇐⇒ j = i + c for c ∈ Z. This is because the counting operation
C(i) := # [j ≤ i, |i − j| ≤ c] P (j) is equivalent to Ĉ(i) where


               Ĉ(i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i − c ∨ j = i − (c − 1) ∨ . . . ∨ j = i + c] P (j)

And it is possible to further reduce this by distributing the disjunctions over many counting op-
erations so that each one only contains a single disjunct as positional function. It helps that
a predicate fst(i) is definable in M
                                   \  AJ 2 [<, +1, MOD] which is true iff i = 0. For instance
fst(i) := ¬M
           [ aj j ⟨j ≤ i, ⊤⟩
For each Boolean C-RASP operation P (i), there exists a M     \  AJ 2 [<, +1, MOD] formula P̂ (i) with
one free variable that is equivalent to P (i) at all positions of all words. By induction, all cases are
straightforward except for comparisons of counts.
For comparison operations, we will first show a formula that is equivalent for all nonempty strings.
Accounting for the empty string is easy, depending on the constants in the comparison. WLOG we
are able to rewrite the formula (not in standard C-RASP notation) as the following, where αk , β ∈ Z

                                                                                            
        X                                        X
            αk · (# [j ≤ i] Pk (j)) +             αm · (# [j ≤ i, j = i + cm ] Pm (j)) + β > 0
       k≤K                                     m≤M


We’ve grouped the uniform counting operations that have ψ = ⊤ together. Then using a case dis-
junction, we can rewrite it all the local counting operations as the following (using I[ϕ] as notational
convenience to turn ϕ(j) ∈ {⊥, ⊤} to the corresponding value in {0, 1}):

                                                                                           
                  _                      X                                         X
                                            αk · (# [j ≤ i] Pk (j)) +                 αm τm  + β > 0
      τ ∈{0,1}M : I[Pm (j−cm )]=τm    k≤K                                          m≤M


We can see that for nonempty
                             strings within each case, the additive constant β can be reformulated
        P
as β + m≤M αm τm · # [j ≤ i] fst(j), and we can just add it to the summation using αk+1 =
     P
  β + m≤M αm τm . Then, it is possible to define formulas for each case disjunction using a
series of existential quantifiers and succ(j, i). For instance:


                        ϕ(j − 2) ≡ ∃i. (Succ(i, j) ∧ ∃j. (Succ(j, i) ∧ ϕ(j)))

Thus, we are able to rewrite the entire formula where we only ever compute sums of C-RASP counts
without any positional functions. This means it now suffices to focus on the summations of counting
terms

                                      X
                                             αk · (# [j ≤ i] P (j)) > 0
                                     k≤K


and simulate these that using a M
                                [ aj formula. For k ≤ (K + 1), if αk > 0 consider the list of
formulas


                            Lk := [P̂k (j), P̂k (j), . . . , P̂k (j), ⊤, ⊤, . . . , ⊤]
                                   |             {z                } |    {z        }
                                                 αk many                 αk many



                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Intuitively, the M
                 [ aj j quantifier can only check if the total count is greater than half the possible
positions, so to check if a count is > 0 we need to pad the quantifier with a bunch of trivially true
formulas to ensure the total count is at least half by default. And if αk < 0 we use

                         Lk := [¬P̂k (j), ¬P̂k (j), . . . , ¬P̂k (j)), ⊥, ⊥, . . . , ⊥]
                                |               {z                  } |    {z        }
                                                αk many                   αk many


Let L = L1 + +L2 + + . . . + +LK+1 be the concatenation of all these lists, and let φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φ|L|
list out the formulas in L. Then we claim the following formula will compute the correct value of
the comparison for nonempty strings.

                                   ϕ1 (i) := M
                                             [ aj j⟨φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φ|L| ⟩
                         P
For empty strings, if β + m≤M αm τm > 0 then define ϕ0 (i) := ¬M
                                                               [ aj j ⟨⊤⟩ ∧ ⊤. Otherwise,
use ϕ0 (i) := ¬M
               [ aj j ⟨⊤⟩ ∧ ⊥. Then we can define

                                          P̂ (i) := ϕ0 (i) ∨ ϕ1 (i)



C.3.2    I NEXPRESSIBILITY OF Σ∗ be∗
Krebs (2008); Behle et al. (2007; 2009) used infinite groups to establish results about the expres-
siveness of M\AJ 2 [<]; by Corollary 31, these results entail results on C-RASP[periodic, local]. In
particular, Lemma 6.11 in Krebs (2008) shows that Lbb ̸∈ M   \  AJ 2 [<]; this result turns out to have
profound consequences for C-RASP expressiveness.
Definition 33. Let Σ = {a, b, e}. Define Lbb := Σ∗ be∗ bΣ∗ .

As a minor note, the exact statement of Lemma 6.11 used Lbb = Σ∗ bbΣ∗ , but the addition of the
neutral letter e is inconsequential.
Lemma 34. Let φ be a M \  AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD] formula. There exists a morphism h(σ) = es σes−1
and a M
      \ AJ 2 [<] formula ψ such that for every w ∈ Σ∗ , h(w) ⊨ ϕ ⇐⇒ w ⊨ ψ

Proof. Let M be the least common multiple of all occurring moduli in φ. Let C be the maximum
nesting depth of Succ(x, y) predicates (which must be bounded by the quantifier depth of φ). In-
tuitively, we can think of C as the largest number where a subformula φ(x + C) occurs in φ. Let
s = M C, and define the morphism h(σ) = es σes−1 for σ ∈ Σ. Here we will use the notation ϕc (x)
which will be true at position x in w whenever ϕ is true at position x + c in h(w), for c ∈ [−s, s − 1].
We will show that for every formula φ(x) of M   \ AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD] with at most one free variable,
we can define φ−s (x), φ−(s−1) (x) . . . φ(s−1) (x) such that for all i ∈ [0, |w| − 1] and c ∈ [−s, s − 1]

                                   h(w) ⊨ φ(i + c) ⇐⇒ w ⊨ φc (i)

Intuitively, what this does is it takes every interval of [x − s, x + (s − 1)] around each position in
h(w) and stores it in a “vector” at that position in w. We will induct on the complexity of φ. If φ(x)
is Qe (x), then φ0 (x) := Qe (x), and then φc (x) = ⊤ for every other c ̸= 0, since the morphism h
pads neutral symbols e in h(w) between every symbol from w. If φ(x) is Qσ (x) for σ ̸= e, we have
that φ0 := Qσ (x) and φ+c (x) = ⊥ for every other c ̸= 0. If φ(x) is M odm,r (x), the φc can also
be “hardcoded” similarly, as every position in h(w) that has a symbol from w is going to be = 0
mod s.
Boolean formulas are also straightforward. The only hard case is if we have a formula φ(x) =
M
\ AJ y ⟨φ1 (x, y), . . . , φk (x, y)⟩. We can think of φ specifying the constraint


                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     
                                     X                        |w|
                                      # y [φi (x, y)] > k ·
                                                               2
                                       i≤k


Where # y ϕ indicates the number of positions in the string satisfying ϕ (with variables bound
appropriately). The idea here is to rewrite ψi (x, y) in terms of its unary formulas (which we can
apply the inductive hypothesis to) and then split h(w) into some intervals, upon which evaluating
φ+c (x) will be simpler. First we can rewrite each φi (x, y) as



                 Fi (α1 (x), . . . , αq (x), β1 (y), . . . , βr (y), χ1 (x, y), . . . , χp (x, y))



Where Fi is a Boolean function, the α are unary in x, the β are unary in y, and the χ(x, y) are in-
equalities of x and y, possibly with +1’s, of the form x ≤ y + 1, for example. To save space,
we will abbreviate the above expression by grouping the α, β, χ formulas together notationally
Fi (χi (x, y), αi (x), βi (y)).
The χ formulas are not unary, but we can “eliminate” the χ terms by casework over intervals of
the string. We will show this by example for a summation with only one # y term. This argument
works identically if we had many of # y terms, but it would add notational clutter. So if we had a
formula φ(x) = M \  AJ y ⟨φ1 (x, y)⟩ we could think of it as in the form


                                                                |w|
                             φ(x) = # y F (χ(x, y), α(x), β(y) ≥
                                                                 2


Then we can construct the formula φc (x) for c ∈ [−s, s − 1] by using the following partition of
intervals of the string. Let Ξ be the set of inequalities


         Ξ = {y < x − s, y = x − s, . . . , y = x, . . . , y = x + (s − 1), y > x + (s − 1)}


And we define some notation. For ξ ∈ Ξ, let χξ (x, y) ∈ {⊤, ⊥} evaluate χ in the case ξ holds.
For instance if χ(x, y) is y < x + 1, then χy>x+2 (x, y) = ⊥. Since the intervals defined by
ξ ∈ Ξ disjoint and cover the entirety of the string, every χ can be evaluated in this manner. Then,
we can essentially compute the sum in each interval, and only precision is needed in the interval
[x − s, x + (s − 1)], so φ(x) is equivalent to


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    −s
               h                                         i
            # y y < x ∧ F (χy<x−s (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                    −(s−1)
               h                                               i
           +# y y < x ∧ F (χy<x−s (x, y), αc (x), β        (y)
                ..
                 .
               h                                    +(s−1)
                                                              i
           +# y y < x ∧ F (χy<x−s (x, y), αc (x), β        (y)
               h                                    s
                                                        i
           +# y y < x ∧ F (χy<x−s (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                    −s
               h                                          i
           +# y x = y ∧ F (χy=x−s (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                        −(s−1)
               h                                                   i
           +# y x = y ∧ F (χy=x−(s−1) (x, y), αc (x), β        (y)
                ..
                 .
               h                                        (s−1)
                                                                 i
           +# y x = y ∧ F (χy=x+(s−1) (x, y), αc (x), β       (y)
               h                                    s
                                                        i
           +# y x = y ∧ F (χy=x+s (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                    −s
               h                                          i
           +# y x < y ∧ F (χx+s<y (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                    −(s−1)
               h                                               i
           +# y x < y ∧ F (χx+s<y (x, y), αc (x), β        (y)
                ..
                 .
               h                                    (s−1)
                                                             i
           +# y x < y ∧ F (χx+s<y (x, y), αc (x), β       (y)
               h                                    s
                                                        i
           +# y x < y ∧ F (χx+s<y (x, y), αc (x), β (y)
                                                                                       |w|
                                                                                   ≥
                                                                                        2



By the inductive hypothesis, all αc and β c are definable solely in terms of M
                                                                             \ AJ 2 [<], so the entire
formula is equivalent to a M
                           \  AJ y formula that quantifies over all the bracketed formulas above,
as well as equally many trivially true formulas, as described more clearly in Proposition C.3.1. As
mentioned before, since this argument also applies to a summation of # y terms, this completes
the proof. Then for any φ(x) in M \  AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD], after performing the above translation the
                   0
resulting formula φ (x) is our desired formula in M\  AJ 2 [<].

Lemma 35. Lbb ̸∈ M
                 \ AJ 2 [<, +1, M OD]


Proof. Assume for sake of contradiction that Lbb is definable by a formula φ of M   \ AJ 2 [<
                                                                             ∗
, +1, M OD]. Let h and ψ be as guaranteed by the above lemma. Then for w ∈ Σ , w ∈ Lbb ⇐⇒
h(w) ∈ Lbb . This means ψ defines Lbb which contradicts Lemma 6.11 in Krebs (2008), which has
shown that Lbb ̸∈ M
                  \ AJ 2 [<].

Lemma 36. For Σ = {a, b, e}, it holds that
                                 Σ∗ be∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]                                 (4)

Proof. To get a contradiction, note that a C-RASP[periodic, local] program Φ for Σ∗ be∗ could be
used to construct one for Lbb , as:


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                C1 (i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i − 1] Φ(j)
                            P REVΦ (i) := C1 (i) ≥ 1
                                C2 (i) := # [j ≤ i] Qb (j) ∧ P REVΦ (j)
                                  Lbb := C2 (i) ≥ 1


C.3.3    I NEXPRESSIBILITY OF PARITY
First, let the depth of a C-RASP operation be the maximum depth of nesting of counting operations
in it. For instance if C(i) := # [j ≤ i] P (j), the depth of the C is depth of P (i) plus one. None of
the other operations are greater than the depth of its dependencies. We will induct on program depth
for the following proof:
Lemma 37. Let Σ = {a}. For any C-RASP[∅] program P there exists an n such that for all w
where |w| ≥ n, either all such w are accepted by P or all are rejected

Proof. If P is depth 0, it is equivalent to either Qa (i) or ¬Qa (i), which either rejects every string
or accepts every string.
Otherwise, let all C-RASP programs of depth k give constant output for strings above length n, and
then consider a program P of depth k + 1. P will be equivalent to a Boolean combination of linear
constraints. We will see that each linear constraint becomes constant for strings above a certain
length. Consider any linear constraints over X many counts Cx of depth k:
                                                                     
                                             X
                                L(i) :=         αx # [j ≤ i] Cx (j) ≥ c
                                           x≤X


For string of length i ≥ n, this is equivalent to
                                                                                
                                X
                   L(i) :=           αx ((i − n)I[Cx (n)] + # [j ≤ n] Cx (j)) ≥ c
                                x≤X


Where I[Cx (n)] denotes the truth value of Cx (n) ∈ {0, 1}. Rearrange this to
                                                                                    
                                X                             X
           L(i) := (i − n)           αx (I[Cx (n)]) +            αx (# [j ≤ n] Cx (j)) ≥ c
                                x≤X                           x≤X

                P                                   P
The sums c1 = x≤X αx (I[Cx (n)]) and c2 =               x≤X αx (# [j ≤ n] Cx (j)) are constants depend-
ing on the formula and n.

                                             (i − n)c1 + c2 ≥ c

Depending on if c1 , c2 are positive or negative, we either derive a lower bound m after which the
linear constraint L(i) is always true, or always false for i ≥ m. Since any formula of depth k + 1
is a Boolean combination of these linear constraint, we take the max of all the m’s from them, and
any string larger than this will always be accepted or always rejected by P .
Lemma 38. (aa)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅]

That is, no C-RASP[∅] program can determine if a general string has even length. The same proof
applies to testing whether the string length is a multiple of any other fixed integer.


                                                    37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Using the previous lemma, for every C-RASP[∅] program there exists an n such that the
program accepts (aa)n iff it accepts (aa)n a. So no program can recognize (aa)∗ .

We will use this to show that C-RASP[periodic, local] program cannot recognize P ARIT Y , as the
extra positional operations do not give sufficient expressive power. We start with an observation that
simplifies the proof
Proposition 39. As syntactic sugar we allow j < i as a mask in C-RASP counting operations.

Proof. Consider the counting operation C(i) := # [j ≤ i] P (j). We can define the program


                                        I(i) := P (i) ? 1 : 0
                                        C(i) := # [j ≤ i] P (j)
                                        C ′ (i) := C(i) − I(i)


And essentially, this operation will compute the count

                                        C ′ (i) := # [j < i] P (j)


Lemma 40. Let P be a C-RASP[periodic, local] program over Σ = {a, b}. There is some s > 0
and a morphism h(a) = bs abs−1 and a C-RASP[∅] program P̂ over Σ = {a} such that for all
w ∈ a∗ , if P accepts h(w) iff P̂ accepts w.

Proof. Choose s to be the least multiple of all moduli occurring in P that is also greater than all the
|c| in local functions j = i+c. For every operation P (i) of P , we will define P̂ c (i) for c ∈ [−s, s−1]
such that P̂ c (i) when run on w is equivalent to P (s + i(2s) + c) when run on h(w).
If P (i) is Qa (i) or Qb (i), it is straightforward, as P̂ c (i) is true iff c = 0. Modular predicates
are also capable of being “hardcoded”, as positions in w are always 0 mod s in h(w), and so the
offset c determines the value modulo. All other kinds of operations are also straightforward using
the inductive hypothesis. The only ones that need care are counting operations. First, consider a
counting operation without positional functions:

                                        C(i) := # [j ≤ i] A(j)

We can define each Ĉ c (i) using a program like the following. The idea is that the entire window of
[j − s, j + (s − 1)] around each j < i can be counted up completely, but around i we only consider
the interval [−s, i + c]:
                                C−s (i) := # [j < i] Â−s (j)
                            C−(s−1) (i) := # [j < i] Â−(s−1) (j)
                                      ..
                                       .
                             C(s−1) (i) := # [j < i] Â(s−1) (j)
                                 I−s (i) := Â−s (j) ? 1 : 0
                            I−(s−1) (i) := Â−(s−1) (j) ? 1 : 0
                                      ..
                                       .
                                   Ic (i) := Âc (j) ? 1 : 0
                                                 X                X
                                  Ĉ c (i) :=            Ct (i) +   It (i)
                                            t∈[−s,s−1]           t∈[−s,c]



                                                   38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Otherwise, if we have a counting operation that involves a local positional function

                                 C(i) := # [j ≤ i, j = i + d] A(j)

Then the operation returns either the count 1 or 0 and we can just use


                                  Ĉ c (i) := (c = d ∧ Âc (i)) ? 1 : 0

Since d will not exceed ±s, Âd exists. Using these constructions we can see that (bs abs−1 )n is
accepted by operation P (i) in P iff an is accepted by the constructed operation P̂ (s−1) (i).

Lemma 41. P ARIT Y ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local]

Proof. If such a program existed, it would be able to distinguish between (bs abs−1 )2n and
(bs abs−1 )2n+1 for all n (using the s guaranteed by the previous lemma). However, this implies
the existence of a C-RASP[∅] program over Σ = {a} that recognizes (aa)∗ . This contradicts
Lemma 38.


D     D ISCUSSION OF D ESIGN C HOICES

D.1   MLP ACTIVATION F UNCTIONS

Our analysis allows ReLU and the Heaviside function as activation functions in MLPs. ReLU is a
standard choice in theoretical studies of neural networks and transformers (e.g. Bhattamishra et al.,
2024; Sanford et al., 2023). Modern LLMs also use other functions such as SwiGLU (Shazeer,
2020), but universal approximation theorems guarantee that ReLU networks can approximate
smooth functions on bounded domains well. While the choice of ReLU is not necessarily key to
our results, it is important that the number of active units provides a meaningful upper bound on the
complexity of the function expressed. Our results would continue to go through if ϕ is an arbitrary
activation function but operates at p-bit precision.
We also allow the Heaviside function as a second activation function. Heaviside allows exactly
performing threshold computations at arbitrary input lengths, which is relevant to simulating C-
RASP at arbitrary input lengths. This includes simple problems such as MAJORITY, on which
transformers empirically do well. Real-world transformers generally do not include this function,
though ReLU MLPs can approximate it arbitrarily closely.

D.2   F IXED P RECISION

As described in Section 2, we assume that attention logits and the exponentials inside softmax are
rounded to p fractional bits of precision before further processing. This allows us to cluster keys and
queries into finite numbers of clusters, and compute all activations at logarithmic precision, used for
proving the logarithmic communication complexity bound (Theorem 12). We note that logarithmic
precision of the intermediate activations is also key to upper bounds of transformers in terms of TC0
shown by Merrill & Sabharwal (2023b).
We also assume that the parameters in transformers and Limit Transformers are expressed at fixed
precision (Definitions 4 and 2), and penalize the precision p used of representing the parameters as
part of the regularizer used in our inference procedure (Definition 5). Indeed, penalizing unbounded
precision of parameter values is necessary to enable full identification of a transformer algorithm
from behavior at finite lengths. For any real number α ≥ 0, a one-layer transformer with real-valued
parameters can express the function

                                             1 if α · #1 (x) ≥ #0 (x)
                                 Fα (x) =
                                             0 else


                                                   39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Grammar       Star-Free     Definition
 1             Yes           1*
 2             Yes           (10)*
 3             No            strings without odd-length strings of ones followed by odd-
                             length strings of zeros (i.e., no 012n+1 02m+1 1 substrings)
 4             Yes           strings without any 000’s substrings
 5             No            strings of even length with an even number of 1’s
 6             No            strings where number of 0’s - number of 1’s is divisible by 3
 7             Yes           0*1*0*1

Table 1: Tomita Grammars (originally due to Tomita, 1982), following Bhattamishra et al. (2020).


For any two distinct α, β, the functions Fα and Fβ are distinct on sufficiently long inputs (though,
when α and β are close, very long inputs will be needed to distinguish them). Thus, there are un-
countably many distinct functions implemented by transformers; however, their distinction relies
on infinite precision. In an infinite precision setup, one cannot hope to identify algorithms imple-
mented by transformers from finite data, no matter the input length and the regularization applied
to the model size. In contrast, when parameters are representable in finite precision (as in real
computers), the number of distinct algorithms expressed by Limit Transformers is countable, and
ultimate identification from long inputs is possible when the precision required for representing the
parameters is penalized.


D.3     L AYER N ORM
                                                                                      (l)
                               √ Norm or RMSNorm, whereby activations yi are rescaled to
Real-world transformers use Layer
have norm or standard deviation d. Layer norm can be incorporated into the translation to Limit
Transformers (Lemma 52) by recording terms of the form
                                                     !T               !
                                          Y                Y
                                      T
                                  v              S                S       wT                      (5)
                                          S∈S1             S∈S2


when v ∈ VOl1 and w ∈ VOl2 and S1 , S2 ∈ P. We can record these products in further dimen-
           (l)          (l)                         (l)
sions of yi , so that ∥yi ∥22 is recoverable from yi . The simplest approach is then to modify the
         d                                        d
                                                   (l)
definition of Limit Transformers by normalizing yi based on this recovered norm.
                                                 d

The original translation from C-RASP to fixed-precision transformers (Yang & Chiang, 2024) capi-
talized on layer norm; it would be no problem to translate from C-RASP[periodic,local] to a version
of Limit Transformers incorporating layer norm, and we would be able to remove the Heaviside
function from Limit Transformers.


E     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR E XPERIMENTS

E.1     R EGULAR L ANGUAGES FROM THE B HATTAMISHRA ET AL 2020 B ENCHMARK

E.1.1    L ANGUAGE D EFINITIONS

Descriptions follow Bhattamishra et al. (2020).
Tomita Grammars. Definitions are shown in Table 1.
Dn are defined on the alphabet Σ = {a, b} by the recursion Dn = (aDn−1 b)∗ .
PARITY. PARITY is b∗ (ab∗ ab∗ )∗ . It is contained in the set of algorithmic tasks.
Others. Other languages: (aa)∗ , (aaaa)∗ and (abab)∗ (not star-free), aa∗ bb∗ cc∗ dd∗ ee∗ ,
{ab}∗ d{b, c}∗ , and {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ (star-free).


                                                      40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                C-RASP expressiveness
 #         Language             [∅]  [periodic, local]          Star-Free?     Dot-Depth       AC0 ?
 1          Tomita 1            yes        yes                     yes             1            yes
 2          Tomita 2            yes        yes                     yes             1            yes
 3          Tomita 3            no          no                      no             –            yes
 4          Tomita 4            no         yes                     yes             1            yes
 5          Tomita 5            no          no                      no             –            no
 6          Tomita 6            no          no                      no             –            no
 7          Tomita 7            yes        yes                     yes             1            yes
 8             D2               yes        yes                     yes             2            yes
 9             D3               yes        yes                     yes             3            yes
 10            D4               yes        yes                     yes             4            yes
 11            D12              yes        yes                     yes            12            yes
 –          PARITY              no          no                      no             –            no
 12           (aa)∗             no         yes                      no             –            yes
 13          (aaaa)∗            no         yes                      no             –            yes
 14          (abab)∗            no         yes                      no             –            yes
 15     aa bb cc dd∗ ee∗
          ∗ ∗ ∗
                                yes        yes                     yes             1            yes
 16      {a, b}∗ d{b, c}∗       yes        yes                     yes             1            yes
 17       {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗        no          no                     yes             2            yes

Table 2: The finite-state languages in the benchmark from Bhattamishra et al. (2020), with the num-
bering from Figure 1, C-RASP expressiveness properties, and three established notions of complex-
ity (star-freeness, dot depth, and membership in the circuit complexity class AC0 ). In the C-RASP
columns, “yes” means we found a C-RASP program; “no” means we proved that no C-RASP pro-
gram can exist. Note that {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ is equivalent to the language Σ∗ be∗ from Lemma 11. Note
also that we discuss PARITY in the algorithmic benchmark, as it is included in Zhou et al. (2024a).
See discussion in Appendix E.1.2. See Figure 2 for a version of Figure 1 (right) with languages
labeled.


E.1.2    C-RASP E XPRESSIVENESS

All languages in the benchmark are in TC0 , and all are expressible in principle by transformers
(Liu et al., 2023). We were able to provably settle the C-RASP expressiveness for all languages,
with results shown in Table 2. We compare C-RASP expressiveness with the standard notions of
complexity of finite-state languages considered by Bhattamishra et al. (2020): whether languages
are star-free, and (among the star-free ones) their dot-depth. While many star-free languages in the
sample show length-generalization, star-freeness does not overall account for the observed behavior
(Figure 4). Within the star-free languages, a standard complexity metric is dot-depth (Figure 2); this
again does not accurately predict length-generalization: it succeeds for a language with dot depth 12
but fails for a language with dot depth 2. We also considered circuit complexity of regular languages
(Barrington et al., 1992). All regular languages included in the sample are in the class TC0 ; most
are also in AC0 , a smaller class sometimes compared to transformers (Hao et al., 2022; Barcelo
et al., 2024). Transformers show poor length generalization on the non-AC0 regular languages7 ,
but also fail on various languages that are in AC0 . On algorithmic problems, transformers succeed
on some non-AC0 problems such as Majority (Table 3). Overall, C-RASP expressiveness is much
more successful than previously considered notions of complexity in accounting for empirical length
generalization behavior of transformers.

Proof Sketches for Membership Claims We sketch proofs for all C-RASP expressiveness claims
in Table 2. We first note that C-RASP[periodic, local] is closed under the inverse images of mor-
phisms where each symbol is mapped to a string of the same length. That is:
Lemma 42. C-RASP[periodic, local] is closed under the inverse images of morphisms where each
symbol is mapped to a string of some fixed length n. That is, if h : Σ1 → Σn2 (for some
    7
      By the results of Barrington et al. (1992), regular languages outside of AC0 are all, informally speaking, at
least as hard as PARITY, and indeed they provably are not in C-RASP[periodic, local].


                                                        41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


fixed n) is extended to a map Σ∗1 → Σ∗2 and L ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local], then h−1 (L) ∈
C-RASP[periodic, local].


Proof. Let h be such a morphism. We we take any C-RASP[periodic, local] program operation P (i)
that operates on h(w) into an equivalent program which operates on w. We use similar notation to
Lemma 40. In this case for every operation P (i), we create an operation P̂ c (i) that, evaluated on
word w, evaluates P (i + c) on the word h(w).
For P (i) = Qa (i), we can use P̂ 0 (i) := σ∈Σ:h(σ)0 =a Qσ (i), P̂ 1 (i) := σ∈Σ:h(σ)1 =a Qσ (i), and
                                          W                                W
so on.
For P (i) = M odm,r (i), then for c ≤ n we can define (relying on the fact that m, r are fixed).
This boils down to defining M odm,r (ni + c) in terms of M od terms which only reference i. This is
simple, despite being lengthy to write out, because we can simply “hard-code” what needs to happen
for all i ≤ m. The cases will repeat after that, since M odm,r (ni + c) ≡ M odm,r (n(m + i) + c), so
we can check i mod m, and enumerate the cases from there.
For P (i) = # [j ≤ i, ψ(i, j)] V (j), where ψ(i, j) = ⊤, then like before we can define P̂ c (i) as


                                 C 0 (i) := # [j < i] V̂ 0 (j)
                                 C 1 (i) := # [j < i] V̂ 1 (j)
                                       ..
                                        .
                              C n−1 (i) := # [j < i] V̂ n−1 (j)
                                  I 0 (i) := V̂ 0 (j) ? 1 : 0
                                  I 1 (i) := V̂ 1 (j) ? 1 : 0
                                        ..
                                         .
                                  I c (i) := V̂ c (j) ? 1 : 0
                                                 X                X
                                 P̂ c (i) :=            C t (i) +   I t (i)
                                            t∈[0,n−1]            t∈[0,c]


Otherwise, as described before, we only need to consider the case of ψ(i, j) := j = i − d since
counts over any local function can be rewritten as counts over local functions with this form. Here it
takes a little bit more care, as the single position j upon which to check V (j) may occur far behind
the window of n around each symbol.
So for c ≤ d, we need to find the value of some V (j) at position j = ni − d, where we can check
the value of V (nj + c) using V c (j). Intuitively, the idea is to use a # [j ≤ i] ϕ(j) operation in order
to find a j ≤ i such that nj + c = ni − d. We can use a local positional function to find the right j
modulo n, and then find the correct c to retrieve V c (j).
This can be done by looking pack to position i − nd , using a local positional function. Then,


we need to find the offset which is equal to the position (ni + c) − d. Thus we can write the
following summation, where only one of the count terms will be nonzero. Let τc = I[(c = (n − (d
mod n)))] ∈ {⊤, ⊥} be a boolean value indicating we’ve found the correct c value.


                                                     42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          d
                            C 0 (i) := # j ≤ i, i = j +       τ0 ∧ V̂ 0 (j)
                                                          n

                               1                          d
                            C (i) := # j ≤ i, i = j +         τ1 ∧ V̂ 1 (j)
                                                          n
                                   ..
                                    .

                           n−1                            d
                         C       (i) := # j ≤ i, i = j +      τn−1 ∧ V̂ n−1 (j)
                                                          n
                                          X
                            P̂ c (i) :=         C t (i)
                                         t∈[0,n−1]


For c > d, the position to check occurs in the same window as i, so we only need to check the
finitely many cases up to i + c.


                                     I 0 (i) := c − d = 0 ∧ V̂ 0 (i) ? 1 : 0
                                     I 1 (i) := c − d = 1 ∧ V̂ 0 (i) ? 1 : 0
                                           ..
                                            .
                                      I c (i) := c − d = c ∧ V̂ c (i) ? 1 : 0
                                                  X
                                     P̂ c (i) :=       I t (i)
                                                 t∈[0,c]


All other cases are straightforward.

Tomita 1 ∈ C-RASP[∅] A C-RASP program can detect the presence of a symbol other than 1 and
flag a violation.

Tomita 2 ∈ C-RASP[∅] A C-RASP program expresses: At each position, either the current sym-
bol is a 0 and the count of ones and zeros is balanced; or the current symbol is a 1 and the count of
ones is one more than the count of zeros.

Tomita 3 ̸∈ C-RASP[∅] For a given string of the form 010K , the outputs will converge as K → ∞
by the same argument as for (aa)∗ in Lemma 38. Hence, Tomita 3 ̸∈ C-RASP[∅].

Tomita 3 ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Informally, the only way periodic and local predicates are
likely to help is if the lengths of contiguous blocks of zeros and ones were bounded (local), or
the parity of the lengths of 1 and 0 substrings were globally linked to the parity of the positions
of transitions 10 and 01 (periodic), but neither is the case. Sketching a formal proof, assume a
C-RASP[periodic, local] program is given for Tomita 3. First, we eliminate the periodic predicates
by labeling every symbol with the position modulo s, where s is a multiple of 2 and all moduli
appearing in periodic functions; giving an extended alphabet 11 , . . . , 1s ; 01 , . . . , 0s . For sufficiently
large c that is a co-prime with s, we can then also eliminate local functions by merging an adjacent
block of length c around every transition between ones and zeros into a single symbol Λ; indexed
by the first symbol inside the block and whether the transition happens at the f loor(s/2)-th (second
part has even length) or ceil(s/2)-th (second part has odd length) position in the block. The resulting
language, over an extended alphabet, is recognized by a C-RASP[∅] program capable of determining
whether a string of the form
                                      Λ11 ,... Λ0(1+c)%s ,... Λ1(1+2c)%s ,... . . .                          (6)
contains a substring of the form
                  Λ0... ,even Λ1... ,even Λ0... ,even        or        Λ0... ,odd Λ1... ,odd Λ0... ,odd      (7)


                                                           43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This is impossible for the same reasons that Σ∗ bbbΣ∗ (Tomita-4) is not in C-RASP[∅].8

Tomita 4 ̸∈ C-RASP[∅] By Lemma 6.11 in Krebs (2008) (discussed in Appendix C.3.2),
Σ∗ bbΣ∗ ̸∈ M
           \ AJ 2 [<]. In analogy, Σ∗ bbbΣ∗ ̸∈ M
                                               \ AJ 2 [<].

Tomita 4 ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] A C-RASP program tests whether there is a position with a
0 where the preceding position also holds a 0 and the position preceding that also holds a 0.

Tomita 5 ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] This language is the intersection of PARITY with the strings
of even length. C-RASP[periodic, local] inexpressiveness follows from the same arguments as for
PARITY (Lemma 41).

Tomita 6 ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Consider first the language L3 where the number of 1’s is
divisible by 3. This is not in C-RASP[periodic, local] in analogy to PARITY. Now consider the
length-preserving morphism h(1) = 001, h(0) = 000. Then h(w) ∈ LT omita 6 ⇔ w ∈ L3 .

Tomita 7 ∈ C-RASP[∅] Tomita 7 is equivalent to {ϵ} ∪ a+ ∪ b+ ∪ a+ b+ ∪ b+ a+ ∪ a+ b+ a+ ∪
a+ b+ a+ b+ . It can be shown this is equivalent to Σ∗ \ Σ∗ bΣ∗ aΣ∗ bΣ∗ aΣ∗ , and this was constructed
in section C.1.5. Interestingly, directly implementing this C-RASP[∅] construction in a transformer
appears to require at least four layers; this is in contrast to the C-RASP[periodic, local] construction
discussed next, where two layers are sufficient.9

Tomita 7 ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] A C-RASP program can count the number of positions with
the bigrams 01, 10 to detect a violation.

Dn ∈ C-RASP[∅] Similar to Tomita 2.

PARITY ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] See Lemma 41.

(aa)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅] See Lemma 38.

(aa)∗ ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] See Example C.2.3.

(aaaa)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅], ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Analogous to (aa)∗ .

(abab)∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[∅], ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Analogous to (aa)∗ .

aa∗ bb∗ cc∗ dd∗ ee∗ ∈ C-RASP[∅] A C-RASP program indicates, first, the presence of “a”, “b”,
“c“, “d”, “e”, and, second, that every “a” is preceded only by “a”; every “b” is preceded only by “a”
or “b”; every “c” is preceded only by “a”, “b”, “c”; and analogously for “d”, “e”.

{a, b}∗ d{b, c}∗ ∈ C-RASP[∅] There is a single d; a can only appear before it; c can only appear
after it.

{0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] See Lemma 36. Note that this is equivalent to the lan-
guage Σ∗ be∗ over the alphabet Σ = {a, b, e}.

   8
     Formally, Theorems 6.10 and 6.12 in Krebs (2008) show that the regular languages in M      \ AJ 2 [<] are
contained in DA ∗ G. The second component in this product can capture the first subscript of each Λ, but
not the second. Since the language Σ∗ aaaΣ∗ ∪ Σ∗ bbbΣ∗ over Σ = {a, b} is not in DA (shown, e.g., via the
Theorem 2c in Tesson & Thérien (2002), which would entail syntactic congruence of (aabb)ω bb(aabb)ω and
(aabb)ω ), the claimed C-RASP[∅] program cannot exist.
   9
     The first layer collects bigrams, the second layer compares the count of each bigram to the count of SOS
tokens (which is known to be one) to count the bigrams.


                                                     44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2     A LGORITHMIC TASKS

E.2.1     TASK D EFINITIONS FOR A LGORITHMIC P ROBLEMS
The tasks are generally from Zhou et al. (2024a), except for Binary Majority Interleave. Here, we
define each formally.

Binary Majority. The binary majority problem identifies the most frequent bit in a sequence of
random bits. An example is      SOS 0 1 ... 0 SEP 1 EOS The part                   0 1 ... 0 is
the sequence of random bits. We define LEN to be the length of this part. We constrain the sequences
such that the number of 0s and 1s are always not equal. The model is trained with the language
modeling loss on the part    1 EOS , in other words, it is only trained to predict the most frequent
bit and EOS token. The minimum length lmin of this task is 1.

Binary Majority Interleave. The sequences in this problem are created by interleaving multiple
binary majority (see above) inputs while avoiding repeating special tokens (e.g., SOS). We use 3
binary majority sequence to compose one sequence in this task. Formally speaking, given 3 binary
sequences of the same length, x11 , · · · x1n , x21 , · · · x2n , and x31 , · · · x3n , and their corresponding labels
(most frequent bits) y 1 , y 2 , y 3 , the interleaved input is SOS x11 , x21 , x31 , x12 , x22 , x32 , · · · , x1n , x2n , x3n .
SEP y 1 , y 2 , y 3 EOS.
An example is    SOS 1 0 1 1 0 0 ... SEP 1 0 0 EOS L EN in this problem refers to
length between SOS and SEP (excluding). The model is trained with the language modeling loss on
the part   1 0 0 EOS and lmin = 3.

Majority. This problem is similar to binary majority problem except that the vocabulary is bigger.
An example is      SOS c b a b SEP b EOS , where               c b a b is a sequence of random
tokens, each of which is sampled independently from an alphabet of 26 symbols. The L EN is defined
as the length of of this part. We constrain the sequences such that there is always a unique answer.
The model is trained with the language modeling loss on the part       b EOS . lmin = 1.

Sort. In sort problem, the model outputs a sorted version of the given sequence. An example is
 SOS 14 23 6 9 SEP 6 9 14 23 EOS where                       14 23 6 9 is a sequence of unique
numbers. L EN in this problem refers to length this part. The model is trained with the language
modeling loss on the part     6 9 14 23 EOS . In this problem, lmin = 1. The total vocabulary
size of tokens except for special tokens is equal to the maximum testing length, i.e., 150.

Copy (unique). In this problem, the model outputs the same sequence as the given sequence,
which consists of unique tokens. An example is        SOS 14 23 6 9 SEP 14 23 6 9 EOS
where the first      14 23 6 9 is a sequence of unique numbers. L EN in this problem refers
to length this part. The model is trained with the language modeling loss on the second part
 14 23 6 9 EOS . In this problem, lmin = 1. The total vocabulary size of tokens except
for special tokens is equal to the maximum testing length, i.e., 150.

Copy (repeat). In this problem, the model outputs the same sequence as the given sequence,
which can contain repeated tokens. An example is          SOS b a b SEP b a b EOS where
the first    b a b is a sequence of random symbols. As in Zhou et al. (2024a), we use an
alphabet of only 2 symbols. L EN in this problem refers to length this part. Each symbols is sampled
independently and uniformly. The model is trained with the language modeling loss on the second
part      b a b EOS . In this problem, lmin = 1.

Parity. In the parity problem, the model recognizes whether the given sequence
contains even number of 1s and outputs a corresponding token.                      An example is
 SOS 1 0 0 1 0 SEP e EOS                The bits before SEP and after SOSis a random sequence
of bits. L EN in this problem refers to length this part. The token between SEP and EOS is the label,
it can be either “e” or “o”, meaning even or odd number of 1s. The model is trained with the loss
on the part      e EOS . lmin = 0 for this problem. The bits are randomly sampled in a way such
that the number of 1s is distributed uniformly given a fixed L EN.


                                                              45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          C-RASP[∅]     C-RASP[periodic, local]     AC0 ?
                 Binary Majority             yes                yes                  no
            Binary Majority Interleave    none found            yes                  no
                    Majority                 yes                yes                  no
                      Sort                   yes                yes                  yes
                  Copy (unique)               no                yes                  yes
                  Copy (repeat)               no                no                   yes
                     Parity                   no                no                   no
                    Addition                  no                no                   yes

Table 3: Expressiveness properties of algorithmic tasks as defined in Appendix E.2.1 and discussed
in Appendix E.2.2. In the C-RASP columns, “yes” means we found a C-RASP program; “no”
means we proved that no C-RASP program can exist; “none found” means that we found no program
despite best efforts. All problems are expressible in TC0 , the tightest known upper-bound on the
expressiveness of transformers. We also show membership in the circuit complexity class AC0 , a
smaller class sometimes compared to transformers (Hao et al., 2022; Barcelo et al., 2024); it is not
predictive of length generalization either here or in the regular languages benchmark (e.g., Addition
is in AC0 but Majority is not).


Addition.    In addition problem,        the model does binary addition.           An example is
SOS 1 0 1 + 1 0 = 1 1 1 EOS                  The two operands are sampled randomly. L EN in this
problem refers to the total length of them, including “+” and “=”. The model is trained with the loss
on the part    1 1 1 EOS . lmin = 4 for this problem. Note that we do not pad zeros in the front
of operands to make them of equal length. The length of first operand is sampled uniformly in [1,
L EN-2], and the remaining length is for the second operand. After determing the lengths, random
bits are sampled uniformly.

E.2.2   L IMIT T RANSFORMERS AND C-RASP EXPRESSIVENESS ON ALGORITHMIC TASKS

See Table 3. We provide proof sketches.

Binary Majority ∈ C-RASP[∅] A single count operation is sufficient.

Binary Majority Interleave and C-RASP[∅] We did not find a C-RASP[∅] program, though we
do not have a rigorous proof of nonexistence. Note that, by Lemma 38, even the (seemingly easier)
task of determining whether a given input is well-formed (input length is a multiple of the number
of different majority sequences) cannot be solved by C-RASP[∅].

Binary Majority Interleave ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Periodic functions can be used to sepa-
rately implement each count operation.

Majority ∈ C-RASP[∅] Similar to Binary Majority.

Copy (unique) ∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] If character (or n-gram) repetition is prevented, then
the sequence length is bounded by the alphabet, so that the space of possible inputs becomes finite,
seemingly precluding the asymptotic analysis done in Theorem 7. To overcome this (apparent)
challenge, we consider two formalizations of this task as operating on unbounded-length inputs.
First, as explained in Zhou et al. (2024a) (and relatedly by Jelassi et al. (2023)), the unique copy-
ing task can be realized with an induction head circuit (Section 4.1 and Appendix C.2.2). More
specifically, each position first records whether SEP has already appeared. An induction circuit then
predicts new tokens in proportion to how frequently they have previously followed appearances of
the current token before SEP (Section 4.1). Copying without repetition is a special case where each
token occurs at most once, so the output of f in (10) is always 0 or 1. We show in Appendix C.2.2
that the induction head construction from Section 4.1 is expressible in C-RASP[periodic, local] but
not in C-RASP[∅].

                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Another formalization of the task is in terms of repeated copying, where, given an input such as SOS
a c b SEP, the model repeatedly copies the string, always predicting the next character, lead-
ing to an unbounded sequence SOS a c b SEP a c b SEP a c b SEP.... This turns
the copying task into a function f ∈ F(Σ) that operates on unboundedly long sequences, out-
putting next-token predictions at each position. This alternative formalization is also expressed in
C-RASP[periodic, local], by essentially the same induction head algorithm.

Copy (repeat) ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] One proof proceeds via communication complexity:
By Corollary 13, copying of general strings is not expressible by Limit Transformers and hence
not in C-RASP[periodic, local]. While valid, this proof does not make transparent why length
generalization is much easier if repetition is avoided. A different approach, not using communi-
cation complexity and crucially using the presence of repetition proceeds from the fact that, over
the alphabet Σ ⊇ {a, b, e}∗ , the language Σ∗ be∗ bΣ∗ ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] (Lemma 35),
and uses it to deduce that, given an input of the form vbek bw#vbek (v, w ∈ Σ∗ , k large), no
C-RASP[periodic,local] program can reliably determine whether a b should follow.

Sort ∈ C-RASP[∅] As explained in Zhou et al. (2024a), this can be realized by selecting the
smallest number in the input that is larger than the last output symbol. This algorithm does not
require local or periodic positional information.
Note that, as in COPY (unique), the input length is bounded by the alphabet size in this case, but we
can view it as a task defined with unbounded length by the same trick as for COPY (unique), whereby
an initial sequence such as SOS a c b SEP is repeatedly sorted, leading to an unbounded se-
quence SOS a c b SEP a b c SEP a b c SEP....

Parity ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] See Lemma 41.

Addition ̸∈ C-RASP[periodic, local] Addition is at least as hard as copying, because the special
case of adding zero to a number amounts to copying (Corollary 13).

E.3   D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

As mentioned in the main paper, at train time, we add random offsets to position indices so that
all position embeddings are trained. The offsets are sampled uniformly at random in the range
[0, N − |x|] (see Section 2). Like Zhou et al. (2024a), we sample independent training batches on
the fly instead of using a finite-size training set. In contrast, each test set contains 2000 samples that
are sampled at the beginning of each experiment.
For the problems where we train models with language modeling loss, the length of inputs is sampled
uniformly from minimum up to maximum length in the specified range. This is true for training data
and all test sets. As mentioned before, we also use predictive modeling. At each step, the model
outputs a label indicating the set of possible next characters, including EOS. The models are trained
on a whole sequence of tokens. In decoder-only models, standard predictive modeling approaches
are less straightforward. Therefore, we assess predictions by combining the input and output spaces.
For every position in the sequence, we evaluate the predicted character by comparing the output
space (where each embedding represents a subset of possible next tokens) against the expected
value.
We train decoder-only transformer from scratch, using implementations from Hugging Face Trans-
formers10 . We train models for maximum 30k steps with a batch size of 64. We stop training early
once the model’s accuracy reaches 100% on the in-distribution test set (the one in range [lmin , 50].
The model is trained with a dropout rate of 0.0. We use AdamW, with a weight decay rate of 0.01.
In preliminary experiments, we found that different model architectures, while achieving 100% ac-
curacy on in-distribution data, may perform differently on out-of-distribution data. To draw a con-
clusion about how the model performs on a problem in general, we determine the hyperparameters
as follows: We consider configurations of {1, 2, 4} layers, {1, 2, 4} heads and model dimension of
  10
     https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/model_doc/gpt2#
transformers.GPT2LMHeadModel


                                                   47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Problem                           Model Size            LR       Max Steps
                    Tomita-1, 2                   1 layer; 1 head; 16 dim     1e-3       30k
                 D2 , D3 , D4 , D12              1 layer; 4 head; 128 dim     1e-4       30k
                    Tomita-4, 7                   4 layer; 2 head; 64 dim     1e-3       30k
        {a, b}∗ d{b, c}∗ , aa∗ bb∗ cc∗ dd∗ ee∗   6 layer ; 4 head; 64 dim     1e-4       30k
             (aa)∗ , (aaaa)∗ , (abab)∗           6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim     1e-4       60k
                  Tomita-3, 5, 6                 6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim     1e-4       60k
               {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ , Parity           6 layer; 4 head; 256 dim     1e-4       60k

       Table 4: Experimental Hyperparameters for testing NoPE on the Regular Languages


                      Problem                           Model Size            LR       Max Steps
                    Tomita-1, 2                   1 layer; 1 head; 16 dim     1e-3       30k
                 D2 , D3 , D4 , D12              1 layer; 4 head; 128 dim     1e-4       30k
                    Tomita-4, 7                  4 layer; 2 head; 128 dim     1e-3       30k
        {a, b}∗ d{b, c}∗ , aa∗ bb∗ cc∗ dd∗ ee∗   4 layer ; 4 head; 64 dim     1e-4       30k
         (aa)∗ , (aaaa)∗ , (abab)∗ , Parity      4 layer; 4 head; 128 dim     1e-4       40k
          {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ , Tomita-3, 5, 6        6 layer; 4 head; 128 dim     1e-3       30k

        Table 5: Experimental Hyperparameters for testing APE on the Regular Languages.



{16, 64, 256}, and learning rate of {0.001, 0.0001}. We sweep all the configurations by iterating
over every combination and choose the one that achieves the highest accuracy on [51, 100] among
those configurations whose accuracy on [lmin , 50] is 100%. When there are multiple such options,
e.g., their accuracy on [51, 100] is 100%, the one with the simplest architecture is selected (when
estimating complexity, we assume the following priority: number of layers > number of heads >
model dimension). The final hyperparameters we used for each task are shown in Table 6 and 7.
When no configuration from the search space defined above can achieve accuracy of 100% on
[lmin , 50], e.g., in the case of ADDITION, we use an extra configuration, where the number of
layers is 12, number of heads is 12, model dimension is 768, learning rate is 1e-4 or 3e-5 (if 1e-4
does not work), and a bigger maximum number of iterations, 60k, we also use the first 3k steps as
warm-up steps.
After we determine the hyperparameter configuration, we run the experiments with multiple random
seeds and report the average accuracy of 5 successful runs (those runs where the model achieves
100% accuracy on in-distribution data). We do not select successful runs in cases where we use
the biggest architecture (the 12-layer configuration), because we find in many cases the accuracy on
in-distribution data stops at around 99%.
The random baseline plotted for the algorithmic tasks (Figure 1, left) is computed using a 2-layer
MLP with a token embedding layer; hence, the model predicts the next token solely based on the
current token. It is trained with the same hyperparameters as transformers, the learning rate is 1e-3.



                  Problem                          Model Size               LR       Max Steps
               Binary Majority               1 layer; 1 head; 16 dim        1e-3        30k
          Binary Majority Interleave        2 layer; 4 head; 256 dim        1e-4        30k
                  Majority                  1 layer; 2 head; 256 dim        1e-3        30k
                    Sort                    1 layer; 2 head; 256 dim        1e-4        30k
                Copy (unique)                2 layer; 1 head; 64 dim        1e-3        30k
                Copy (repeat)               4 layer; 4 head; 256 dim        1e-3        30k
                   Parity                   4 layer; 2 head; 256 dim        1e-4        30k
                  Addition                 12 layer; 12 head; 768 dim       1e-4      60k (3k)

Table 6: Experimental hyperparameters for testing APE on each problem. In the last column, num-
bers in parenthesis mean the warm-up steps, which is 0 when there is no number in parenthesis.


                                                    48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Problem                                     Model Size                             LR           Max Steps
                   Binary Majority                          1 layer; 1 head; 16 dim                      1e-3            30k
              Binary Majority Interleave                  12 layer; 12 head; 768 dim                     1e-4          60k (3k)
                      Majority                              1 layer; 1 head; 64 dim                      1e-3            30k
                        Sort                               1 layer; 1 head; 256 dim                      1e-3            30k
                    Copy (unique)                          4 layer; 4 head; 256 dim                      1e-3            30k
                    Copy (repeat)                          4 layer; 4 head; 256 dim                      1e-3            30k
                       Parity                             12 layer; 12 head; 768 dim                     3e-5          60k (3k)
                      Addition                            12 layer; 12 head; 768 dim                     1e-4          60k (3k)

Table 7: Experimental hyperparameters for testing NoPE on each problem. In the last column,
numbers in parenthesis mean the warm-up steps, which is 0 when there is no number in parenthesis.


      Found CRASP[Periodic, Local] Program         No CRASP[Periodic, Local] Program            Found CRASP[] Program         No CRASP[] Program
               (aa)*                (aaaa)*               (abab)*                Tomita-3               Tomita-5              Tomita-6
       100                   100                   100                    100                     100                   100

         0                     0                     0                       0                      0                     0
         Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
                D-2                   D-3                      D-4                  D-12                Tomita 1              Tomita-2
       100                   100                   100                    100                     100                   100

         0                     0                     0                       0                      0                     0
         Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
             Tomita-4               Tomita-7          aa*bb*cc*dd*ee*           {a,b}*d{b,c}*           {0,1,2}*02*
       100                   100                   100                    100                     100

         0                     0                     0                       0                      0
         Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3

Figure 2: Detailed results for regular languages with language names, corresponding to the right
part of Figure 1 but with individual languages labeled.



F     T RANSLATING BETWEEN T RANSFORMERS AND L IMIT T RANSFORMERS

Here, we formally introduce the product parameterization, formally state the hypothesis class, and
state and prove the technical lemmas establishing the correspondence between ordinary transformers
and limit transformers.


F.1    P RODUCT PARAMETERIZATION

This parameterization is defined as follows:

Definition 43 (Product Parameterization). For l = 1, . . . , L, set

             VO0 ={pi : i} ∪ {Eσ : σ}
             VOl ={(Bl )·,s : s = 1, . . . , d}
             VI 0 =∅
             VI l ={(Al )s,· : s = 1, . . . , d; Uσ : σ ∈ Σ}
                      [
              VO =            VOl
                        l=0,1,...,L
                             [
               VI =                   VI l
                        l=0,1,...,L

                 P ={{Vl1 ,h1 , . . . , Vlk ,hk }          :         0 ≤ k ≤ L;         l1 < · · · < lk ;          1 ≤ hi ≤ H}


                                                                        49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                 Algorithmic Problems
                                                                        In AC0              Not In AC0
                  Binary                              Binary Majority
                  Majority                               Interleave                                 Majority                                    Sort
 100                                        100                                       100                                      100

  50                                         50                                        50                                       50

   0                                             0                                      0                                        0
    Bin 1           Bin 2          Bin 3          Bin 1         Bin 2         Bin 3      Bin 1          Bin 2          Bin 3      Bin 1      Bin 2      Bin 3
                    Copy                                    Copy
                    Unique                                  Repeat                                      Parity                             Addition
 100                                        100                                       100                                      100

  50                                         50                                        50                                       50

   0                                             0                                      0                                        0
    Bin 1           Bin 2          Bin 3          Bin 1         Bin 2         Bin 3      Bin 1          Bin 2          Bin 3      Bin 1      Bin 2      Bin 3


                                                                   Regular Languages
                                                                         In AC0             Not In AC0
            (aa)*                     (aaaa)*                      (abab)*                    Tomita-3                    Tomita-5                Tomita-6
 100                         100                          100                         100                        100                      100

   0                           0                            0                           0                          0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3            Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3          Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
            D-2                            D-3                          D-4                      D-12                     Tomita 1                Tomita-2
 100                         100                          100                         100                        100                      100

   0                           0                            0                           0                          0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3            Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3          Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
       Tomita-4                       Tomita-7              aa*bb*cc*dd*ee*                 {a,b}*d{b,c}*                {0,1,2}*02*
 100                         100                          100                         100                        100

   0                           0                            0                           0                          0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3            Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3           Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3          Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3

Figure 3: Membership in the circuit complexity class AC0 does not predict transformers’ length
generalization on algorithmic problems (top) or regular languages (bottom). Prior work has often
linked the expressiveness of transformers to circuit complexity (e.g. Hahn, 2020; Hao et al., 2022;
Merrill & Sabharwal, 2023c; Strobl, 2023; Barcelo et al., 2024). All tasks included in our exper-
iments are in the class TC0 , the tightest known upper bound on transformers’ expressiveness. A
well-known circuit complexity class within TC0 is AC0 , known to upper-bound the power of cer-
tain hard-attention models of transformers (Hao et al., 2022; Barcelo et al., 2024), which may raise
hopes that it helps understand transformers’ practical abilities. However, membership in this class
does not predict transformers’ length generalization behavior. On the algorithmic problems, there
is no apparent correlation at all; majority-type problems, which the attention mechanism can easily
implement, are not in AC0 , but problems with super-logarithmic communication complexity such
as copying and addition (Corollary 13) are contained. On the regular languages, AC0 exactly covers
the class FO[reg]. This class can be proven to include all regular languages in C-RASP, but it also
includes various languages that transformers length-generalize poorly on, such as Tomita-3. A nat-
ural subclass, obtained by restricting the size of AC0 circuits to a linear number of wires, yields the
class FO2 [Reg] (Cadilhac & Paperman, 2022), which does not match transformers’ behavior well
either, e.g. it includes {0, 1, 2}∗ 02∗ (bottom right, equals Σ∗ be∗ from Lemma 11) but does not in-
clude D-12. Taken together, established circuit complexity classes do not account for Transformers’
length generalization behavior. Compare to C-RASP results in Figures 1 and 2.


                                                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    (A) Star-Free vs Non-Star-Free Languages
                  Star Free + APE            Non Star Free + APE          Star Free + NoPE            Non Star Free + NoPE
         (aa)*                (aaaa)*                (abab)*                Tomita-3                 Tomita-5                  Tomita-6
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
         D-2                     D-3                   D-4                    D-12                   Tomita 1                  Tomita-2
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
       Tomita-4              Tomita-7            aa*bb*cc*dd*ee*          {a,b}*d{b,c}*            {0,1,2}*02*
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3



                                                         (B) Dot-Depth
                   Dot Depth=1          Dot Depth=2            Dot Depth=3             Dot Depth=4              Dot Depth=12
         (aa)*                (aaaa)*                (abab)*                Tomita-3                 Tomita-5                  Tomita-6
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
         D-2                     D-3                   D-4                    D-12                   Tomita 1                  Tomita-2
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0                        0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3        Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3
       Tomita-4              Tomita-7            aa*bb*cc*dd*ee*          {a,b}*d{b,c}*            {0,1,2}*02*
 100                   100                    100                   100                      100

   0                     0                      0                       0                      0
   Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3     Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3       Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3      Bin 1 Bin 2 Bin 3

Figure 4: (1) Comparing length-generalization with a standard notion of the complexity of finite-
state languages: Star-free languages (green) do not require modular counting (McNaughton & Pa-
pert, 1971), have simpler algebraic representations in terms of group-free monoids (Schützenberger,
1965), are easily represented by modern state-space models (Sarrof et al., 2024), and match the ex-
pressiveness of a formal model of hard attention Transformers (Yang et al., 2023). However, they
do not consistently lead to length generalization in transformers, which on the other hand length-
generalize on some non-star-free languages such as (aa)∗ . The expressiveness of C-RASP correctly
accounts for the observed behavior. (2) Within the star-free languages, a standard complexity metric
is dot-depth, with increased dot-depth indicating increased complexity (non-star-free languages are
plotted in gray color). Dot-depth does not predict length generalization, which succeeds on some
languages at dot depths 1 and 12 and fails at some languages at intermediate depth. See Figure 3 for
further discussion regarding another existing notion of complexity, circuit complexity, also much
less successful than C-RASP expressiveness at predicting length generalization. Compare to C-
RASP results in Figures 1 and 2.


                                                                   51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given a transformer T with N (T ) < ∞, define:
                                    !T                                      !
                              Y                                  Y
                            T            T
       αl,h,S1 ,S2 ,v,w :=v       S    Kl,h Ql,h                        S       w∈R
                                S∈S1                             S∈S2
                       for 1 ≤ l ≤ L; 1 ≤ h ≤ H; v ∈ VO; w ∈ VO; S1 , S2 ∈ P
                                  !
                             Y
                         T
              βS,v,w :=v         S w∈R
                                S∈S
                          for v ∈ VI l1 ;       w ∈ VOl2 ; S ∈ P

where the matrix product over a set S ∈ P
                                                      Y
                                                             S                                     (8)
                                                      S∈S
is computed in descending order of layers; with the S associated with the lowest layer at the right.
For instance,                        Y
                                                 S = V4,h′′ V3,h′ V1,h                           (9)
                               S∈{V1,h ,V3,h′ ,V4,h′′ }

Remark 44. Here, we exemplify the Product Parameterization (Definition 43).
                                       α1,h,∅,∅,pi ,Eσ =pTi K1,h
                                                             T
                                                                 Q1,h Eσ
                             α2,h,{V1,h′ },∅,pi ,pj =pTi V1,h
                                                           T    T
                                                             ′ K2,h Q2,h pj


               α3,h,{V2,h′ V1,h′′ },{V1,h′′′ },Eσ ,Eτ =EσT V1,h
                                                             T       T    T
                                                                ′′ V2,h′ K2,h Q2,h V1,h′′′ Eτ


                                        β∅,(A1 )s,· ,pi =(A1 )Ts,· pi
                              β{V1,h },(A3 )s,· ,Eσ =(A3 )Ts,· V1,h Eσ
                             β{V3,h′ ,V1,h },Uτ ,Eσ =UτT V3,h′ V1,h Eσ
                         β{V3,h′ ,V2,h },Uτ ,(B1 )·,s =UτT V3,h′ V2,h (B1 )·,s


Remark 45. For ease of notation, we have not restricted the layers from which different vector
parameters are taken in the definition of α and β; hence, they will also include products that are not
relevant to actual computations, such as
                                        pi T V2,h
                                               T   T
                                                  K1,h′ Q1,h′′ V3,h′′′ pj                        (10)
where a vector of the form V      pj cannot actually feed into the computation of queries in the first
                              3,h′′′
layer. This is simply for simplicity of notation; such products will not impact results, though one
could explicitly exclude them if one wants to obtain tighter quantitative bounds on the parameter
count of Limit Transformers in Lemma 52.

F.2   F ORMAL D EFINITION OF H YPOTHESIS C LASS

Definition 46 (Hypothesis Class, corresponds to Definition 4). Let p ∈ N be fixed. For each n =
1, 2, 3, . . . , define the hypothesis class Θn as the set of transformers T (as defined in Section 2)
where
      1. N (Tn ) = n
      2. each parameter vector and matrix of T is represented at p bits of precision
      3. each product function (Definition 43) involving positional encodings is translation-
         invariant. That is, every product function involving exactly one positional encoding is
         constant across positions, and for every 1 ≤ i, j, i + ∆, j + ∆ ≤ n,
                                        αl,h,S1 ,S2 ,pi ,pj = αl,h,S1 ,S2 ,pi+∆ ,pj+∆
         for all l, h, S1 , S2 making these objects well-defined.


                                                        52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.3   F ROM L IMIT T RANSFORMERS TO T RANSFORMERS

We give a translation from Limit Transformers to standard transformers for every finite context
window N . The translation is uniform in the sense that R(TN ) from (8) is bounded across all
TN , though the width may need to increase. More intuition is provided further in the proof of the
translation.
Lemma 47. Let T∞ be a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL. Then there are
transformers T1 , T2 , . . . (Ti ∈ Θi ) such that, for all i ∈ N, x ∈ S, o ∈ {0, . . . , i − |x|}:
                             Ti (x, o) ≡ T∞ (x, 0) when o + |x| ≤ i                               (11)
and
                                           sup R(Ti ) < ∞                                         (12)
                                            i


Proof. We use hats to indicate the parameters of the constructed transformers. Fix N ∈ N; we
construct TN .
Let ∆ be the periodicity of pi . The construction sets L̂ = L + 2 and Ĥ = max{1, H, ∆}. Each
activation has dˆ := d + N + 3∆ + 2 dimensions, which can be partitioned into six regions:
                                                                         
                               d dimensions (Region I: main region)
                           N dimensions (Region II: position region)     
                           ∆ dimensions (Region III: periodic region I)
                                                                         
                                                                                           (13)
                                                                         
                       ∆ dimensions (Region IV: periodic Region II) 
                                                                         
                              1 dimension (Region V: SOS Region)         
                        ∆ + 1 dimensions (Region VI: Copied SOS Region)
Region I directly emulates the computations of the Limit Transformer. Region II carries absolute
positional information, used for simulating the positional functions ϕl,h .
We define the token and positional encodings as
                             0 ∈ Rd                                   E σ ∈ Rd
                                                                            
                        e i ∈ RN                                   0 ∈ RN 
                       e(i%∆)+1 ∈ R∆                               0 ∈ R∆ 
                                                                            
                 p̂i =                                       Êσ = 
                            0 ∈ R∆                                   0 ∈ R∆ 
                                                                              
                                       
                              0∈R                                     σ=$ ∈ R
                                                                  1         
                                 ∆+1                                       ∆+1
                           0∈R                                       0∈R
where ei is the i-th unit vector. Region I holds token information. Region II holds exact position
information. Region III holds modular position information. Region V indicates whether the to-
ken is start-of-sequence (SOS) or not. Content will be written to Regions IV and VI by attention
components.

Intuition At first sight, a simple intuitive translation just uses Regions I and II, placing all param-
eters of T∞ into Region I, and taking one-hot vectors ei for Region II to encode exact positional
information, so that the functions ϕl,h can be implemented by products p̂i K̂T Q̂p̂j . One would thus
use the simpler encoding Ẽσ := [Eσ , 0] and p̃i := [pi , ei ]. Such a translation would be able to
reproduce the input-output behavior of T∞ . However, it would fall short in two ways: First, the
positional encodings pi can give rise to patterns whereby pTi K T Qpj is periodic in j − i when j − i
is large, and thus bounded away from zero at unboundedly many distances j − i, making (8) un-
bounded. We will avoid this by routing modular positional information through a value matrix V1,1
before making it available to attention computations; intuitively, this is possible because the vectors
pi have a bounded-dimensional span. Modular positional information starts out in Region III of
p̂i , and is copied by V1,1 into Region IV; no K T Q matrix in the construction will directly address
Region III. Second, transformers in ΘN must satisfy the requirement that all product functions are
translation-invariant; such a requirement need not be implemented by T∞ (e.g., MLPs could respond
differently to different pi ’s), and thus also not by the simple translation sketched. We overcome this
by adding ∆ different attention heads, each assigned to some k ∈ {0, . . . , ∆ − 1}, each of which
primarily attends to the SOS symbol (based on Region V), with a stronger weight in the k-th head


                                                  53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


falling on SOS if the distance between the query position and the SOS position is congruent to k
modulo ∆ (based on Region IV). These attention weights are written, via the value matrix, to Region
VI. An MLP then compares each of these attention weights to the weights resulting from uniform
attention, thereby determining the head giving rise to the highest attention weight, and places the
matching encoding pi into Region I. This construction maintains translation-invariance of all prod-
uct functions; most importantly, it makes all β functions involving positional encodings equal to
zero: The MLP reads from Region VI, whose entries are linear combinations of entries from Region
V, which is zero in all p̂i . Crucially, the dependence of the positional encoding pi written to Region
I on the original positional information in p̂i is mediated entirely through attention weights, which
do not enter the definition of the product functions. Once these computations are completed, Region
I matches the activations in T∞ at offset 0, and a direct simulation of T∞ can proceed based on
Regions I and II. Taken together, we expand the intuitive simple construction to make rigorous the
intuition that bounded-rank positional information can be utilized by transformers even under the
constraints that (8) be bounded and that product functions be translation-invariant.


Layer 1: Copying Periodic Positional Information to Region IV In the lowest layer, each po-
sition attends to itself and moves the periodic positional information from Region III to Region IV.
Formally:
                                                                       
                                        0          0     0        0 0 0
                                       0     Ω · IN ×N 0         0 0 0
                                       0          0     0        0 0 0
                                                                       
                         K1,1 = Q1,1 = 
                                       0          0     0        0 0 0
                                       0          0     0        0 0 0
                                        0          0     0        0 0 0
                                                                       
                                              0 0      0          0 0 0
                                             0 0      0          0 0 0
                                             0 0      0          0 0 0
                                                                       
                                      V1,1 = 
                                             0 0 I∆×∆            0 0 0
                                             0 0      0          0 0 0
                                              0 0      0          0 0 0

for some Ω > 0 to be chosen later. After attention (the MLP does nothing, A1 , B1 , b1 ≡ 0), the
output will be
                                                          
                                                  Eσ
                                                  ei      
                                          e(i%∆)+1
                                                          
                                   (1)
                                 ŷi =                                                     (14)
                                                           
                                         (1 − ϵ)e(i%∆)+1 
                                                           
                                                1xi =$    
                                                   0

where ϵ < 0.1 when Ω is sufficiently large. Region III will not be addressed by any further down-
stream matrices or vectors. The idea behind this operation is to ensure no K̂ T Q̂ matrix will directly
have to read from Region III – rather, any dependence of attention logits on modular positional in-
formation is mediated by the V1,1 matrix. This allows us to keep (8) bounded even in the presence of
such dependence, as we detail below. Note that this strategy importantly relies on ∆ ≤ R∞ (T∞ ), so
that rank(V1,1 ) is bounded independently of N. Intuitively, modular positional information (unlike
the full positional information encoded in Region II) can be routed through bounded-rank compo-
nents, which enables keeping (8) bounded.


Layer 2: Determining Position Relative to SOS We now add a second layer, in which we attend
with ∆ + 1 different heads, where the s-th head tests whether the distance to SOS is congruent to
s modulo ∆, and the ∆ + 1-st head attends uniformly. By determining which head attends most
strongly to SOS, we can read out the relative position with an MLP without breaking the translation
invariance of product functions.


                                                  54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For h = 1, . . . , ∆, let Q2,h be such that
                                                       
                                            ...       0
                                           . . .  0 
                                           . . .  0 
                                                       
                                      Q2,h   =                                                  (15)
                                            ei  ei+h%∆ 
                                                          
                                           . . .  0 
                                            ...       0
Let K2,h (h = 1, . . . , ∆) be the identity matrix restricted to Regions IV and V. Further, let
                                          Q2,∆+1 = K2,∆+1 ≡ 0                                      (16)
Then, for h = 1, . . . , ∆,
                                   (1)  T           (1)
                                  ŷi K̂2,h Q̂2,h ŷj     = 1i−j≡h (mod) ∆                         (17)
and
                                         (1)   T                (1)
                                       ŷi K2,∆+1     Q2,∆+1 ŷj = 0                             (18)
Intuitively, heads 1, . . . , ∆ attend preferentially to positions at a given distance modulo ∆; head
∆ + 1 attends everywhere. Define V2,h for h = 1, . . . , ∆ + 1 by
                                                               
                                                 ...           0
                                               . . .   0 
                                               . . .   0 
                                                               
                                          V2,h   =                                            (19)
                                               . . .   0 
                                                                  
                                               z  0 
                                                 ...       z · eh
As the only vector parameter with an entry in Region V is the token embedding for the SOS token,
the outcome of this attention block effectively writes the attention falling on the SOS token for
each of the ∆ + 1 attention heads. We then use a Heaviside MLP with number of hidden units
bounded in ∆ to determine for which s = 1, . . . ∆ it holds that entry s in Region VI has a greater (as
opposed to smaller) entry than entry ∆ + 1. The MLP, via the B matrix, then writes ps to Region
I. A special case occurs at SOS, where Region V is 1 (it is 0 everywhere else); here, the ∆ MLP
units described above are disabled (a 1 in Region V causes a large negative number to be added to
their inputs) and the MLP instead writes p1 to Region I. Overall, ∆ + 1 MLP units with Heaviside
activation are sufficient for this construction. Overall, after the MLP, the i-th position in the string
has p((i−1)%∆)+1 added to Region I. Overall,
                                                          (0) 
                                          Exi + pi−o+1            yi
                                               ei+o      ei+o 
                                                 ...
                                                                    
                                   (2)                     ... 
                                 ŷi =                      =                                     (20)
                                        
                                                ...       ... 
                                                                      
                                                ...       ... 
                                                 ...               ...
where o is the offset, and the second equality holds if the Limit Transformer is run at o = 0. In
layers 2, . . . , L̂, only Regions I and II will receive any consideration.

                                                                T                ˆ ˆ
Higher Layers: Emulating T∞           Next, for l ≥ 1, define K̂l+2,h Q̂l+2,h ∈ Rd×d as
                                            T                                 
                                              Kl,h Ql,h     0     0 0 0 0
                                                 0        Wl,h 0 0 0 0
                                                  0         0     0 0 0 0
                                                                              
                           T
                         K̂l+2,h Q̂l+2,h =                                                        (21)
                                           
                                                  0         0     0 0 0 0
                                                                               
                                           
                                                 0         0     0 0 0 0
                                                  0         0     0 0 0 0
where i ≤ j:
                                           (Wl,h )i,j = ϕl,h (i, j)                                (22)
to satisfy
                                          pTi Wl,h pj = ϕl,h (i, j)                                (23)


                                                        55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then W is a sum of matrices each of which has the value ϕl,h (i−j, j) for some i on an (off-)diagonal
and zeros elsewhere; hence                      X
                                    ∥Wl,h ∥2 ≤      |ϕl,h (1, i)|                                (24)
                                                     i
            T                                                                  T
Overall, ∥K̂l+1,h Q̂l+1,h ∥ can be bounded, independently of N , in terms of ∥Kl,h Ql,h ∥ and ∥ϕl,h ∥1 .
As ϕl,h is local, this 1-norm is finite.
We construct all other parameter matrices and vectors by placing the parameter from the Limit
Transformer into the Region I and leaving all other regions zero. Now, by induction, the first d
dimensions of any activation will match those of the Limit Transformer, but shifted by two layers:
                                                   (l) 
                                                    yi
                                                  ei+o 
                                                       
                                                =  ... 
                                          (l+2)
                                        ŷi                                                    (25)
                                                       
                                                   ... 
                                                   ... 
                                                         ...
As the U matrix only reads from Region I, the output will also be the same as for the Limit Trans-
former.
For the excess heads, the matrices are just set to 0 – in the first or the higher layers – depending on
whether H or ∆ is larger than the other.

Bounding Norms and Ranks At l ≥ 2, now the ranks of Vl,h and the norms of Al , Bl , U and the
ℓ2 norms of e, b, c will be the same they were in the Limit Transformer. The increases from the first
and second layer are bounded in terms of ∆ and hence R∞ (T∞ )

Verifying Boundedness of (8) By construction, p̂Ti K̂1,h
                                                       T
                                                          Q̂1,h p̂j = δij δh1 and p̂Ti K̂2,h
                                                                                         T
                                                                                             Q̂2,h p̂j ≡
0. For the higher layers, the boundedness follows because T∞ satisfies L OCAL.

Verifying Translation Invariance We need to verify that all product functions are translation-
invariant. Each p̂i contains entries in Regions II and III. In the first layer, we have α1,1,∅,∅,pi ,pj =
δij , hence, these are translation-invariant. In the second layer, we have
                                                   T                         
                                               0                          0
                                          ei                          ei     
                                         e(i%∆)+1                  e
                                                                             
                                                           T
                       α2,s,∅,∅,pi ,pj =               K2,s Q2,s  (j%∆)+1  = 0                     (26)
                                                                               
                                              0    
                                                                        0     
                                              0                        0     
                                               0                          0
                  α2,s,{V1 },∅,pi ,pj =0                                                             (27)
                                                  T                                  
                                             0                                0
                                         ei                               ei    
                                        e(i%∆)+1                        e
                                                                                
                                                       T   T
              α2,s,{V1 },{V1 },pi ,pj =             V1,1 K2,s Q2,s V1,1  (j%∆)+1                  (28)
                                                                                  
                                            0    
                                                                            0    
                                            0                              0    
                                             0                                0
                                                 T                      
                                             0                        0
                                            0                      0    
                                             0                        0
                                                                        
                                                       T
                                      =             K2,s Q2,s                                      (29)
                                                                        
                                        e(i%∆)+1             e(j%∆)+1 
                                                                          
                                            0                      0    
                                             0                        0
                                    =1j−i≡s(mod ∆)                                                   (30)
                                                                                                     (31)


                                                   56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These are all translation-invariant. All α2+l,h,∅,∅,pi ,pj equal a function ϕl,h (i, j) and hence are
translation invariant. No V matrix ever reads from Region II. Overall, all α products are translation-
invariant. In higher layers, K T Q matrices read from Regions I and II. The positional encodings p̂i
write to Region II but not – not even when mediated directly through value matrices – Region I, and
the products are translation-invariant because the functions ϕl,h are.
Consider
                                                  β∅,(A1 )s,· ,pi = 0


because the first layer MLP does nothing. Second,
                                                  β∅,(A2 )s,· ,pi = 0


because the second layer MLP only reads from Region VI, and none of pi , V1 pi contain any entries
in Region VI. Also,
                                                      βS,Uσ ,pi = 0
                                                    β{V1 },Uσ ,pi = 0
                                                 β{V2 V1 },Uσ ,pi = 0
                                                    β{V2 },Uσ ,pi = 0


since none of pi , V1 pi , V2 V1 pi , V2 pi contain any entries in Region I, where Uσ has its entries.
Since V2,s all read only from Region V, whose entries have no connection to p̂i , we also have:
                                                β{V2 ,... },(Al )s,· ,pi = 0
                                                    β{V2 ,... },Uσ ,pi = 0
                                             β{V2 ,V1 ,... },(Al )s,· ,pi = 0
                                                 β{V2 ,V1 ,... },Uσ ,pi = 0


Overall, all β products involving pi are translation-invariant.



F.4      F ROM T RANSFORMERS TO L IMIT T RANSFORMERS

We first establish various smaller lemmas. The first lemma informally says that, when f (i, j) :=
pTi Apj is translation-invariant in (i, j), and A has bounded rank, then f (i, j) is periodic. This
lemma is key to the prominent role of the P ERIODIC property in Theorem 7.
Lemma 48. Let p ∈ N, and let N ∈ N. Let p1 , . . . , pN ∈ Rk such that ∥pi ∥2 < C; let A ∈ Rk×k .
Let f (i, j) := pTi Apj be translation invariant, in the sense that
                    ∀0 ≤ i ≤ j : ∀M ≥ 0 : j + M ≤ N ⇒ f (i, j) = f (i + M, j + M )                              (32)
                                                                                            11
Further assume that, for i ≤ j, f (i, j) can be expressed with p fractional bits.                Define for n ≥ 0
                                               G(n) := f (1, 1 + n)                                             (33)
Then there is ∆ ∈ N upper-bounded in terms of rank(A), p, C, and ∥A∥ (but not N ) such that
                                    ∀n : n + ∆ < N ⇒ G(n) = G(n + ∆)                                            (34)

Proof. Let ρ := rank(A); it is > 0 without loss of generality. We write the singular value decom-
position of A as
                                         A = U T ΣV                                           (35)
  11
       In particular, this is satisfied if pi , A are each expressed at some fixed precision q, where p ≥ 3q.


                                                           57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Σ ∈ Rρ×ρ , U , V ∈ Rρ×d , where ∥U ∥, ∥V ∥ ≤ 1. Then we can write
                                                T
                                          U pi                  T                    U pj
         pTi Apj = pTi U T ΣV pj =                (Iρ×ρ 0ρ×ρ ) Σ (0ρ×ρ Iρ×ρ )                    (36)
                                          V pi                                      V pj

                                                   T                      ρ×ρ               U pi
We will henceforth replace A by (Iρ×ρ 0ρ×ρ ) Σ (0ρ×ρ Iρ×ρ ) ∈ R                and pi by           ∈
                                                                                            V pi
R2 rank(A) ; note that this increases the norms of these objects at most by a multiplicative constant
while preserving the products pTi Apj .
As ∥pi ∥2 < C for all i, we find that, when N is sufficiently large, for each ϵ > 0, there are pi , pj
(i < j) such that:
                                          ∥pi − pj ∥2 ≤ ϵ                                       (37)
Take ∆ := j − i. The minimum required distance ∆ can be upper bounded by considering the
ϵ-packing number of {v : ∥v∥ ≤ C} and applying the pigeonhole principle. Hence, overall, ∆ can
be upper-bounded in terms of ϵ, rank(A), and C. Importantly, this bound is independent of N .
Hence, ∀k ∈ {i + ∆, . . . , N }:
                                        = |G(k − i) − G(k − i − ∆)|
                                        = |f (i, k) − f (i + ∆, k)|
                                        = |f (i, k) − f (i + (j − i), k)|
                                        = |pTi Apk − pTj Apk |
                                        ≤ ∥pi − pj ∥2 ∥Apk ∥2
                                        ≤ ϵ · ∥Apk ∥2


Equivalently, using the substitution l := k − i − ∆, we have, for any l ∈ {l, . . . , N − ∆}:
                                      |G(l + ∆) − G(l)| ≤ ϵ · ∥Apk ∥2                             (38)
                −p
          2
Take ϵ = 4C∥A∥ ; then
                                        G(l) = G(l + ∆)                                           (39)
due to the assumption about fixed-precision outputs.


Lemma 49. Assume each parameter in a transformer is represented at p bits of precision. Then
each product function is exactly represented at (4 + 2L)p bits of precision.

Proof. Each product function consists at most of two vectors, a key and query matrix, and up to 2L
value matrices. This results in a sum of numbers that each are a product of up to 4+2L numbers that
each are individual parameters. As each number is represented at p bits of precision, each product
is represented at (4 + 2L)p bits of precision.

It will be useful to define a complexity metric applicable to Limit Transformers:
Definition 50. For a Limit Transformer T , define R∞ (T ) as the sum of

         1. L + H + d
         2. the precision p used for expressing the parameters (Definition 2), and the precision p used
            for rounding attention logits and the output of exp(·) (Section 2).
         3. the maximum ℓ∞ norm of all parameter vectors and matrices (including positional encod-
            ings)
         4. the minimal periodicity ∆ of the positional encodings12
                   P∞
         5. maxl,h i=1 |ϕl,h (1, 1 + i)|2 (short: maxl,h ∥ϕl,h ∥22 ).
  12
       Formally, 1 plus the supremum of the set of ∆’s for which pi ̸≡ pi+∆ .


                                                       58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 51. Let A ∈ R+ . Let U be the set of Limit Transformers T such that R∞ (T ) ≤ A.
Then the set of parameter settings in U , other than the ϕl,h functions, is finite.

Proof. Immediate.

We now state the key lemma translating ordinary transformers to Limit Transformers using the
product parameterization:
Lemma 52. Let T ∈ Θn , at p bits of precision. Let the alphabet Σ be fixed.13 Then there is a Limit
Transformer T∞ such that T ≡ T∞ at length ≤ n and
                                            R∞ (T∞ ) ≤ F (R(T ))                                          (40)
for some universal function F : R+ → R+ and

                                         pTi Kl,h
                                              T
                                                  Ql,h pj = ϕl,h (i, j)                                   (41)
for the pi , Kl,h , Ql,h parameters of T ; for each l, h. In particular, T∞ satisfies P ERIODIC and each
ϕl,h is translation-invariant.

We prove the lemma in the remainder of the section.

F.4.1      P ROVING L EMMA 52 (I): P RELIMINARIES
We discuss various preliminaries, before presenting the construction, explaining its intuition, and
explaining how its soundness is formally proven.

Basic Idea We will construct T∞ so that the entries in every parameter are 0, 1, or one of the prod-
uct functions from Definition 43. This will automatically ensure that its parameters are represented
at fixed precision p bounded in terms of R(T ), and with each entry bounded in terms of the spectral
norms of parameter matrices and the ℓ2 norms of parameter vectors, hence, also bounded in terms of
R(T ). Importantly, we will use the definition of R(T ) and the definition of Θn to restrict attention
to a number of product functions that are bounded only in terms of R(T ), independently of n.

Bounding Active MLP Units First, given ∥Al ∥F < ∞, the number of nonzero entries is bounded
     ∥Al ∥2F
as ≤ 2−2p    , which is bounded in terms of R(T ). Similarly, the number of nonzero entries in bl is
                   ∥b∥2
bounded as ≤ 2−2p2 , and similarly for Bl . Let dM LP ≤ d be, across l = 1, . . . , L the maximum
of the maximum number of nonzero entries in bl , and of the maximum number of nonzero rows in
Al . Without loss of generality, by reordering rows in Al and columns in Bl , we may assume that,
in each layer, these entries are in the first dM LP dimensions. Then dM LP is upper-bounded in terms
of these (or d, if the bounds exceed d); this is bounded in terms of R(T ) and independent of n. In
each layer, only ≤ dM LP of the MLP units have nonzero input weights Al , output weights Bl , or
biases bl . Removing product functions belonging to the inactive units, we set:

                              VI
                              dl :=VI l − {(Al )s,· : s = dM LP + 1, . . . , d}
                                       L
                                       [
                               VI
                               c :=         VI
                                            dl
                                      l=1

Then, the size of VI
                  c is bounded in terms of R(T ).

Periodicity of Bounded-Rank Positional Functions By Lemma 48 all products pTi . . . pj where
the intervening material has bounded rank are periodic in j − i with period bounded in terms of the
rank of the intervening material, and hence R(T ). Let ∆ be the least common multiple of the periods
obtained from Lemma 48 across the (finitely many) different products of the form βl,h,S1 ,S2 ,pi ,pj
  13
       The bound on R∞ (T∞ ) depends on it, but during the inference procedure, the alphabet is assumed fixed.


                                                       59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where S1 ∪ S2 ̸= ∅. Define
                     VO
                      d0 ={pi : i = 1, . . . , ∆} ∪ {Eσ : σ}
                         VO
                         dl ={(Bl )·,s : s = 1, . . . , dM LP },     l = 1, . . . , L
                                          T
                                          [
                          VO
                          d =VO
                             d0 ∪               VO
                                                dl
                                          l=1



Then, the size of VO
                  d is bounded in terms of R(T ).

F.4.2   P ROVING L EMMA 52 (II): C ONSTRUCTION OF T∞
Translation in Terms of Regions We use hats (i.e., b·) to mark the parameters and activations
of the Limit Transformer, distinguishing those from the parameters and activations of the original
transformer T .
Each d-dimensional parameter vector and activation (residual streams and attention outputs) is trans-
lated to a vector consisting of three regions, each having a fixed number of dimensions bounded in
                                                                                         (l)
terms of R(T ), That is, each vector parameter or activation v (e.g., pi , Eσ , yi ) is translated to a
                                                   (l)
parameter or activation v    b (e.g., pbi , E
                                            cσ , y
                                                   i ) vector consisting of the following three regions:
                                                 d
                                                                                                        
                                              ΓS,w (b  v ) : S ∈ P; w ∈ VI
                                                                        [  l2
   v
   b = ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (v) : 1 ≤ l ≤ L; 1 ≤ h ≤ H; S1 ⊆ T1 ; T1 , T2 ∈ P, w1 , w2 ∈ VO
                                                                                                     d 
           ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (v) : 1 ≤ l ≤ L; 1 ≤ h ≤ H; S2 ⊆ T2 ; T1 , T2 ∈ P, w1 , w2 ∈ VO    d
                                                                                                         (42)

Intuition of the Construction The first region, denoted ΓS,w (b     v ), has one entry for every choice
of S ∈ P; w ∈ VI [  l2 . Intuitively, the entry ΓS,w (b
                                                      v ) describes the  outcome of applying all value
matrices in S and then finally the vector wT :
                                                            !
                                                      Y
                                                  T
                                   ΓS,w (bv) = w           S v∈R                                   (43)
                                                          S∈S
                                         Q
(Recall Definition 43 for the notation S∈S S.) The second and third regions each have one entry
for every choice of 1 ≤ l ≤ L, S2 ⊆ T2 ; T1 , T2 ∈ P, w1 , w2 ∈ VO.     d These regions contain the
information necessary for computing attention logits. Intuitively, T1 , T2 describe the value matrices
through which w1 and w2 , respectively, pass before the computation of attention logits in layer
l. For parameter vectors w1 , w2 (e.g., token embeddings or columns of a Bl matrix – positional
encodings are somewhat special), we simply expect (note the duplicated arguments T1 , T2 – these
will be explained in the next paragraph):
                                                                        !T                   !
                                                                    Y                  Y
   ΛT1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (w1 )ΩT2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (w2 ) = w1T   S      T
                                                                           Kl,h Ql,h        S w2
                                                                  S∈T1                     S∈T2
                                                                                                    (44)
Thus, Λ can be viewed as holding key parameters, whereas Ω can be viewed as holding query param-
eters, for the contribution that the pair of w1 , w2 makes to attention logits in layer l, after passing
through the value matrices in T1 , T2 , respectively. As a convention, at the level of parameter vectors,
the Λ component will hold the attention logit contribution (the RHS of this equation), whereas the
                                                                                             (l)     (l)
Ω component will just hold zeros and ones. At the level of intermediate activations v (yi or Yi ),
the situation is slightly more complex: here,
                                                                  (l)
                                        ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,w1 ,w2 (yi )                               (45)
                                                                 d

denotes the contribution to attention logits for head h at layer k arising from multiples of
  Q                                 \
                                    (k−1)                                   Q
    S∈T1 S w  c1 in an activation yi        interacting with multiples of      S∈T2 S w  c2 in an activa-
      \(k−1)
tion yj      ; a similar idea applies to Ω... . However, additional care is needed to ensure that only


                                                     60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


contributions from value matrices are counted that were actually passed through. The additional
argument S1 serves as a “to-do-list”: it records which of the value matrices in T1 still have to be
traversed; whenever an activation passes through a value matrix Vl,h′ , the value matrix Vd         l,h′ of
the Limit Transformer moves entries from ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,w1 ,w2 to ΛS1 −{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,k,h,w1 ,w2 – ef-
fectively removing itself from the “to-do-list”. The same princple applies to Ω, which maintains a
to-do-list S2 for T2 . In the end, only those components where the to-do-lists are empty (formally,
S1 = S2 = ∅) will enter attention logit computations of the Limit Transformer:

                                                   (l)                        (l)     (l)             (l)
                    X
 ϕk,h (i, j) +                Λ∅,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yi ) · Ω∅,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w (yj ) = (yi )T Kk,h
                                                                                            T
                                                                                                Qk,h yj (46)
                                                  d                          d
                 v,w,T1 ,T2


where the sum runs over all v, w ∈ VO,
                                   d and T1 , T2 runs over all sets of value matrices from layers
≤ l.
In the remainder of the proof, we present a detailed formal construction implementing this intuition.
We first define, for each vector v ∈ {pi , Eσ , bl : i, l, σ} its translation v
                                                                              b; throughout, we will define
each of the three regions.


Vector Parameters bl ∈ VO             We take (bbl )s := (bl )s for s = 1, . . . , dM LP .

Vector Parameters Eσ ∈ VO The first region provides products with other vectors appearing at
higher layers (rows/columns of the Al matrices and the unembedding matrix). The second and third
regions provide products leading up to keys and values.
                                                    (
                                                        βS,w,Eσ   if S ∈ P, w ∈ VI
                                                                                c
                                  ΓS,w (E
                                        cσ ) :=
                                                        0         else

                                                  αl,h,T1 ,T2 ,w1 ,w2 if Eσ = w1 , S1 = T1
                 ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (E
                                          cσ ) :=
                                                   0                  else

                                          cσ ) := 1 if Eσ = w2 , S2 = T2
                 ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (E
                                                   0 else



Vector Parameters: pbi For v = pi , the construction is analogous, however, we zero out the
entries for Λ∅,∅,l,h,pi ,pj and Ω∅,∅,l,h,pi ,pj , as these will be taken care of by the ϕl,h functions. For-
mally:


                                   (
                                    βS,w,pi if S ∈ P, w ∈ VI   c
                  ΓS,w (pbi ) :=
                                    0            else
                                   
                                   αl,h,T1 ,T2 ,w1 ,w2 if pi%∆ = w1 ; (w2 ̸∈ {pj : j} ∨ T1 ∪ T2 ̸= ∅) ,
 ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (pbi ) :=                          S1 = T1
                                   
                                     0                  else
                                   
                                   1 if pi%∆ = w2 ; (w1 ̸∈ {pj : j} ∨ T1 ∪ T2 ̸= ∅) ,
 ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (pbi ) :=           S2 = T2
                                   
                                     0 else


We need to establish that T∞ satisfies P ERIODIC with the period ∆ given above. First, βS,v,pi is
independent of i by translation-invariance, thus trivially periodic in i. Second, the Λ and Ω entries
are periodic in i with period ∆ by construction.


                                                           61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matrix Parameters: V       d l,h Each entry in the Vl,h matrix is zero or one. We define it implicitly, in
                                                    d
terms of its action on the three different regions:
                                            (
                                                                (l)
                                              ΓS∪{Vl,h },w (yl ) Vl,h ̸∈ S
                                                             d
                                     (l)
                     ΓS,w (V   l,h (yl )) =
                              d     d
                                              0                        else
                                            (
                                                                                (l)
                                              ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (yl ) Vl,h ̸∈ S1 , Vl,h ∈ T1
                                                                               d
                                     (l)
    ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (V l,h (yl )) =
                              d     d
                                              0                                     else
                                            (
                                                                                (l)
                                              ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (yl ) Vl,h ̸∈ S2 , Vl,h ∈ T2
                                                                               d
                                     (l)
    ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (V l,h (yl )) =
                              d     d
                                              0                                     else



Matrix Parameters: A         cl Let s ∈ {1, . . . , dM LP }. For the s-th unit in the MLP at layer l, we
                        cl , B
first define the s-th row of A
                             cl by setting

                                            (l)                 (l)
                               (Al )s,· · Yi = Γ∅,(Al )s,· Yi         ∈R
                                 c        d                   d


and define the s-th column of B     cl as follows – writing X̂ ∈ R for the s-th hidden unit activation:
                       ΓS,w (B b s,· X̂) :=X̂ · βS,w,(B )
                                                       l ·,s

                              cl·,s X̂) :=X̂ · αl1 ,h,l2 ,T1 ,T2 ,(Bl )·,s ,w2 if w1 = (Bl )·,s , S1 = T1
     ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (B
                                                  0                            else

                              cl·,s X̂) :=X̂ · 1 if w2 = (Bl )·,s , S2 = T2
     ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,w1 ,w2 (B
                                                  0 else



This defines the A
                 cl and Bcl matrix parameters, and we can write, letting ψl,s denote the activation
function (ReLU or Heaviside) applying to the s-th hidden MLP unit:
                                  dX
                                   M LP
                     (l)     (l)                                    (l)
                    yi = Y i +          (Bl )·,s · ψl,s (Al )s,· (Yi ) + (bl )s                (47)
                    d      d             b               b        d       b
                                        s=1
or equivalently
                              (l)     (l)  cl · ϕl (A
                                                    cl · Yd(l)
                             yi = Yi + B                       + bbl )                                  (48)
                             d      d
                                                          i
matching the formulation of MLPs for our model of transformers (Equation 4).
Note that the hidden dimension of the MLP in the Limit Transformer is now dM LP , which will be
smaller than d.
             b We thus pad the remaining rows/columns of Acl , B
                                                               cl , and the remaining entries of bbl
with zeros.

A partial order on sets of value matrices For S, T ∈ P, we write T ≥l S to denote that
      1. T ⊇ S
      2. ∀l′ ∈ {1, . . . , L} : [(Vl′ ,h′ ∈ S) ⇒ l′ > l]
      3. ∀l′ ∈ {1, . . . , L} : [(Vl′ ,h′ ∈ T − S) ⇒ l ≥ l′ ]
Intuitively, “T ≥l S” says that “among the value matrices in T , the activation has already passed
through all value matrices at layer l and below”. For example:
                              {V1,h , V2,h′ , V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ } ≥2 {V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ }
                                   {V1,h , V2,h′ , V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ } ̸≥2 {V4,h′′′ }
                              {V1,h , V2,h′ , V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ } ̸≥1 {V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ }
                              {V1,h , V2,h′ , V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ } ̸≥3 {V3,h′′ , V5,′′′ }



                                                        62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Matrix Parameters: K\   T
                        l,h Ql,h We again define them implicitly in terms of regions; this can be
realized using matrices K
                        d  T ,Qd where all entries are 0 or 1. Importantly, we sum only those
                            l,h    l,h
entries where the “to-do-lists” S1 , S2 are empty, and the sets T1 , T2 only contain value matrices at
layers ≤ l:

      (l)             (l)                                               (l)                        (l)
                                    X
    (yi )T K\
            T
            l,h Ql,h yj =                          Λ∅,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w (yi ) · Ω∅,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w (yj )
     d               d                                                 d                          d
                                                                                                         (49)
                             v,w,T1 ≥l ∅,T2 ≥l ∅


Matrix Parameters: U        The U matrix is translated as follows:
                                               (L)
                                          b T yd             (L)
                                          U        = Γ∅,Uσ (yi )                                         (50)
                                                            d
                                           σ i


Positional Function Define for l = 1, . . . , L and h = 1, . . . , H, when 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ N (T ):

                                         ϕl,h (i, j) = pTi Kl,h
                                                            T
                                                                Ql,h pj                                  (51)

As T ∈ Θn , ϕl,h (i, j) only depends on j − i.


Bounding R∞ (T∞ ) First, we showed above that db is upper-bounded in R(T ). Second, all param-
eters are represented at precision bounded in terms of R(T ): those parameters that are taken from
product functions have precision ≤ 4Lp bits; those involving the SVDs of K T Q matrices also have
bounded precision. Third, the ℓ∞ norm of all parameter vectors is bounded in terms of R(T ) by
construction. Fourth, ∆ is bounded in terms of R(T ) as discussed above. The boundedness of the
fifth term is immediate.

Summary      We have constructed a Limit Transformer T∞ such that

                                           R∞ (T∞ ) ≤ F (R(T ))                                          (52)

for some universal function F : R+ → R+ and

                                         pTi Kl,h
                                              T
                                                  Ql,h pj = ϕl,h (i, j)                                  (53)

for the pi , Kl,h , Ql,h parameters of T ; for each l, h. By assumption on T , each ϕl,h is translation-
invariant. We have also constructed pbi with period ∆, so that T∞ satisfies P ERIODIC.

F.4.3   P ROVING L EMMA 52 (III): P ROVING C ORRECTNESS

In order to conclude Lemma 52, it remains to establish the correctness of the translation; that is,
T ≡ T∞ at length ≤ N (T ). To do this, it suffices to show that both transformers provide the same
next-token predictions for each i = 1, . . . , N (T ):

                                       (L)
                                  b T yd             (L)        (L)
                                  U        = Γ∅,Uσ (yi ) = UσT yi                                        (54)
                                                    d
                                   σ i


Informally, proving this requires showing that the attention logits and MLP activations in T∞ match
those in T ; the result then follows from the linearity of Γ∅,Uσ and the way Γ... is defined for the vec-
tor parameters and how value matrices V   d l,h move information. Formally, we prove the correctness
of the translation inductively, by showing the following
                                                    Q       equalities. Recall (from Definition 43) that,
when S ∈ P is a set of value matrices, we write S∈S S for the product of these matrices, ordered
by layers, with the matrix associated with the lowest layer at the right. Then
Lemma 53 (Preservation of Products by Translation). For layer l ∈ {0, 1, . . . , L}, for any
S, S1 , S2 ∈ P for any k > l, for any m ≥ l, and for any w ∈ VI,
                                                             c by induction over the lay-
ers l:


                                                       63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (A)    Preservation of Products with Vector Parameters
                                        !
                     (l)                    (l)
                                  Y
                              T
              ΓS,w (yi ) = w          S yi
                    d
                                            S∈S
              if ∀l′ ∈ {1, . . . , L} : [(Vl′ ,h′ ∈ S) ⇒ l′ > l]
       (B)    Preservation of Attention Logits (I)
                                                            (l)                          (l)
                      X
                                     ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yj )
                                                           d                            d
               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                            !T                            !
                   (l)                                                         (l)
                               Y                               Y
               = (yi )T                 S         T
                                                 Kk,h Qk,h            S       yj
                              S∈S1                             S∈S2
              if S1 ∪ S2 ̸= ∅
       (C)    Preservation of Attention Logits (II)
                                                               (l)                        (l)
                                 X
              ϕk,h (i, j) +               Λ∅,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yi ) · Ω∅,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yj )
                                                              d                          d
                              v,w,T1 ≥l ∅,T2 ≥l ∅
                                                                                                  (55)
                   (l)             (l)
               = (yi )T Kk,h
                         T
                             Qk,h yj
      (D)     Preservation of Attention Logits (III)
                                                                                            (l)
                     X
                                 ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w ((B m )·,s ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yj )
                                                        d                                  d
               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                            !T                            !
                                                                                   (l)
                                Y                               Y
               = (Bm )T·,s              S          T
                                                  Kk,h Qk,h           S       yj
                               S∈S1                            S∈S2
       (E)    Preservation of Attention Logits (IV)
                                                        (l)
                     X
                                 ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (yi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w ((B m )·,s )
                                                       d                             d
               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                            !T                            !
                   (l)
                               Y                               Y
               = (yi )T                 S         T
                                                 Kk,h Qk,h            S       (Bm )·,s
                              S∈S1                             S∈S2


                                                        (l) d(l)
and analogous statements with the post-MLP activations yi , yi replaced by the pre-MLP activa-
        (l)   (l)
tions Yi , Ybi .

From (A), we in particular obtain the correctness of the translation by noting that next-token predic-
tions are replicated:
                                        (L)
                                   b T yd             (L)        (L)
                                   U        = Γ∅,Uσ (yi ) = UσT yi                                (56)
                                                     d
                                    σ i



Proof of Lemma 53. The formal proof proceeds by induction over l. It is conceptually straight-
forward, consisting of expanding definitions and taking care of the special treatment of positional
encodings. We show it in considerable detail to build intuition. For the inductive base, at l = 0,
         (0)
where yi is a sum of a word embedding and a positional encoding, the claims are immediate from
the definitions. For expository purposes, and for building intuition for the more complex inductive
step, we show them in more detail. Starting from (for simplicity, we are taking the offset to be zero
here):
                                                    (0)
                                                   yi = E x i + p i
                                                                                                  (57)
                                                    (0)
                                                   yi = E xi + p
                                                   d    d       bi

                                                          64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we first, for (A), write
                                 ΓS,w (E
                                       dxi + p
                                             bi ) = ΓS,w (E
                                                          dxi ) + ΓS,w (p
                                                                        bi )
                                                  = βS,w,Exi + βS,w,pi%∆
                                                                !
                                                                   (0)
                                                          Y
                                                      T
                                                  =w          S yi
                                                                     S∈S



proving case (A) of the inductive base. Second, for (B) and (C), write using the linearity of Λ... , Ω... :
                   X
                                ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (E
                                                      d      bi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (E
                                                        xi + p
                                                                                          dxi + p
                                                                                                bi )
              v,w,T1 ≥0 S1 ,T2 ≥0 S2
                       X
          =                            ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (E xi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (Exi )
                                                             d                              d
              v,w,T1 ≥0 S1 ,T2 ≥0 S2
                           X
              +                            ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (E xi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (p
                                                                                                bi )
                                                                 d
                  v,w,T1 ≥0 S1 ,T2 ≥0 S2
                           X
              +                            ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (pbi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (E
                                                                                               d xi )
                  v,w,T1 ≥0 S1 ,T2 ≥0 S2
                           X
              +                            ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (pbi ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (pbi )
                  v,w,T1 ≥0 S1 ,T2 ≥0 S2

The only way of satisfying T ≥0 S is for T to equal S. After plugging in the definitions, the sums
collapse due to the indicator terms in the definition of the token and positional encodings, and we
obtain after simplifying:
                                   =αk,h,S1 ,S2 ,Exi ,Exj
                                        + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,Exi ,pj%∆
                                        + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,pi%∆ ,Exj
                                        + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,pi%∆ ,pj%∆ · 1S1 ∪S2 ̸=∅
By translation-invariance, the second and third term are independent of the positional encod-
ing arguments. By our choice of ∆ at the beginning of the proof, the fourth term equals
αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,pi ,pj · 1S1 ∪S2 ̸=∅ , as this is periodic in (i, j) with periodicity ∆. We can thus rewrite as
                                        =αk,h,S1 ,S2 ,Exi ,Exj
                                            + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,Exi ,pj
                                            + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,pi ,Exj
                                            + αS1 ,S1 ,S2 ,k,h,pi ,pj · 1S1 ∪S2 ̸=∅
Applying the definition of α... , the above equals
                (
                     (0)                   (0)
                  (yi )T Kk,hT
                                  Qk,h (yj ) − ϕk,h (i, j)            S1 ∪ S2 = ∅
             =       (0) T Q              T    T
                                                      Q          (0)
                  (yi )         S∈S1 S      Kk,h Qk,h    S∈S2 S (yj ) S1 ∪ S2 ̸= ∅

This establishes cases (B) and (C) of the inductive base. The proof of cases (D) and (E) in the
inductive base is analogous.
                                                                                 (l)
For the inductive step, the intuition is that each activation yi is a linear combination of vector
parameters, with different sets of value matrices acting on those:
                                                                   !
                                 (l)
                                        X X                  Y
                                yi =              λv,i,l,S      S v                           (58)
                                                v∈VO S∈P                   S∈S

where the coefficients are determined by attention weights and the activations of MLP hidden units.
Importantly, the attention weights and MLP activations turn out to be the same in the Limit Trans-
former as in the original transformer, provided we can prove that attention and MLPs are faithfully


                                                              65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


simulated (which indeed follows from cases A and C of the inductive claim). Hence, the same
decomposition is valid in the Limit Transformer:
                                                              !
                                (l)
                                       X X                Y
                               y =               λv,i,l,S   Sb v                        (59)
                               d
                                      i                         b
                                                v∈VO S∈P                     S∈S
with the same λv,i,l,S coefficients as in the original transformer. Then, case (A) of the inductive
claim follows intuitively by the calculation:
                                                                     !
                                  (l)
                                        X X                    Y
                            wT yi =               λv,i,l,S wT      S v
                                                v∈VO S∈P                          S∈S
                                                                                          !
                                                  X X                              Y
                                                                             T
                                            =                   λv,i,l,S w
                                                                         b              Sb vb
                                                v∈VO S∈P                          S∈S
                                                                                          !
                                                      X X                          Y
                                                  T
                                            =w
                                             b                         λv,i,l,S         Sb vb
                                                      v∈VO S∈P                    S∈S
                                                  (l)
                                             b T yi
                                            =w
                                                 d
                                                                                         Q
which is warranted provided that, when v ∈ VO and w ∈ VI, we have that w            bT     S∈S  Sb vb
          T
              Q
equals w         S∈S S v – this is ensured because of the way the vector parameters v b and the value
matrices Vd l,h are defined. The same idea establishes cases (D–E). A similar, though somewhat  more
complex (due to the bilinear nature of attention) calculation establishes cases (B–C). Formalizing
this reasoning essentially amounts to inductively proving cases (A–E); it will not be necessary to
keep track of an explicit decomposition using λ... coefficients; rather, one can mechanically verify
these conditions inductively by plugging in definitions and applying the inductive hypothesis.
Formally proving the inductive step consists in mechanically expanding definitions and applying
the inductive hypothesis. First, (C) applied to layer l − 1 entails that the attention logits for attention
heads operating in layer l match those of the original transformer. We start by establishing the
                                               (l)
inductive step for the pre-MLP activations Yi . Starting from:
                                                            H X
                                                              i
                                     (l)        (l−1)             (l,h)     (l−1)
                                                            X
                               Yi          =yi          +       ãi,j Vl,h yj
                                                            h=1 j=1
                                                                                                      (60)
                                                            H      i
                                 (l) \
                                     (l−1)
                                             X X (l,h)      \(l−1)
                               Yi =yi      +    ãi,j V l,h yj
                               d                       d
                                                            h=1 j=1
                                                                                                (l)
we show the inductive step first for (A) in the case of the pre-MLP activation Yi . For S satisfying
                              ∀l′ ∈ {1, . . . , L} : [(Vl′ ,h′ ∈ S) ⇒ l′ > l]                         (61)
we consider
                                          XH X
                                             i
                     (l)          \
                                  (l−1)          (l,h)          \(l−1)
              ΓS,w Yi      =ΓS,w yi      +     ãi,j ΓS,w Vbl,h yj
                    d
                                                                h=1 j=1
                                             XH X
                                                i
                                     \
                                     (l−1)          (l,h)             \
                                                                      (l−1)
                              =ΓS,w yi      +     ãi,j ΓS∪{Vl,h },w yj
                                                                h=1 j=1

where ãi,j denotes attention weights. The claim here now follows from the inductive hypothesis for
(A):
                                !            H X i
                                                                     !
                                    (l−1)             (l,h)                  (l−1)
                           Y                X                  Y
                  =wT          S yi       +         ãi,j wT       S Vl,h yj
                           S∈S                          h=1 j=1                    S∈S
                                     !
                                            (l)
                           Y
                  =wT            S         Yi
                           S∈S



                                                              66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the last step used (60). Next, we consider (B) and (C). First, for (B), assuming T1 ∪ T2 ̸= ∅,
we first find using (60) and the linearity of Λ... and Ω... (portions changed marked in blue):


                                               (l)                       (l)
              X
                       ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (Yi )ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (Yj )
                                             d                         d
          v,w,T1 ,T2
                                                                        H        i
                                                                                                               !
              X                                        \(l−1)
                                                                X X (l,h′ )      \(l−1)
      =                ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w            yi     +    ãiw Vd  l,h′ yw
          v,w,T1 ,T2                                                   h′ =1 w=1
                                                                                     j
                                                                         H
                                                                                                                   !
                                                         \(l−1)
                                                                  X X (l,h′′ )       \(l−1)
                       · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w            yj     +    ãjw′ V   l,h′′ yw′
                                                                               [
                                                                       h′′ =1 w′ =1

              X                                        \(l−1)                       \
                                                                                    (l−1)
      =                ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w            yi     ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w yj
          v,w,T1 ,T2
                                                          X j
                                                          H X
                                                   \
                                                   (l−1)        (l,h′ )                       \ (l−1)
                 X
          +                  ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w yi          ãjw ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w Vd
                                                                                         l,h′ yw
              v,w,T1 ,T2                                                h′ =1 w=1
                             H       i
                                            (l,h′′ )                               \ (l−1)                           \ (l−1)
                 X           X       X
          +                                ãiw        ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w V[
                                                                             l,h′′ y w       Ω S2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w   yj
              v,w,T1 ,T2 h′′ =1 w=1
                             H X
                               i
                                            (l,h′ )                              \ (l−1)
                 X           X
          +                               ãiw        ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w Vd  ′
                                                                            l,h wy
              v,w,T1 ,T2 h′ =1 w=1
                             H j
                                              (l,h′′ )                                          \(l−1)
                             X X
                         ·                  ãjw′ ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w                   V
                                                                                         [l,h′′ yw′
                             h′′ =1 w′ =1


Now the definition of Vbl,h allows us to rewrite this as:


              X                                                 \(l−1)                         \
                                                                                               (l−1)
=                                 ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w          yi       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
    v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                                                  X j
                                                                  H X
                                                           \
                                                           (l−1)        (l,h′ )                           \
                                                                                                          (l−1)
                 X
    +                                ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yi          ãjw ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2                                               h′ =1 w=1
                                     H X
                                       i
                                                      (l,h′ )                                  \
                                                                                               (l−1)                         \
                                                                                                                             (l−1)
                 X                   X
    +                                             ãiw          ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2 h′ =1 w=1
                                     H X
                                       i
                 X                   X     (l,h)                                \
                                                                                (l−1)
    +                                    ãi,j ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h′ ,v,w yj
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2 h′ =1 j=1
                                  H j
                                                   (l,h′′ )                                           \(l−1)
                                  X X
                              ·                  ãjw′ ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h′′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w                 yw ′
                                  h′′ =1 w′ =1


                                                                            67
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In order to directly apply the inductive hypothesis, we rearrange the summations:

              X                                              \(l−1)                         \
                                                                                            (l−1)
=                               ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w         yi       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
    v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
           j
         H X
                      (l,h′ )                                                    \
                                                                                 (l−1)                                  \
                                                                                                                        (l−1)
         X                                X
    +               ãjw                                   ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yi       ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw
        h′ =1 w=1               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
         H X
           i
                      (l,h′ )                                                             \
                                                                                          (l−1)                         \
                                                                                                                        (l−1)
         X                                X
    +               ãiw                                   ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
        h′ =1 w=1               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
         H X
           i                    H j
                      (l,h′ )                   (l,h′′ )                                                           \
                                                                                                                   (l−1)
         X                      X X                                   X
    +               ãiw                       ãjw′                                ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw
        h′ =1 w=1               h′′ =1 w′ =1               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2

                                               \(l−1)
              · ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h′′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw′

Note that, as above, S1 , S2 are fixed and the sums run over T1 , T2 . We can rewrite the above as:

                  X                                            \
                                                               (l−1)                         \
                                                                                             (l−1)
    =                                    ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yi       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
        v,w,T1 ≥l−1 S1 ,T2 ≥l−1 S2
              j
            H X
                         (l,h′ )                                                                     \
                                                                                                     (l−1)
            X                                          X
        +               ãjw                                                   ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yi
            h′ =1 w=1               v,w,T1 ≥l−1 S1 ,T2 ≥l−1 S2 ∪{Vl,h′ }

                                                    \
                                                    (l−1)
                    · ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw
              i
            H X
            X             (l,h)
                                                      X                                                              \(l−1)
        +               ãi,j                                                 ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w          yj
            h′ =1 w=1             v,w,T1 ≥l−1 S1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T2 ≥l−1 S2

                                                    \(l−1)
                    · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w          yj
            H X
              i                     H j
                          (l,h′ )                    (l,h′′ )                                                                          \(l−1)
            X                       X X                                   X
        +               ãiw                       ãjw′                                     ΛS1 ∪{Vl,h′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w             yw
            h′ =1 w=1               h′′ =1 w′ =1                v,w,T1 ≥l−1 S1 ∪{Vl,h′′ },
                                                                  T2 ≥l−1 S2 ∪{Vl,h′ }

                                                      \
                                                      (l−1)
                    · ΩS2 ∪{Vl,h′′ },T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yw′

We are now ready to apply the inductive hypothesis: Directly plugging the inductive hypothesis for
(B) into the second through fourth terms gives us:

                X                                           \
                                                            (l−1)                         \
                                                                                          (l−1)
=                                     ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yi       ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,l,h,v,w yj
    v,w,T1 ≥l−1 S1 ,T2 ≥l−1 S2
           j
         H X
                                                               !T                               !T
                      (l,h′ ) (l−1) T
         X                                         Y                                 Y
                                                                     T                                      (l−1)
    +               ãjw (yi       )                       S        Kk,h Qk,h               S         Vl,h yw
        h′ =1 w=1                               S∈S1                                S∈S2
         H X
           i
                                                                !T                               !
                      (l,h′ ) (l−1) T                                                                 (l−1)
         X                                           Y                               Y
                                                                      T
    +               ãiw yj        Vl,h′                    S        Kl,h Ql,h               S       yj
        h′ =1 w=1                                   S∈S1                             S∈S2
         H X
           i                    H       j
                                                                                             !T                                !
                      (l,h′ )                    (l,h′′ )                                                                                   (l−1)
         X                      X       X                                         Y                                 Y
                                                          (l−1) T  T                                  T
    +               ãiw                       ãjw′ (yw       ) Vl,h′                  S            Kl,h Ql,h             S       Vl,h′′ yw′
        h′ =1 w=1               h′′ =1 w′ =1                                     S∈S1                               S∈S2



                                                                         68
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We now distinguish two cases, for proving (B) and (C). The first one is that S1 = S2 = ∅. In this
case, by case (C) of the inductive hypothesis:
                       (l−1) T    T                 (l−1)
             =(yi              ) Kk,h Qk,h yj                − ϕk,h (i, j)
                         j
                       H X
                                      (l,h′ )      (l−1) T
                       X
                                                              T              (l−1)
                   +                 ãjw (yi              ) Kk,h Qk,h Vl,h yw
                       h′ =1 w=1
                       H X
                         i
                                      (l,h′ ) (l−1) T               (l−1)
                       X
                                                          T
                   +                 ãiw    yj    Vl,h′ Kl,h Ql,h yj
                       h′ =1 w=1
                       H X
                         i                        H j
                                      (l,h′ )                     (l,h′′ )                                                (l−1)
                       X                          X X
                                                                        (l−1) T  T    T
                   +                 ãiw                       ãjw′ (yw    ) Vl,h′ Kl,h Ql,h Vl,h′′ yw ′

                       h′ =1 w=1                h′′ =1 w′ =1
Now, applying (60) again, we rearrange to sums to obtain the conclusion
                                                   (l)                          (l)
                                            = (Yi )T Kk,h
                                                      T
                                                          Qk,h Yj                     − ϕk,h (i, j)                                           (62)
                                                                        (l)
proving (upon rearranging) the inductive step for (C) in the case of Yi . In the second case, S1 ∪
S2 ̸= ∅; here, we use case (B) of the inductive hypothesis to instead rewrite as
                              !T                                    !
   (l−1) T                                                                (l−1)
                   Y                                     Y
                                     T
=(yi    )                 S         Kk,h Qk,h                   S       (yj       )
                  S∈S1                                 S∈S2
        j
      H X
                                                           !T                                      !
                    (l,h′ ) (l−1) T
      X                                         Y                                     Y
                                                                 T                                             (l−1)
  +               ãjw (yi       )                     S        Kk,h Qk,h                      S        Vl,h′ yw
      h′ =1 w=1                               S∈S1                                    S∈S2
      H X
        i
                                                             !T                                       !
                    (l,h′ ) (l−1) T                                                                        (l−1)
      X                                           Y                                       Y
                                                                   T
  +               ãiw yj        Vl,h′                   S        Kl,h Ql,h                       S       yj
      h′ =1 w=1                                   S∈S1                                S∈S2
      H X
        i                     H      j
                                                                                                  !T                              !
                    (l,h′ )                    (l,h′′ )                                                                                      (l−1)
      X                       X      X                                               Y                                 Y
                                                        (l−1) T  T                                         T
  +               ãiw                       ãjw′ (yw       ) Vl,h′                          S           Kl,h Ql,h           S       Vl,h′′ yw′
      h′ =1 w=1               h′′ =1 w′ =1                                        S∈S1                                 S∈S2
Now, applying (60) again, we rearrange to sums to obtain the conclusion
                                            !T                     !
                             (l) T                                      (l)
                                     Y                       Y
                                                 T
                       = (Yi )            S    Kk,h Qk,h         S Yj                                                                         (63)
                                                       S∈S1                                   S∈S2
                                                                                (l)
This proves the inductive step for (B) in the case of Yi . We next address the inductive step for (D)
in the case of the pre-MLP activation:
                                                                                           (l)
                         X
                                     ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (B m ) · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (Yj )
                                                           d                             d
                       v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                                  !T                                      !
                                                                                                  (l)
                                      Y                                       Y
                                T                       T
                   =(Bm )                     S        Kk,h Qk,h                      S       Yj
                                     S∈S1                                     S∈S2

                 (l)
By unfolding Yj using (60) and using the linearity of ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w , the claim follows directly
               d
from the inductive hypothesis for (D). The same reasoning applies to (E). Overall, we have proven
                                                       (l)
the inductive step (A–E) for the pre-MLP activations Yi .
We now need to show that the inductive step also holds for the post-MLP activations. Recall that the
MLP acts as
                                  dXM LP
                    (l)      (l)                                     (l)
                   yi = Yi +             (Bl )·,s · ψl,s (Al )s,· (Yi ) + (bl )s
                                                    s=1
                                                                                                                                              (64)
                                                  dX
                                                   M LP
                           (l)   (l)                        b l )s,· · ψl,s (A          (l)
                          yi = Yi +                        (B                bl )s,· (Yd    ) + ( b
                                                                                                  bl )s
                          d    d
                                                                                       i
                                                   s=1


                                                                        69
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof proceeds by expanding this equation and reducing the claim to the already-proven induc-
tive step for pre-MLP activations (for handling the direct contribution from the pre-MLP activation),
and cases (D) and (E) (for handling the contributions of the MLP units). First, we note that, for each
l, s, by the case (A) of the inductive hypothesis and by the definition of bbl ,



                                               (l)                                                   (l)
                       ψl,s        (Al )s,· (Yi ) + (bl )s                = ψl,s         (A
                                                                                          bl )s,· (Yd
                                                                                                    i ) + (bl )s
                                                                                                           b                             (65)



We will abbreviate this number as Ξl,s,i ∈ R. We now prove the case (A) of the inductive step for
the post-MLP activation:


                                                            dM LP
                         (l)          (l)
                                          X
                  ΓS,w (yi ) =ΓS,w (Yi +
                        d           d        b l )s,· · Ξl,s,i )
                                            (B
                                                               s=1
                                                               dM LP
                                             (l)
                                                  X
                                    =ΓS,w (Yi ) +
                                           d               b l )s,· ) · Ξl,s,i
                                                    ΓS,w ((B
                                                                s=1
                                                           !                  dX
                                                                                                           !
                                                                               M LP
                                                                 (l)
                                              Y                                                 Y
                                         T                                                T
                                    =w                 S       Yi +                   w                S       (Bl )·,s · Ξl,s,i
                                              S∈S                              s=1              S∈S
                                                           !
                                                                (l)
                                              Y
                                    =wT                S       yi
                                              S∈S



                                                                                          (l)
To prove cases (B) and (C) for the post-MLP activations yi , we now consider


                                                                    (l)                                         (l)
                  X
                                   ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w            yi         · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w           yj
                                                                   d                                           d
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                                                                                dM LP
                                                                                                                !
                                                                     (l)
                  X                                                      X
    =                              ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w            Yi +    Ξl,s,i · (B
                                                                                     b l )·,s
                                                                   d
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2                                                   s=1
                                                                   dX
                                                                                                   !
                                                                    M LP
                                                        (l)
                     · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w           Yj +                    Ξl,t,j · (B
                                                                                        b l )·,t
                                                      d
                                                                    t=1

                                                          (l)                          (l)
                  X
    =                              ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w Yi      ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w Yj
                                                         d                            d
        v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
            dX
             M LP
                                                                                                (l)
                                        X
        +           Ξl,s,j ·                               ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w               Yi      ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (B
                                                                                                                            b l )·,s
                                                                                              d
            s=1                v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
            dX
             M LP
                                                                                                              (l)
                                        X
        +           Ξl,s,i ·                                                     b l )·,s ΩS ,T ,T ,k,h,v,w Yd
                                                           ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (B          2 1 2            j
            s=1                v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
            dX
             M LP              dX
                                M LP                           X
        +           Ξl,s,i ·           Ξl,t,j ·                                  ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (B
                                                                                                       b l )·,s
            s=1                 t=1               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2

                     · ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w (B
                                             b l )·,t


                                                                          70
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We apply the inductive step for the pre-MLP activation in cases (D), and (E) to rewrite the second
and third term, and apply the definition of B cl to rewrite the fourth term:

                                                          (l)                          (l)
                      X
             =                   ΛS1 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w Yi        ΩS2 ,T1 ,T2 ,k,h,v,w Yj
                                                        d                             d
               v,w,T1 ≥l S1 ,T2 ≥l S2
                   dX
                                                                  !T                               !
                    M LP
                                       (l)
                                                     Y                                  Y
               +           Ξl,s,j · (Yi )T                   S          T
                                                                       Kk,h Qk,h               S       (Bl )s,·
                   s=1                               S∈S1                               S∈S2
                   dX
                                                                !T                                !
                    M LP
                                                                                                        (l)
                                                    Y                                  Y
               +           Ξl,s,i · (Bl )T·,s               S         T
                                                                     Kk,h Qk,h                S       Yj
                   s=1                              S∈S1                               S∈S2
                   dX
                    M LP              dX
                                       M LP                            Y                              Y
               +           Ξl,s,i ·           Ξl,t,j · (Bl )T·,s (            S)T Kk,h
                                                                                   T
                                                                                       Qk,h (                 S)(Bl )·,t
                   s=1                 t=1                             S∈S1                        S∈S2



In the case where S1 = S2 = ∅, we obtain using case (C) of the inductive hypothesis for the
pre-MLP activation:
                                (l)                         (l)
                         =(Yi )T Kk,h
                                  T
                                      Qk,h Yj                     − ϕk,h (i, j)
                                dX
                                 M LP
                                                       (l)
                            +           Ξl,s,j · (Yi )T Kk,h
                                                         T
                                                             Qk,h (Bl )s,·
                                 s=1
                                dX
                                 M LP
                                                                                 (l)
                            +           Ξl,s,i · (Bl )T·,s Kk,h
                                                            T
                                                                Qk,h Yj
                                 s=1
                                dX
                                 M LP               dX
                                                     M LP

                            +           Ξl,s,i ·             Ξl,t,j · (Bl )T·,s Kk,h
                                                                                 T
                                                                                     Qk,h (Bl )·,t
                                 s=1                 t=1



Using (64) and the definition of Ξl,s,i , this rewrites to
                                              (l)                       (l)
                                       =(yi )T Kk,h
                                                T
                                                    Qk,h yj − ϕk,h (i, j)
from which case (B) of the inductive hypothesis follows by rearranging. If instead S1 ∪ S2 ̸= ∅, the
same reasoning leads to case (C) of the inductive hypothesis. Analogous reasoning establishes cases
(D) and (E) for the post-MLP activations. Overall, we have established the inductive step for cases
(A–E) for the post-MLP activations.

G     A DDITIONAL S UPPORTING R ESULTS
G.1    R EGULARIZER AT I NITIALIZATION

Here, we provide evidence that the additional regularizer (8) is bounded independently of N under
plausible initializations of parameters. Recall
                                                  H N
                                                L X   (T )
                                                X   X                                     2
                                      (8) =                            pT1 Kl,h
                                                                            T
                                                                                Ql,h pj                                    (66)
                                                l=1 h=1 j=1

Intuitively, and as formalized in Proposition 54, when independently initializing the positional en-
                                                         T
codings pi , their inner products as mediated through Kl,h  Ql,h will tend to be small. As long as the
width grows linearly with N , the aggregate value of (8) will tend to be bounded independently of
N . Note that (8) only includes products involving position 1, which due to translation invariance for
T ∈ Θn places a bound on all products. As standard training does not enforce translation invari-
ance of the products pTi Kl,hT
                               Ql,h pj , one may also be interested in a variant that takes all pairs of


                                                                  71
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


positions into account, to the extent that they can enter causal attention:
                                             L       H N (T )     j
                                     1 XX X X T T                 2
                                                  pi Kl,h Ql,h pj                                                        (67)
                                   N (T ) j=1 i=1
                                            l=1 h=1

Here, the same conclusion holds. We describe it formally, at the example of the second variant, in
Proposition 54.
Proposition 54. Assume d = Θ(N ). Assume the entries of each p1 , . . . , pN ∈ Rd and Kl,h         T
                                                                                                      Ql,h ∈
  d×d                                                                        1
R     (l = 1, . . . , L; h = 1, . . . , H) are initialized i.i.d. from N (0, d ). The number of layers L and
heads H are constant with respect to N . Then
                                                                                      
                                      L     H
                              1 XX                   X
                           E                                   |pTi Kl,h
                                                                      T
                                                                          Ql,h pj |2  = O(1)                            (68)
                              N
                                     l=1 h=1 1≤i≤j≤N


Proof. We begin by showing that the expectation of each term in the sum is O(1/d) and hence the
sum is bounded by a constant. There are two cases for the expectation of terms: (i) The first is i ̸= j
when the vectors pi and pj are independent and the second is i = j when pi and pj are dependent.
For this section, let K, Q denote the matrices Kl,h Ql,h for any fixed l, h. Let Kij and Qij denote
the entry of the corresponding matrices ith column and jth row. Let A = K T Q ∈ Rd×d . Note that
the expectation of any entry of A,
                                                                      d
                                                                      X
                                E[Aij ] = E[KiT Qj ] = E[                   Ki,k Qj,k ] = 0.
                                                                      k=1

Further,


                     d
                     X                            d
                                                  X                             d−1 X
                                                                                X   d
    E[A2ij ] = E[(        Ki,k Qj,k )2 ] = E[            2
                                                        Ki,k Q2j,k ] + 2E[                     Ki,m Qj,m Ki,n Qj,n ]
                    k=1                           k=1                           m=1 n=m+1

                                                 d
                                                 X
                                                        2
                                          = E[         Ki,k Q2j,k ] = dσ 4 = σ 2
                                                 k=1
For products of two different entries Ai,j Amn , note that                                           E[Ai,j Am,n ]         =
  Pd Pd
E[ u=1 v=1 Ki,u Qj,u Km,v Qn,v )] which is 0 when i ̸= m or j ̸= n.
For each term |pTi Apj |2 , we have
                                d X
                                X d
      E[|pTi AQpj |2 ] =E[(                pi,u Au,v pj,v )2 ]
                                u=1 v=1
                            d X
                            X d                            X
                        =E[     (pi,u Au,v pj,v )2 ] + 2E[                             pi,u pi,v Au,v Am,n pj,v pj,n ]
                               u=1 v=1                                      u,v̸=m,n
                               d X
                               X d
                        =E[               p2i,u A2u,v p2j,v ]
                               u=1 v=1

since all terms of the form E[pi,u pi,v Au,v Am,n pj,v pj,n ] are 0 due to independence of A and p.
For i ̸= j, we have

                   d X
                     d                               d X
                                                       d
                   X                                 X                                                     1
              E[             p2i,u A2u,v p2j,v ] =               E[p2i,u ]E[A2u,v ]E[p2j,v ] = d2 σ 6 =      .
                   u=1 v=1                           u=1 v=1
                                                                                                           d


                                                                72
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For i = j, we have

                   d X
                   X d                                  d
                                                        X                    d X
                                                                             X
              E[             p2i,u A2u,v p2i,v ] = E[        4    2
                                                            pi,u Au,v ] + E[         p2i,u A2u,v p2i,v ]
                   u=1 v=1                              u=1                 u=1 v̸=u

                                                                             3
                                         = d(3σ 6 ) + (d2 − d)σ 6 <            .
                                                                             d
Since d = Θ(N ) and each term is less than d3 , we have that the sum in Eq.68 is O(1).



G.2   E MPIRICAL L ENGTH G ENERALIZATION OF P OSITIONAL F UNCTIONS

Here, we show empirically that, when directly fitting parameters so that a product pi K T Qpj re-
produces some function ϕ(·, ·) at smaller distances, it will length generalize when these are local
or periodic, but under different conditions matching the role of local and periodic functions in our
theory. Specifically, we show that they length-generalize well at large d when they are L OCAL;
whereas, when d is smaller, length generalization works well when they are P ERIODIC. Length
generalization is poor on functions that are neither local nor periodic.

Experimental Setup We randomly initialize 200 position embeddings {pi ∈ Rd : 1 ≤ i < 201},
as well as query and key matrices, Q, K ∈ Rd×d . We experiment with d = {32, 256}. We optimize
the mean square error (MSE) between pTi K T Qpj and ϕ(·, ·) on length of 50, and test on length
{50, 100, 150}. Concretely, during training, we sample random offsets o from [0, 150] and take
the sequence of p1+o , . . . , p50+o to compute the loss. When testing on length n, we compute the
average loss over all offsets in [0, 200-n]. We ignore the loss on those entries where j < i to
mimic causal masking. The ϕ(·, ·) we use in experiments (except for the one combined from two
ϕ(·, ·)) only takes two values, 0 when condition is false and 2 log 50 when condition is true. We thus
use different condition to describe different ϕ(·, ·). For example, we use ϕ : j=i-c to denote the
following function:
                                               2 log 50 j = i − c
                                   ϕ(j, i) =                                                      (69)
                                               0          else
where c is a constant number.
The embeddings and weight matrices are trained with Adam optimizer, using batch size of 64,
learning rate of 1e-3, for 15k steps. Additionally, we add mean squared weights (i.e., squared
Frobenius norm divided by number of elements) to the loss to mimic training regularizer, with
coefficient of 0.01.
Results are in Figure 5 and 6. Note that in both figures, y axis is using logarithmic scale above 1.0
and stays linear scale below 1.0. In the last column of 6, “combined” denotes functions that combine
two functions as follows: ϕ = ϕ1 + ϕ2 , where ϕ1 : j=i-c and ϕ2 : (i-j)=c2 mod c1 .

G.3   B OUND FOR E NCODINGS N ORM IN T ERMS OF F UNCTION C OMPLEXITY

Recall that our regularizer includes a penalty (8) on attention dot products. Here, we discuss a
conjecture:
Conjecture 55. The term (8) can be removed from the regularizer while maintaining a (potentially
weaker) length generalization guarantee for Limit Transformers.

To provide a heuristic argument for this, assume that for each upper bound N on the input length,
we have a configuration of positional encodings and the matrix A, such that the following property
holds: For any indices N ≥ j > i > 0, let
                                               pTi Apj = F (j − i)                                         (70)
where F : N → R is a function that maps to numbers representable in p-bit precision. The function
F and the precision p are chosen globally, across the different N’s. Boundedness of R(Tn ) across


                                                             73
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Appendix G.2: MSE loss in fitting (length = 50) and generalizing (higher lengths) func-
tions ϕ(·, ·) with products pTj K T Qpi . We show local functions testing if j = i−c (left), if j > i−c
(center), periodic functions testing whether i−j ≡ c2 (modc1 ) (right). We show result at small (top,
d = 32) and high (bottom, d = 256) dimensionality. Local functions length-generalize well when
dimensionality is high (bottom left, bottom center); generalization is more successful with functions
concentrated on few pairs (bottom left is nonzero at only one value of j −i; bottom center is nonzero
at c different values of j − i). Periodic functions length-generalize well when dimensionality is low
(top right). The results match the distinct roles played by local and periodic functions in our theo-
retical constructions: Periodic functions are mediated by bounded-rank products (Lemma 48), local
functions are mediated by the products pT Kl,h  T
                                                  Qp.


Figure 6: Appendix G.2: MSE loss in fitting (length = 50) and generalizing (higher lengths) func-
tions ϕ(·, ·) with products pTj K T Qpi . We show functions that are neither local nor periodic, which
tests if j < i − c (left), if i − j is prime number (center), and a function created by adding a local
and a periodic function (right). We show result at small (top, d = 32) and high (bottom, d = 256)
dimensionality. Compared with results in Figure 5, we can see that such functions, neither local nor
periodic, length-generalize poorly.



                                                  74
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


n entails ∥pi ∥2 , ∥A∥ < C, for C a global constant. We also know that supx∈N |F (x)| < ∞.
We conjecture that one can use these assumptions, and Lemma 56, to prove that F cannot be “too
complicated”. Specifically, we conjecture that F will be ultimately periodic: when x exceeds
some threshold, F (x + ∆) = F (x) for some period ∆. For, if F is not ultimately periodic, we
hope to construct a matrix G whose nuclear norm can be made arbitrarily large, so large as to give
a superconstant lower bound on ∥A∥ – which is a contradiction. First note that Lemma 56 even
holds if G = Y T AX where X, Y are two different matrices with n unit-norm columns. That
is, we can consider a matrix Gij = pTxi Apyj where we conjecture that one can choose x1 , ..., xn
and y1 , ..., yn to give an arbitrarily large lower bound on ∥A∥, under the assumption that F is not
ultimately periodic. Here, it is important that F maps to fixed-precision output; otherwise, one could
get functions that have irrational periods and thus are not periodic when restricted to N.
Lemma 56. Let x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd be vectors with ∥xi ∥2 = 1, and let A ∈ Rd×d arbitrary. Let
G ∈ Rn×n such that Gij = xTi Axj . Then
                                                    ∥G∥∗
                                           ∥A∥ ≥                                                 (71)
                                                     n
where ∥A∥ denotes the spectral norm.

Proof. First, note that for any matrix B = U ΣV , we have

              ∥B∥∗ = tr(Σ) = tr(ΣV V T U T U ) = tr(U ΣV V T U T ) = tr(BV T U T )               (72)
where V T U T has each singular value bounded by 1 (in fact, it’s orthogonal). In other words,
∥B∥∗ = tr(BM ) where M is an orthogonal matrix.
For any two real-valued and possibly non-square matrices, we have


                                      tr(AT B) ≤ ∥A∥F ∥B∥F                                       (73)

and by submultiplicativity, we have
                                       ∥AB∥F ≤ ∥A∥∥B∥F                                           (74)

Using Eq. 72 and the above two properties, it follows that,


                     tr(X T AXM ) = tr(AXM X T ) ≤ ∥X T AT ∥F ∥M X T ∥F

                     ≤ ∥AX∥F ∥M X T ∥F ≤ ∥A∥∥X∥F ∥M ∥∥X∥F ≤ n∥A∥.



G.4   P OSITIONAL A BILITIES IN N O PE VS APE

A recent study by Kazemnejad et al. (2024) found NoPE to work better than APE at length gener-
alization and to theoretically simulate positional information – an apparent contrast to our findings,
which find APE to be more powerful than NoPE both theoretically and empirically (Figure 1). There
are a few important aspects that resolve this apparent contradiction.

      1. The APE setting in Kazemnejad et al. (2024) is different from ours, as they used fixed sinu-
         soidal functions (Vaswani et al., 2017), whereas we follow Zhou et al. (2024a) in examining
         the potentially more expressive case of arbitrary learnable positional encodings.
      2. Kazemnejad et al. (2024) trained APE transformers only on an initial segment of the full
         set of positions, so that the positional encodings at higher positions did not appear during
         training. This inherently puts APE at a potential disadvantage compared to our setting,
         where (in line both with Zhou et al. (2024a) and standard LLM training) all positional
         encodings appear during training.


                                                 75
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      3. In support of their empirical findings, Kazemnejad et al. (2024) also showed theoretically
         that NoPE transformers can simulate positional information. Specifically, they found (their
         Theorem 1) that NoPE transformers can compute an activation with value 1/t at position
         t, e.g. by attending uniformly and reading out the contribution coming from a BOS token.
         Importantly, this is weaker than the ways in which APE transformers can use positional
         information. For instance, distinguishing close-by positions, say t − 1 and t − 2, in such
         an encoding requires rapidly increasing parameter values as t → ∞, as the values get
         arbitrarily close to 0. In this sense, even a simple task such as an induction head, which
         requires attention from t to t−1, requires parameter norms rapidly increasing with the input
         length14 , not allowed under our inference procedure. In our theoretical framework, NoPE
         is not predicted to length-generalize as well as APE on such a task. Indeed, empirically,
         we find NoPE transformers not to perform well on the induction head task, and a variety
         of other tasks not expressible in C-RASP[∅] (dotted lines in Figure 1) despite extensive
         hyperparameter search (Figure 1 and Section G.7).

We further note that Kazemnejad et al. (2024) also report strong performance for NoPE on a copying
task (their Figure 3), in apparent contradiction to our finding that COPY is hard even for APE.
However, note COPY in Kazemnejad et al. (2024) had three variants: The first two just asked the
model to replicate the number of tokens but not their identities, a task well in C-RASP[∅], and
indeed NoPE worked well (their Figure F.4). Their third variant matched our COPY task and is not
in C-RASP[periodic,local]; neither NoPE nor APE generalize to 2x training length (their Figure
F.4), in line with both our empirical and theoretical findings.

G.5    C ONCEPTUAL R ELATION TO S OLOMONOFF I NDUCTION

A standard approach to studying learning in algorithmic information theory, specifically Solomonoff
Induction (Li & Vitányi, 2008), does not specifically ask for identifying the correct function at some
point, but rather aims to bound the overall number of mistakes. In the case of Solomonoff Induction,
computability of the underlying function guarantees that this number is finite. Here, we show that
our length generalization guarantee can also be viewed as bounding the number of mistakes made
by the inference procedure:
Definition 57. When applying the Inference Procedure from Definition 6 on a target function f , we
define the Number of Errors as the summed numbers of inputs on which Tn makes a mistake:
                                                         ∞
                                                         X     X
                       ErrorCount(T1 , T2 , . . . ) :=                   1Tn (x,o)̸=f (x)               (75)
                                                         n=1 x∈S:|x|≤n


Then we can show the following variant of Theorem 7:
Theorem 58. Let f ∈ F(Σ). Then the following are equivalent:

      1. f is expressible by a Limit Transformer satisfying P ERIODIC and L OCAL.
      2. (Guaranteed Length Generalization) Applying the Inference Procedure from Defini-
         tion 6 to f generates a sequence T1 , T2 , . . . with supn=1,2,3,... R(Tn ) < ∞ and
         ErrorCount(T1 , T2 , . . . ) < ∞.

Proof. In view of Theorem 7, it suffices to note that the following two conditions are equivalent:

      1. ErrorCount(T1 , T2 , . . . ) < ∞
      2. There is some N0 such that, for all m > N0 , Tm matches f on all inputs of any length
         k ≤ m.


   14
      Kazemnejad et al. (2024) use an MLP to convert 1/t to t. Such an MLP would need an increasing num-
ber of hidden units as the maximum context size n grows, hence, ∥A∥F , ∥B∥F growing with n. Hence,
R(Tn ) → ∞ by Definition 5. Such a construction is thus not predicted to length-generalize under our theoret-
ical framework.


                                                     76
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.6     T HE ROLE OF T RANSLATION I NVARIANCE

The hypothesis class (Definition 4) assumes that product functions involving positional encodings
are translation invariant: That is, every product function involving exactly one positional encoding
is constant across positions, and for every 1 ≤ i, j, i + ∆, j + ∆ ≤ n,
                            pTi M1 . . . Mk pj = pTi+∆ M1 . . . Mk pj+∆                           (76)
                                                                                          T
whenever M1 . . . Mk is a product of parameter matrices linking the input layer, such as K1,h Q1,h ,
  T   T
V2,h K3,h′ Q3,h V1,h , and similar.
               ′    ′′


Translation invariance formalizes the idea that the algorithm employed by the transformer is the
same independently of the offset. However, it is not explicitly enforced in standard training. Here,
we justify this assumption as follows:

      1. We theoretically show that translation invariance is beneficial for length generalization, by
         describing a sequence of transformers Tn that violate it and that fail to length generalize on
         a simple induction head task (Section G.6.1).
      2. We empirically show that trained transformers often exhibit translation invariance, both in
         transformers that we trained from scratch on algorithmic problems, and in GPT-2 (Sec-
         tion G.6.2).

We conjecture that translation-invariance happens when the training signal itself is offset-invariant:
On the algorithmic problems, our theoretical and experimental setups assume that each training
example is presented with a random offset; hence, the target function is translation-invariant. In
the case of language modeling, the task is also approximately translation-invariant, because – ex-
cept for the beginning of a document – the structure of language (e.g., its grammar) is likely to
be largely independent of absolute position. Hence, we expect that the behavior of the model will
be approximately translation-invariant. Thus, with an offset-invariant target function, we conjec-
ture that standard training implicitly favors translation-invariance of the transformer’s algorithm.
Understanding this theoretically, in a theoretical account of SGD dynamics and generalization on
multi-layer transformers, is an interesting problem for future research.

G.6.1    N ON -O FFSET-I NVARIANT T RANSFORMERS FAILING TO L ENGTH -G ENERALIZE
Here, we theoretically show on a simple induction head task how offset invariance is beneficial for
length generalization. We construct a sequence (Tn )n of transformers violating offset invariance
that each compute the induction head task at lengths ≤ n/2, but fail to compute it at length n:
Proposition 59. There is a function f ∈ F and a sequence Tn of transformers violating offset-
                                                                       T
invariance, where n operates at lengths ≤ n, each product function pi Kl,h Ql,h pj is local for
τ = 2 where supn R(Tn ) < ∞ and each Tn matches f at lengths ≤ n/2, but no Tn matches f at
length n.

This is an important contrast to the translation-invariant setup, where such a sequence Tn where (i)
supn R(Tn ) < ∞ and (ii) all pTi K T Qpj are local for a single τ < ∞, will necessarily match f at
length n when n is large. This property is used in showing our length generalization guarantee. This
property is not available when translation invariance is violated, exemplifying that offset invariance
is theoretically beneficial for length generalization.

Proof. We take f to compute a simple induction head task (Section 4.1). There is a simple
translation-invariant construction: In Layer 1, each position collects the token appearing at the
previous condition; in Layer 2, each position j attends to previous positions i that had followed
the token also appearing at j. This construction performs correctly across input lengths, reflecting
length generalization.
Here, we describe a transformer performing this task while violating translation invariance, and
failing to length-generalize. We use two heads, one performing “correctly” at smaller indices; the
other one performing “correctly” at large indices. We note that this version is more complex and
not minimal; we conjecture that translation-invariant solutions will generally tend to be simpler for


                                                  77
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C-RASP-expressible problems. We consider an alphabet Σ = {SOS, σ1 , . . . , σk }. For each n, we
define a transformer Tn as follows. We define the encodings:
                        1                            0
                                                                               
                                                                               0
                    0 ∈ Rk                    ei ∈ Rk               0 
                            k
                     0 ∈                         0 ∈ Rk               0 
                                                                                
                          R
           eSOS =                       eσi =                pi =  0 
                            
                            k                          k
                   0 ∈ R                      0 ∈ R                            
                    0 ∈ Rk                     0 ∈ Rk               0 ∈ Rk 
                     0 ∈ Rn                       0 ∈ Rn                   ei ∈ Rn
where ei ∈ Rn is the i-th one-hot vector. We define pi and K1,h , Q1,h by:
                                                 2δi,j−1 1 ≤ j ≤ 3n

                            pTi K1,1
                                  T
                                     Q1,1 pj =                      4
                                                 2δi,j−2 else
                                                  2δi,j−2 1 ≤ j ≤ n4

                               T   T
                             pi K1,2 Q1,2 pj =
                                                  2δi,j−1 else
This is not translation-invariant: Informally, one of the two heads takes the role of copying from
the preceding position for smaller indices; the other one takes it for large indices. We set
                                                 
                                                ...        0
                                              ei   0 
                                              ... e 
                                                 
                                       V1,1 ·   =  i 
                                              ...  0 
                                              ...  0 
                                                ...        0
                                                 
                                                ...        0
                                              ei   0 
                                              ...  0 
                                                 
                                       V1,2 ·   =  
                                              ... ei 
                                              ...  0 
                                                ...        0


Now, given an input of the form x1 x2 · · · ∈ Σ∗ (where x1 = $), and an offset o, we have
                                                                                
           0                                 0                                    0
        exi                          exi                                 exi 
 (1)   exi−1 
                           n        exi−1  n
                                                                3n        exi−2  3n
                                                                                    
yi =            if i + o <                       if ≤ i + o ≤                        if   <i+o≤n
       exi−2               4        exi−1  4                   4        exi−1       4
                                                                         
        0                            0                                   0 
         ei+o                              ei+o                                 ei+o


                T             T
Then, we set K2,1 Q2,1 and K2,2 Q2,2 to satisfy:
                                                           (
                                                                        (1)        (1)
                                   10 xi = $; j + o < 3n

            (1) T  T        (1)                        4    1         (yi )3 = (yj )2
         (yi ) K2,1 Q2,1 yj =                            +
                                   0     else               0         else
                                                           (
                                                                        (1)        (1)
                                   10 xi = $; j + o ≥ 3n

            (1)
         (yi )T K2,2
                   T        (1)
                      Q2,2 yj =                        4 + 1          (yi )4 = (yj )2
                                   0     else               0         else
The value matrices are given as (h = 1, 2):
                                                  
                                             ...     0
                                            ei   0 
                                            ...   0 
                                              
                                      V2,h   =                                           (77)
                                            ...   0 
                                           .... ei 
                                            ....     0

                                                  78
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By design, supn R(Tn ) < ∞.
Due to the design of the token embeddings, attention to the SOS token contributes a zero output.
Hence, at query position j, the first head provides the output
                                                          (                     !
                                                                    (1)    (1)
                             10 xi = $; j + o < 3n

                                                      4      10 (yi )3 = (yj )2
                     exp                                +
            X                0 else                          0   else                   (2)
                                                                                  V2,h yj
         i=1+o,...,j
                                              Normalization

                             20 i = 1; j + o < 3n
                                                            
                                                    4
                         10 exi−1 = exj , i + o < 3n 
                          
                     exp                                  4 
                         10 ex
                                     i−2
                                          = exj , i + o ≥ 3n
                                                           4
                                                              
                          
            X                0 else                                   (2)
      =                                                         V2,h yj
         i=1+o,...,j
                                   Normalization

whereas the second head provides the output:
                                                 (                                    !
                                                                     (1)        (1)
                          10 xi = $; j + o ≥ 3n

                  exp                         4 + 1               (yi )4 = (yj )2
             X            0 else                   0              else                          (2)
                                                                                          V2,h yj
             i=1,...,j
                                               Normalization

                                       i = 1; j + o ≥ 3n
                               
                                  20
                                                                
                                                       4
                                       exi−2 = exj , i + o < n4 
                                
                               10
                           exp                                 
                               10
                                      exi−1 = exj , i + o ≥ n4 
                                
                X                 0    else                             (2)
         =                                                        V2,h yj
             i=1+o,...,j
                                       Normalization

If the input length is ≤ n2 , this simplifies as follows: If j + o < 3n2 , the first head’s contribution is
dominated by SOS (which leads to zero value vector), and an overall near-zero contribution. The
second head contributes the frequencies of symbols appearing immediately after prior occurrences
of xj (10). On the other hand, if j + o ≥ 3n   2 , the reverse situation holds; the second head makes a
near-zero contribution, and the first head contributes (10). Hence, Tn computes (10) when the input
length is ≤ n2 .
However, for longer inputs, this does not hold any more: if, say, o = 0 and j = 3n
                                                                                 4 , the second head
additionally has contributions counting, at positions where i < n4 , how often a symbol appeared
two positions after a symbol matching xj . Hence, Tn performs correctly at lengths ≤ n2 , but not at
longer lengths.

G.6.2    T RANSLATION -I NVARIANCE IN T RAINED T RANSFORMERS
Here, we provide empirical evidence that translation invariance, even though it is not explicitly
enforced in standard training, may be approximately satisfied in trained transformers. In this section,
we aim to check, empirically, how often or how much the product
                                              pTi Kl,h
                                                   T
                                                       Ql,h pj                                         (78)
is translation-invariant as a function of (i, j). We conduct experiments for both models trained on
algorithmic problems and a transformer language model trained on real-world data.

Transformers trained on algorithmic problems We select five small transformers which gen-
eralize well on algorithmic tasks. They are trained on BINARY MAJORITY, BINARY MAJOR-
ITY INTERLEAVE, MAJORITY, SORT, and COPY UNIQUE (defined in Section E.2.1). For a
given head (l, h), we assemble each product pTi Kl,h
                                                  T
                                                     Ql,h pj into a matrix M := P T QTl,h Kl,h P ∈
  n×n 15
R     . Then such a product is translation-invariant if and only if the entries are constant along
  15
     Our experiments use a standard transformer implementation including layer norm, whereas our theoretical
analysis disregards layer norm (see Appendix D.3). Layer norm can in principle have a nontrivial impact on


                                                    79
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


each sub-diagonal16 :
                 pTi Kl,h
                      T
                          Ql,h pj = pTi+∆ Kl,h
                                           T
                                               Ql,h pj+∆         ∀1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ j + ∆ ≤ n                     (79)
Hence, we quantified the deviance from translation-invariance by calculating the offset variance
Varof f set , the average variance along each sub-diagonal, as follows:
                                               N −1
                                           1 X
                               Diagc =              Mi(i−c)                                                 (80)
                                         N − c i=c
                                                   N −1 X
                                                        i
                                             2     X
                           Varof f set =                   (Mij − Diagi−j )2                                (81)
                                         N (N + 1) i=0 j=0
We calculate the Varof f set for each head in these models, and show a histogram of the values across
heads in Figure 7. Most of the heads have very small variance, and a single head across these models
has variance around 8.
We next investigated the behavior of these heads in greater detail
(Figure 8–9). Figure 8 provides examples for the first two bins
in Figure 7. The head in (a) shows an entirely uniform pattern,
translation-invariant by definition. More interestingly, the head in
(b), from the transformer trained on BINARY MAJORITY INTER-
LEAVE, shows a perfectly periodic pattern reflecting the parity of
j − i:
                       T            ≈2        j − i even
                 pi K Qpj =                                        (82)
                                    ≈ −1.5 j − i odd
Intuitively, this pattern allows the head to specifically attend to po-
sitions at an even distance from the query position, which is impor-
tant for solving BINARY MAJORITY INTERLEAVE. As it only
depends on j − i, this satisfies (79) and the pattern is translation-
invariant, in accordance with our hypothesis class in Definition 4.17
Finally, in Figure 9, we study the single head which has Varof f set ≈         Figure 7: Product functions
8. Subfigure (a) shows the overall pattern of P T QTl,h Kl,h P . It is         across five small transformers
not translation-invariant, but still shows similarity to a compara-            trained on algorithmic tasks.
ble translation-invariant pattern in (b): pi K T Qpj is large when             Histogram of heads by their
j − i is small or very large, and small in between. In order to                offset variance measured by
understand the variability of the contributions that inner products            Varof f set (Eq. 81), for all
pTi K T Qpj make to attention weights across different offsets, we             heads from five small trans-
measure the variance of post-softmax weights across context win-               formers trained on algorith-
dows. Specifically, given a window size w < N , we apply soft-                 mic problems. Most heads
           T
max to P[:,o:o+w]   QTl,h Kl,h P[:,o:o+w] together with causal masking,        have very low Offset Vari-
where o ≤ N − w is the offset. We denote the post-softmax matrix               ance; we investigate these in
when offset is o as M (o) . Subfigure (c) shows this matrix at dif-            Figure 8. One head across the
ferent offsets o. Throughout, the softmax output is focused on the             five models has a higher vari-
immediately preceding position:                                                ance; we investigate it in Fig-
                                                                               ure 9.
                         (o)         ≈ 0.8 i − 1 = j
                   (M )ij =                                        (83)
                                     < 0.2 else
the attention logit dot products. We accounted for this, by fixing the variance term in layer norm as its average
value across a big amount of input data (around 240k tokens for small transformers and 400k tokens for GPT-2),
thus making it a linear operation. Effectively, we are thus able to account for layer norm by applying it as a
linear operation to the columns of P .
   16
      Due to causal masking, super-diagonal entries are irrelevant, see Definition 4.
   17
      In the asymptotic regime of n → ∞, our Inference Procedure prefers transformers where product functions
pTi K T Qpj are local, and thus cannot be periodic over unbounded distances. Such periodic relations are
instead, asymptotically, predicted to be covered by product functions additionally involving components whose
rank is penalized by R(Tn ), such as pTi K T QV pj . Our theory applies in the asymptotic limit, and thus
predicts that as n → ∞ (and thus d → ∞), this periodic pattern might instead be taken over by such products.
An extension of our theory that accounts for training dynamics, beyond an idealized inference procedure, may
be able to predict in which settings which kind of product will represent periodic relations.


                                                       80
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   (a)                                 (b)

Figure 8: Product functions across five small transformers trained on algorithmic tasks. (a)
P T QTl,h Kl,h P of a head whose variance is 0.001 (Figure 7 a). (b) P T QTl,h Kl,h P of a head whose
variance is 0.098 (second bin in Figure 7 (a)). This head represents an almost perfectly periodic
pattern, depending only on the parity of j − i. All heads with Offset Variance close to 0 look quali-
tatively like (a) or (b). We investigate the higher-variance head in Figure 9.


Thus, the product function makes an approximately translation-invariant contribution to attention
weights. Overall, the transformers trained on algorithmic problems show approximate translation-
invariance even though this is not enforced as part of standard initialization or training.

Results on an LM: GPT-2 Small We conduct the same
calculation on GPT-2 Small (Radford et al., 2019), a lan-
guage model with 12 layers, and 12 heads per layer,
which has served as a common object of study in the
mechanistic analysis of language models (Conmy et al.,
2023). The results are shown in Figure 10 and 11. Again,
there are heads producing near-constant products, and
heads producing a focus on positions i with small dis-
tance j−i. In addition to products of the form pi K T Qpj ,
we also inspected more complex products including value
matrices18 , finding these to generally be close to zero and
thus also translation-invariant. Overall, we have found
product functions in GPT-2 Small to display approxi-
mately offset-invariant behavior, again even though this
is not enforced in training or initialization.               Figure 10: Product Functions in GPT-
                                                             2 Small: Histograms of Offset Variance
G.7 C OMPARING                                               measured. Heads with variance close
APE AND N O PE ON I NDUCTION H EAD TASKS                     to 0 have approximately uniform values
                                                             (Figure 11a). Heads with higher vari-
We further conduct more experiments comparing the gen- ances are shown in Figure 11 (b–d).
eralization ability of transformers with APE and NoPE.
We have already found that APE performs better at NoPE
at a variety of task that are not expressible in C-RASP[∅],
such as COPY UNIQUE (Figure 1). Here, we further bol-
ster these results by (i) considering a parametric family of further such tasks, and (ii) conducting a
much broader hyperparameter search for NoPE.
We introduce 3 problems, and refer them as COPY UNIQUE t − 1, t − 2, t − 3 respectively.
Here, “t − c” means the problem is naturally solved with an attention pattern where each token
attends to the c-th last previous token. The t − 1 problem is identical to the COPY UNIQUE task
we described before; it asks the model to copy a string in which each token appears at most once
(hence, “UNIQUE”), and is naturally solved using an induction head circuit (Section 4.1). The t − 2
   18
      GPT-2 Small uses additional output matrices, e.g. Ol,h Vl,h , corresponding to the value matrices in our
theoretical analysis.


                                                     81
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  (a)                               (b)


                                                   (c)


Figure 9: Head 0,0 in a small transformer trained for COPY UNIQUE. This is the head whose
variance is 8.39 (the single head in the largest bin in Figure 7). (a) P T QTl,h Kl,h P . Values are high
when j − i is small or very large, and low in between. (b) For comparison, we show a similar
but perfectly translation-invariant matrix. We replace values P T QTl,h Kl,h P with their average
value along the diagonal. The pattern is qualitatively similar to (a), highlighting how (a) is similar
to though does not fully satisfy translation-invariance. (c) Heatmaps showing the post-softmax
matrices M (o) , where o = 0, 40, 80, 120, 160 respectively, and at a context window w = 50. Across
offsets, the largest contribution at position t is to the immediately preceding position t−1; that is, the
entries of the post-softmax matrix M (o) are largely determined by the relative distance j −i. Hence,
while the overall function is not exactly translation-invariant, the resulting attention behavior is
approximately offset-independent, and implements attention to the immediately preceding position.


                                                   82
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a)                       (b)                    (c)                      (d)


                                                  (e)
                   o=0                         o = 100                       o = 200


                             o = 300                          o = 400


Figure 11: Product functions in GPT-2 small. Heatmaps showing the product P T QTl,h Kl,h P of
heads in different bins in Figure 10. (a) A head whose Offset Variance is 0.6. The pattern is close to
uniform, making it trivially translation-invariant. (b–d) Heads with Offset Variances 66.0 (b), 87.9
(c), 142.1 (d). These heads (b–d) produce high products at small distances, and at distances ≈ 300.
The first aspect is exactly translation-invariant; the second one is approximately translation-invariant
in the middle of the range, though not when closer to the boundaries. (e) Heatmaps showing the post-
softmax matrices M (o) for Head 0,3, the head with largest variance in Figure 10, where o = 0, 100,
200, 300, 400 respectively, and window size w = 128. With the exception of positions very close to
the beginning (o = 0), the weights from query position j are focused on key positions i with small
j − i (note the green/yellow diagonal). Note that the green/yellow diagonal is faint as it is spread
over multiple small distances j − i, but it is consistently present and of consistent width. Hence, the
contribution of pi K T Qpj to attention patterns is largely independent of the offset here, even in the
head with the numerically largest Offset Variance.


                                                  83
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   APE                             NoPE
                     ≤ 50     [51, 100]   [101, 150]   ≤ 50    [51, 100] [101, 150]
              t-1    1.000      1.000       0.986      1.000     0.770     0.044
              t-2    1.000      1.000       0.977      0.999     0.232     0.000
              t-3    1.000      1.000       0.990      1.000     0.116     0.000

Table 8: Experimental results for transformer with APE and NoPE, on the three problems we de-
fined. The models are trained on data where L EN≤ 50, and tested on all three length ranges. Accu-
racy is averaged over 5 successful runs (accuracy on L EN ≤ 50 is greater than 0.99). We find the set
of hyperparameters that generalizes best in each case, shown in Table 10.

                                 APE                                NoPE
                    ≤ 128    [129, 256]   [257, 384]   ≤ 128    [129, 256]    [257, 384]
            t-1     1.000      1.000        0.989      1.000      0.602         0.000
            t-2     1.000      1.000        0.998      1.000      0.241         0.000
            t-3     1.000      1.000        0.997      0.997      0.058         0.000

Table 9: Experimental results for transformer with APE and NoPE, on the three problems we de-
fined. The models are trained on data where L EN≤ 128, and tested on all three length ranges.
Accuracy is averaged over 5 successful runs (accuracy on L EN ≤ 128 is greater than 0.99). We find
the set of hyperparameters that generalizes best in each case, shown in Table 11.


problem consists of inputs such as      SOS # 14 23 6 9 1 18 SEP 14 6 1 EOS That is,
the problem is tasked with copying every second token from the input, which can be naturally solved
using attention from position t to position t − 2. Finally, the t − 3 problem consists of inputs such
as     SOS # # 14 23 6 9 1 18 SEP 14 9 EOS
In general, for a t − c problem, each input sequence starts with SOSand c − 1 special tokens #,
and then continues with k · c unique tokens, where k ∈ Z+ is a positive integer, finally the output
sequence after SEP, which consists of every cth token in the input sequence. We introduce the extra
special token # so that the task is easily solved using an induction head-like construction attending
from position t to position t − c. The model is trained to output the tokens after SEP. In these
problems, L EN (recall Section E.2.1) refers to the length of the portion between SOSand SEP. The
minimum L EN is lmin = 2c − 1. The total vocabulary size of tokens except for special tokens is
equal to the maximum number of unique tokens needed, i.e., 150.
As before, the models are trained on sequences of L EN ≤ 50, and we optimize hyperparameters for
accuracy on lengths [51, 100]. For APE transformers, we fixed the architecture to have 2 layers and
1 head per layer, and the searching space is: learning rate = {0.001, 0.0001}, model dimension =
{64, 256, 512}, dropout rate = {0, 0.1}. For NoPE transformers, we search in a much larger space:
number of layers = {2, 3, 4, 5}, number of heads = {1, 2, 4}, learning rate = {0.001, 0.0001}, model
dimension = {64, 256, 512}, dropout rate = {0, 0.1}. Other hyperparameters are fixed and same as
before; the attention dropout is still 0. We sweep all hyperparameter combinations and select the
combination with highest accuracy on on [51, 100], shown in Table 10. The selected combination
is then used to train 5 models with different random seeds. The average accuracy on the test set
(different from before, each now 5,000 examples, more than before) is shown in Table 8. We can
see that, even though we search in a much larger space for NoPE and select the most generalizable
model according to accuracy on on [51, 100], APE’s performance is still far stronger than NoPE
across the board. We also change the length range, that is, we train model on sequences of L EN
≤ 128, and we optimize hyperparameters for accuracy on lengths [129, 256], and test the model’s
performance on [257, 384] as well as the previous two ranges. Results are shown in Table 9. We
see that, again, APE’s performance is superior than NoPE. These problems are easily expressed in
C-RASP[periodic, local] but not C-RASP[∅], and our theory thus predicts length generalization for
APE but not NoPE, in line with the empirical results.


                                                 84
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           APE                                         NoPE
              Model Arch          LR     Dropout          Model Arch           LR     Dropout
 t-1    2 layer; 1 head; 64 dim   1e-3     0.1      5 layer; 2 head; 512 dim   1e-3     0.1
 t-2   2 layer; 1 head; 256 dim   1e-4     0.1      5 layer; 4 head; 256 dim   1e-3     0.1
 t-3   2 layer; 1 head; 256 dim   1e-3     0.1      5 layer; 4 head; 256 dim   1e-3      0

Table 10: The best configuration of hyperparameters we found for each case in Table 8. Gray text
stands for fixed hyperparameter. Because we know 2 layers with 1 head can solve these problems
when using APE, we do not perform further search there. On the other hand, for NoPE, we perform
hyperparameter search over a larger space.


                           APE                                         NoPE
              Model Arch          LR     Dropout          Model Arch           LR     Dropout
 t-1    2 layer; 1 head; 64 dim   1e-3     0.1      5 layer; 1 head; 512 dim   1e-3     0.1
 t-2   2 layer; 1 head; 256 dim   1e-3     0.1      5 layer; 2 head; 512 dim   1e-3     0.1
 t-3   2 layer; 1 head; 256 dim   1e-3     0.1      5 layer; 2 head; 512 dim   1e-3     0.1

        Table 11: The best configuration of hyperparameters we found for each case in 9.


                                               85
