Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D ERIVING C AUSAL O RDER FROM S INGLE -VARIABLE
I NTERVENTIONS : G UARANTEES & A LGORITHM

                Mathieu Chevalley1,2†         Patrick Schwab1        Arash Mehrjou1,3†
                      1            2                 3
                          GSK.ai       ETH Zürich       MPI for Intelligent Systems



                                               A BSTRACT
          Targeted and uniform interventions to a system are crucial for unveiling causal re-
          lationships. While several methods have been developed to leverage interventional
          data for causal structure learning, their practical application in real-world scenar-
          ios often remains challenging. Recent benchmark studies have highlighted these
          difficulties, even when large numbers of single-variable intervention samples are
          available. In this work, we demonstrate, both theoretically and empirically, that
          such datasets contain a wealth of causal information that can be effectively ex-
          tracted under realistic assumptions about the data distribution. More specifically,
          we introduce a novel variant of interventional faithfulness, which relies on com-
          parisons between the marginal distributions of each variable across observational
          and interventional settings, and we introduce a score on causal orders. Under
          this assumption, we are able to prove strong theoretical guarantees on the opti-
          mum of our score that also hold for large-scale settings. To empirically verify
          our theory, we introduce I NTERSORT, an algorithm designed to infer the causal
          order from datasets containing large numbers of single-variable interventions by
          approximately optimizing our score. I NTERSORT outperforms baselines (GIES,
          DCDI, PC and EASE) on almost all simulated data settings replicating common
          benchmarks in the field. Our proposed novel approach to modeling interventional
          datasets thus offers a promising avenue for advancing causal inference, highlight-
          ing significant potential for further enhancements under realistic assumptions.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Causal structure learning is pivotal for understanding complex systems, aiming to discover causal
relationships from data. This field spans disciplines such as biology (Meinshausen et al., 2016;
Yu et al., 2004), medicine (Farmer et al., 2018; Joffe et al., 2012; Feuerriegel et al., 2024), and
social sciences Baum-Snow & Ferreira (2015); Imbens & Rubin (2015), where causal insights
drive informed decision-making and deepen our understanding of underlying processes. Tradi-
tionally, causal discovery has relied heavily on observational data, primarily because expansive
interventional experiments are often impractical or costly in many application domains. The
inherent limitations of observational data necessitate assumptions about data distribution to ensure
identifiability beyond the Markov equivalence class (Spirtes et al., 2000; Shimizu et al., 2006;
Hoyer et al., 2008). However, the emergence of large-scale interventional data, especially in
single-cell transcriptomics data (Replogle et al., 2022; Datlinger et al., 2017; 2021; Dixit et al.,
2016), introduces both new opportunities and challenges.
Interventional data, characterized by targeted alterations to a system, offers a unique perspective
for causal discovery. These controlled interventions reveal causal mechanisms often obscured in
observational studies. As such, many causal discovery methods using interventional data have
been proposed (Brouillard et al., 2020; Lorch et al., 2022; Lopez et al., 2022; Hauser & Bühlmann,
2012). However, their practicality remains challenging. For example, recent benchmarks in the gene
network domain (Chevalley et al., 2023; 2022) demonstrate that simpler models based on straight-
forward statistical comparisons between observational and interventional distribution outperforms
established causal discovery methods, particularly when many single-variable interventions are
    †
        Correspondence to m.chevalley97@gmail.com, arash@distantvantagepoint.com


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


available. The motivation for this research thus stemmed from these recent advances in applying
causal discovery techniques to gene network inference. Our methodology, including the use of
the Wasserstein distance, aligns with evaluation metrics for predicted graphs as established in the
benchmark by Chevalley et al. (2022). Additionally, a component of our algorithm builds upon and
formalizes approaches from leading models in gene network inference, such as those highlighted
in the CausalBench challenge (Kowiel et al., 2023; Nazaret & Hong, 2023; Deng & Guan, 2023;
Chevalley et al., 2023). This work not only addresses a critical domain of application but also
enhances the theoretical framework surrounding contemporary advancements in the field (Yu et al.,
2004; Chai et al., 2014; Akers & Murali, 2021; Hu et al., 2020).
Here, we study further the potential of single-variable interventional data for causal structure
discovery, which we reduce to finding the causal order (topological order) of the variables. Even
though the causal order represents a superset of the true causal relationships, it is useful per se.
Intuitively and informally, correlations are more likely to be causations if they follow the causal
order. More practically, it can for example be used to guide experimental design, as it greatly
reduces the hypothesis space. As a specific example, in biology, a task of interest is to select pairs
of genes to intervene on, which is a space much larger than single gene interventions. For a target
gene that let us assume lies in the middle of the causal order, the number of candidate double
                                       d
interventions goes from d2 down to 22 , where d is the number of variables.


To find the causal order, we introduce a data-based score to rank candidate causal orders, and we
establish theoretical guarantees on its optimum, providing upper-bounds on the expected error de-
pending on the graph density and on the probability for a variable to be intervened on, that also hold
for large scale settings. Crucially, our approach makes light assumptions on the data distributions,
requiring only what we call ϵ-interventional faithfulness, which characterizes the strength of changes
in marginal distributions between observational and interventional distributions. We then introduce
a novel algorithm called I NTERSORT that leverages this assumption to derive the causal order.
Our empirical evaluations on diverse simulated datasets (linear, random Fourier features (Lorch
et al., 2022), neural network (Nazaret et al., 2023; Brouillard et al., 2020) and single cell (Dibaeinia
& Sinha, 2020) with various noise distributions), which are close replications of real-world
systems and follow common practice in the field, confirm our theoretical results. The efficacy
of our approach in accurately determining the causal order from interventional data signifies a
notable advancement in causal inference. I NTERSORT outperforms the four baselines, namely
PC (Spirtes et al., 2000), GIES (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2012), DCDI (Brouillard et al., 2020) and
EASE (Gnecco et al., 2021) on almost all settings. It is also robust to data normalization (Reisach
et al., 2021), which is a failure mode of many recently proposed continuous optimization causal
discovery methods. Moreover, our empirical results show that Intersort makes more efficient use of
interventional information compared to existing approaches which is a critical advantage especially
in domains where interventions are costly and sometimes impossible to perform. This suggests
that the task of identifying causal structures with many single-variable interventions may be more
feasible than previously believed. Moreover, our method demonstrates similar performance and
robustness across different types of simulated data, emphasizing its reliability and versatility.
Our method relies on ϵ-interventional faithfulness which is a lighter version of many of the existing
assumptions in causal discovery literature, while still providing theoretical guarantees. Realistic
assumptions on the data distributions are crucial, as in many application domains such as gene
expression data, the validity of common assumptions in the field may be unverifiable or known to
not hold. Furthermore, many methods catastrophically fail when their assumptions do not hold,
rendering them inapplicable (Montagna et al., 2023a; Heinze-Deml et al., 2018).

2   R ELATED WORK
Causal ordering Even though the causal order does not contain the full causal information as it
does not uniquely identify the causal graph, it can subsequently be used with for example penalized
regression techniques to recover the edges (Bühlmann et al., 2014; Shimizu et al., 2011). Also, the
correct causal order is useful in itself as a fully connected graph can be constructed from it which
describes the interventional distributions (Peters & Bühlmann, 2015; Bühlmann et al., 2014). More
recently, following the discovery of Reisach et al. (2021) that identified an artifact in simulated
datasets where sorting variables by variance appears to recover the causal order under certain con-
ditions, many algorithms to recover the causal order from observational data have been proposed,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for example via score matching (Rolland et al., 2022; Montagna et al., 2023a;b). To our knowledge,
another work aiming to infer the causal order from interventions comes from Tian & Pearl (2001),
which builds on seminal works such as Cooper & Yoo (1999); Spirtes et al. (2000). Tian & Pearl
(2001) focus on causal discovery from passive interventions, where shifts in distributions arise natu-
rally. Our work brings two major contributions: first, we propose a score-based approach, in contrast
to the rule-based algorithm of Tian & Pearl (2001), which opens the door for a large class of opti-
mization tools and offers better scalability, and second, we provide extended theoretical results in
terms of upper-bounding the expected error of our algorithm, especially in cases where only a subset
of the variables is intervened on whereas Tian & Pearl (2001) argues mainly about the recovery of
the true causal order when ”all” variables are intervened. Adjacently, methods like DirectLiNGAM
(Shimizu et al., 2011) infer causal orderings from observational data under non-Gaussianity assump-
tions. As such, they score orderings based on fitted parameters, making it sensitive to distributional
assumptions. By leveraging interventional data, our approach relaxes distributional assumptions and
provides a more robust framework for causal ordering. Eberhardt et al. (2005; 2006) explored the
theoretical bounds on the number of experiments required for full causal structure identification.
Our work complements these findings by focusing on deriving causal orderings from single-variable
interventions under light assumptions, which can be more practical in large-scale applications.

3    C AUSAL O RDER : D EFINITIONS
We here introduce our framework for causality following Pearl (2009) and we follow the notations
of Peters et al. (2017). We also present the definition of a causal order as well as a divergence to
measure how faithfully a causal order recalls the causal information.
Statistical metric Let (M, d) be a metric space, and let P(M ) be the set of probability measures
over M . We define D : P(M )×P(M ) → [0, ∞) as a distance between probability measures on M .
Distribution We consider a set of d random variables X = (X1 , ..., Xd ) indexed by
V = {1, ..., d}, with associated joint distribution PX . We denote the marginal distribution
of each random variable as PXi , i ∈ V .
Causal Graph We write G = (V, E) a DAG between variables v ∈ V , E ⊆ V 2 , such that (v, v) ∈        /
E for all v ∈ V . We write AG the d × d adjacency matrix, where AG (i, j) = 1 ⇐⇒ (i, j) ∈ E.
We note Paj the parents of j, where i is a parent if (i, j) ∈ E. We note DEiG the descendants of i in
graph G. j is a descendant of i if there is a directed path from i to j. We note ANiG the ancestors of
i in graph G. j is an ancestor of i if there is a directed path from j to i.
Causal Order Given a causal graph G, we call a permutation of the variables:
                                             π : {1, ..., d} → {1, ..., d},
a causal ordering of the variables in G if it satisfies π(i) < π(j) if j ∈ DEiG (Peters et al., 2017). A
permutation is a bijective mapping of the indices to new indices.
For a causal graph, a causal ordering always exists, but may not be unique. We note the set of
causal orderings Π∗ , and any member of Π∗ as π ∗ . We can rearrange the variables according to a
permutation π, and we write the new associate adjacency matrix AGπ , where AGπ is upper triangular
                                              2             d−1
if π ∈ Π∗ . Lastly, we define AGπ = AGπ + AGπ + ... + AGπ       the transitive closure of the adjacency
matrix. It is straightforward to show that AGπ∗ (i, j) > 0 if and only if there is a directed path from
i to j in G. Furthermore, there may be a total causal effect* of i on j only if AGπ∗ (i, j) > 0. AGπ∗ is
also upper-triangular.
Top Order Divergence Dtop To measure the discrepancy between a permutation π and a graph
G, we use the top order divergence (Rolland et al., 2022). The top order divergence Dtop :
({1, ..., d}, {1, ..., d} × {1, ..., d}) × ({1, ..., d} → {1, ..., d}) → N0 is defined as:
                                                         X
                                       Dtop (G, π) =             AG (i, j).
                                                         π(i)>π(j)

Dtop counts the number of edges that cannot be recovered given a topological order π, or said
differently, the number of false negative edges of the fully connected DAG corresponding to π.
                                                                                                C,do(Xk :=Ñ ))
    * There is a total causal effect of i on j if there exists some Ñ    such that Xi ̸⊥
                                                                                        ⊥ Xj in PX
(Definition 6.12 in Peters et al. (2017)).


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As such, it represents a lower bound on the structural hamming distance (SHD) achievable when
constrained to a particular topological order.
Observation 1. The divergence Dtop can also be written as Dtop (G, π) = i<j AGπ (i, j).
                                                                       P

Lemma 1. Let π ∗ ∈ Π∗ be a causal ordering for G. Then Dtop (G, π ∗ ) = 0. (Rolland et al., 2022)

SCMs and interventions An acyclic structural causal model (SCM) C = (S, PN ) is determined
by a collection of d assignments sj ∈ S, | S |= d, such that for each assignment sj defines Xj
                                           Xj := fj (Xpaj , Nj ),
 where Paj ∈ V \ j is the set of variables on which Xj directly depends on and PN is a joint
distribution over the noise variables N = (N1 , ..., Nd ) that is jointly independent (Peters et al.,
2017). The associated graph G that connects variables to their parents is assumed to be acyclic.
                                      (C,do(X :=Ñ ))
                                           k     k
Distribution with Intervention PX                     An intervention is then defined as a replacement
of a subset of the structural assignments of an SCM C, such that no cycle is created. In this work, we
consider intervention on a single variable, where the structural assignment is replaced by a new ran-
dom variable independent of the parents. We denote the new distribution entailed by an intervention
  C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
PX                . We denote I ⊆ {1, ...d} the set of nodes that are intervened on. We also assume
                                                                                     C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
that for each intervention, we have access to the interventional distribution PX                       , k ∈ I.
                                                               S
The set of interventional random variables is denoted as Ñ = k∈I {Ñk }.

4   ϵ-I NTERVENTIONAL FAITHFULNESS
We here introduce the main assumption of our work that we name interventional faithfulness. Akin
to the common assumption of faithfulness of a joint distribution with respect to the true graph,
which assumes that all d-separations in the graph are reflected by conditional independences in the
entailed distribution, ϵ-interventional faithfulness assumes that all paths in the graphs are revealed
by changes in distribution under intervention above a significance threshold ϵ. This assumption is
also similar to how Mooij et al. (2016) define causality as the existence of interventions inducing a
change in distribution. The main difference with comparable assumptions made in the literature is
that this definition depends on a statistical distance and significance threshold, instead of an oracle
of the statistical dependence. We formalize our assumption as follows:
                                             C,(∅)        C,do(X :=Ñ )
                                                             k    k
Definition 1. Given the distributions PX         and PX             , ∀k ∈ I, we say that the tuple
(Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally
                              faithful to the graph G associated to C if for all i ̸= j, i ∈ I, j ∈ V ,
      C,(∅)   C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
D PXj , PXj                     > ϵ if and only if there is a directed path from i to j in G.

The concept of interventional faithfulness, where interventions on a node cause significant devia-
tions in the distribution of downstream nodes, is discussed in various contexts. It aligns closely
with the notion of ”c-faithfulness” in causal graphs, where interventional distributions respect the
causal structure and result in significant changes in downstream nodes (Shanmugam et al., 2015;
Squires et al., 2020), and with the notion of ”influentiality” (Tian & Pearl (2001), Definition 2).
Assumption 4.4 in Yang et al. (2018) explicitly states that interventions on upstream nodes should
affect downstream nodes. The causal Markov condition and faithfulness for both observational and
interventional distributions also support this idea (Addanki & Kasiviswanathan, 2021). The use of
interventional data to improve the identifiability of causal models is another related concept, em-
phasizing how interventions can reveal causal relationships not identifiable from observational data
alone (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2014).
Lemma 2. If all interventions in Ñ have full support and all directed paths in G imply a total causal
effect, then (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally faithful for ϵ = 0. (Follows from Proposition 6.13 in Peters
et al. (2017).)
Lemma P3. Consider a linear structural causal model C defined by the equations
Xj =        i∈Paj βij Xi + Nj , where βij are the weights representing causal effects, drawn in-
dependently from a continuous distribution, and Nj are noise variables that are independent of
each other and of the parent variables, each with a distribution having full support. Let the Ñi be
distributions with full support. Then, (Ñ , C) is almost surely ϵ-interventionally faithful for ϵ = 0,
as the total causal effect along any directed path is non-zero with probability one.

                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark. If (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally
                                          faithful for ϵ = 0, then it  is also ϵ-interventionally
                                                                                                 faithful
                            C,(∅)   C,do(Xi :=Ñi )                               C,(∅)      C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
for all 0 < ϵ < min{D PXj , PXj                        , ∀(i, j) ∈ E : D PXj , PXj                             > 0}

Lemma 3 shows that the ϵ-interventionally faithful assumption covers a large class of SCMs. We
leave further theoretical work to characterize how large the class of ϵ-interventionally faithful
(Ñ , C) tuples is as future work.

5   L ATENT CONFOUNDERS
Until now, we have assumed that all causal variables are observed, an assumption called causal suf-
ficiency. We here discuss how the notion of interventional faithfulness and the results of this paper
are applicable to the case where only a subset of the causal variables are observed. This is a common
situation in practice either because we want to focus on a subset of variables which are of our inter-
est, or because we are certain about the existence of unobserved confounders. To that end, we take
the common formalization of marginalized SCMs, that marginalizes the latent confounders from the
joint distribution and gives rise to a new SCM where the effects of marginalized variables are now
reflected in functional dependencies among observed variables. Therefore, some variables become
confounded as they depend on the same noise variables. An important property of acyclic SCMs
is that they are closed under marginalizations and that their marginalization respects the latent pro-
jection (Bongers et al., 2021). The latent projection describes how to construct a new graph among
the remaining variables, representing the appearance of confounders, or dependent noise variables,
with bidirected (hyper) edges (Verma, 1991; Evans, 2016; 2018b). Those two representations are
referred to as Acyclic Directed Mixed Graphs (ADMGs) (Verma, 1991; Andrews et al., 2022; Verma
& Pearl, 2022; Richardson, 2003) and mDAGs (Evans, 2016; 2018a; Bongers et al., 2021). For our
purpose, both representations are equivalent, and we thus focus on ADMGs. For the DAG G of the
original SCM, we write the projection over a subset of variables V ′ ⊂ V as G ′ = (V ′ , E ′ , B), where
B is a set of bidirected edges, and the marginalized SCM as C ′ .
Proposition 1. If the tuple (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally faithful to the graph G associated to C,
then for any marginalization    V ′ ⊂ V , the marginalized SCM C ′ and the subset of interventional
                 ′
distributions Ñ = k∈I V ′ {Ñk } is ϵ-interventionally faithful to (V ′ , E ′ ) from the projected
                       S
                              T

ADMG G ′ = (V ′ , E ′ , B).
This result derives directly from the fact that ancestral relationships are preserved in the projected
graph, and that the (interventional) distributions induced by the marginalized SCM correspond to
the marginals of the distributions induced by the original SCM (Bongers et al., 2021). As such, our
algorithm is applicable to settings with confounders or on subsets of variables, and the theoretical
guarantees hold for the projected DAG (V ′ , E ′ ). However, we note that we here implicitly assume
that there is no selection bias in the sampling process (e.g., preferential inclusion of certain data
points or experiments), and that latent confounders remain stable across conditions.

6 A SCORE ON CAUSAL ORDERS
                                     C,(∅)
Given an observational distribution PX                     and a set of interventional distributions
            C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
Pint =    {PX               ,k  ∈ I}, I ⊆ V , we define the following score for a permutation
π, for some statistical distance D : P(M ) × P(M ) → [0, ∞), ϵ > 0, c > ϵ:

                         C,(∅)                                C,(∅)   C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
                                              X
        S(π, ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint , c) =                   D PXj , PXj                    −ϵ
                                          π(i)<π(j),i∈I,j∈V                                                       (1)
                                          + c · d · 1   C,(∅)        C,do(Xi :=Ñi )

                                                       D PX        ,PX                  >ϵ
                                                              j        j

 Intuitively, the sum quantifies how the causal order corresponds to strong causal effects. The
rescaling from the second term by a factor of d ensures that effects higher than ϵ will force the
optimal solution to have π(i) < π(j) by inflating their weight compared to effects smaller than ϵ.
Usually, we can set the ϵ of eq. (1) to the same value of ϵ-interventional faithfulness as the input
dataset, unless it is equal to zero. However, the remark in section 4 ensures the existence of a
suitable ϵ in that case, as it can be chosen in a data-driven way by taking a non-zero value for ϵ
smaller than the smallest non-negative distance.
                                               C,(∅)           k  C,do(X :=Ñ )
                                                                    k
Theorem 1. Assume that we are given PX              and PX            , ∀k ∈ I and I = V , such
that (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally faithful for some ϵ > 0, and let πopt ∈ arg maxπ S(π). Then
Dtop (G, πopt ) = Dtop (G, π ∗ ) = 0.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The above theorem shows that in the case where we observe interventions on all the variables,
we are guaranteed to find a valid topological order by maximizing our score when the data is
ϵ-interventionally faithful. Similar results were proven for this case where all the variables are
intervened (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2012; Tian & Pearl, 2001). We now turn to the case where
variables have a probability of being intervened smaller than one. In that case, the error will not be
zero in expectation, and we thus aim to upper-bound the expected error as measured by Dtop . We
first prove an important property of the optimum to our proposed score. Lemma 4 shows that for a
given edge, a single intervention among a large set of candidate variables is sufficient to correctly
order the two variables of an edge.
                                                      C,(∅)  k   k C,do(X :=Ñ )
Lemma 4. Assume that we are given PX             and PX            , ∀k ∈ I, such that (Ñ , C) is ϵ-
interventionally faithful for some ϵ > 0, and let πopt ∈ arg maxπ S(π). Let (i, j) ∈ E, then if j ∈ I
or for some k ∈ ANGj \ ANGi , k ∈ I, then πopt (i) < πopt (j).

We now use this result to derive a graph dependent upper-bound to the expected error, given a
uniform probability for a variable to be intervened. We leave theoretical derivations for other
intervention distributions, for example data dependent intervention selection, as future work.
                                                       C,(∅)k   k  C,do(X :=Ñ )
Theorem 2. Assume that we are given PX          and PX             , ∀k ∈ I, such that (Ñ , C) is ϵ-
interventionally faithful for some ϵ > 0, and let I be chosen uniformly at random, where pint :=
                                                                               G        G
P (i ∈ I)∀i ∈ V, 0 < pint < 1, then E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤ (i,j)∈G (1 − pint )|ANj ∪{j}\ANi | .
                                                         P


7    R ELAXATION OF ϵ-I NTERVENTIONAL FAITHFULNESS
We now look at the case where ϵ-interventional faithfulness may not be fully fulfilled and we derive
some bounds for that setting. We consider the worst case to be the one where interventions only
reveal direct causal relationships, i.e., only children are affected by a node intervention such that
the distance is larger than ϵ. We can hypothesize that real distributions lie on a continuum between
those two extremes, that is, some interventions have an ϵ-strong effect only on children and other
interventions have an effect on more downstream variables. This restricted setting also covers the
case when multiple paths between two variables i and j ”cancel out” the causal effect of i on j. In
that restricted setting, we can rewrite lemma 4 as follows:
Lemma 5. Let (i, j) ∈ E, then if j ∈ I or for some k ∈ PaGj \ PaGi , k ∈ I, then πopt (i) < πopt (j).

It is then straightforward that the bound on Dtop for πopt in that case is:
Theorem 3. Let I be chosen uniformly at random, where pint := P (i ∈ I)∀i ∈ V, 0 < pint < 1,
                                                G        G
then E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤ (i,j)∈G (1 − pint )|Paj ∪{j}\Pai | .
                         P


Now that the bound only depends on the parent of the variables, it becomes possible to find a closed
form for the expectation of Dtop for a particular graph distribution.
Theorem 4. Let I be chosen uniformly at random, G be a random Erdos-Renyi directed acyclic
graph withh edge probability pe , where pinti := P (i ∈ I)∀i ∈ V, 0 < pint , then E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤
(1−pint )2                                        d

  pint       d − (1 − pint pe ) 1−(1−p int pe )
                                    pint pe            . We also have a looser, but independent of pe , bound
                                 2
E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤ (1−p int )
                       pint     d.

The natural next step is to look at how the bound behaves as d goes to infinity. More precisely, let’s
                              E[Dtop (G,πopt )]                                        E[Dtop (G,πopt )]
look at the normalized error          d         . If pe is fixed, we simply get limd→∞         d         ≤
(1−pint )2
  pint     . However, in realistic scenarios, we can expect the edge probability to depend on the num-
ber of variables. A common assumption is that the expected number of edges per variable is constant.
                            d(d−1)
Lemma 6. Let E|E| =            2     peh = 2c (d − 1), where ci >                  0, c ∈ R is a constant, then
                                     2
       E[Dtop (G,πopt )]
limd→∞         d         ≤ (1−p int )
                              pint
                                               1
                                        1 − pint ·c (1 − e
                                                           −pint ·c
                                                                    ) .

The above lemma shows that the expected error as d goes to infinity is O(d), providing a strong
guarantee on πopt even in a large scale setting.

                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8     I NTERSORT
Given that our score for causal order eq. (1) is optimized over a set of permutations, finding
the optimum by exhaustively trying all possible solutions becomes intractable as the number of
variables grows larger. We thus develop an algorithm to tractably find a solution that optimizes for
our proposed score in eq. (1). This algorithm consists of two steps. The first step uses a different
score to find an initial solution. In the second step, this solution is refined by performing a local
search using our original score eq. (1).

8.1   I NTERSORT STEP 1: F INDING AN INITIAL SOLUTION
To find an initial solution, we design a new score, similar to eq. (1), but this time on graphs.
    intuition is that we  want to score edges directly, and edges (i, j) that have a distance
The
      C,(∅)   C,do(X :=Ñ )
                    i   i
D PXj , PXj                 greater than ϵ should be on the upper-triangular part. We thus write this
new score Sinit as follows:

                             C,(∅)                            C,(∅)   C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
                                                X
        Sinit G, ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint =                   D PXj , PXj                     − ϵ|G|    (2)
                                              (i,j)∈G,i∈I

Then, we aim to find a DAG G that maximizes this score.

                                                          C,(∅)
                        Gopt = arg max Sinit G, ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint                                  (3)
                                   G∈GDAG

  Once again, the search over all possible DAGs is computationally expensive. We thus
design
         an approximation  algorithm based on the following heuristic: the highest values
      C,(∅)  C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
D PXj , PXj                  , which can be seen as a score on the corresponding edge (i, j),
should be edges in the solution DAG to maximize the score Sinit . To do so, we sort the edges based
on this ”edge score” from highest to lowest. We then construct our solution by adding the edges
following the sorted order, adding an edge only if it does not
                                                              break the acyclity of the solution. We
                                                               C,(∅)  C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
then stop adding edges when those have a score Dij = D PXj , PXj                      lower than ϵ in
the matrix D = (Dij ). The topological order of this solution Gopt for Sinit is then used as initial
condition for our original objective of maximizing S. The runtime of this algorithm is dominated
by the sorting step, which is O(d · |I| log(d · |I|)). We call this procedure SORTRANKING and
illustrate it in algorithm 2 in the appendix.

8.2   I NTERSORT STEP 2: A LOCAL SEARCH FOR πopt
Starting from the initial solution found by maximizing eq. (2), we then perform a greedy
local search to optimize our original objective eq. (1). At each step, given a current solu-
tion, we search in a close neighbourhood set for a candidate permutation π with a higher
score than our current solution. To derive the neighborhood set, we introduce an operator
Σ : {{1, ...d} → {1, ...d}} → {{1, ...d} → {1, ...d}}, defined such that for a given set of per-
mutations Π, Σ(Π) returns a new set of permutations Π′ . Each permutation π ∈ Π is modified by
applying σ : {1, ...d} → {1, ...d} → {{1, ...d} → {1, ...d}}, which for each variable i ∈ V , returns
all the permutations such that π(i) takes any of the other d − 1 possible values. σ takes one permuta-
tion as input and return a set of permutations which is O(d2 ). The total number of applications of Σ,
denoted as k, directly defines the neighborhood size which is O(d2k ). This definition allows us to
explore varying depths of the search space, which is O(d!), by controlling k, thereby balancing be-
tween the breadth of the search and the computational resources required. A smaller k value implies
a tighter search around the initial solution and encode our confidence in the initial solution, optimiz-
ing runtime at the potential cost of missing broader, potentially better solutions. In our experiments,
we use k = 1. We then stop once an iteration of the algorithm brings no improvement to the score.
This procedure, that we name LOCALSEARCH, is described in algorithm 3 in the appendix. Our com-
plete algorithm for finding the causal order is called I NTERSORT (see algorithm 1 in the appendix).
Now arises the question of how close the solutions from the approximation algorithm INTERSORT
are to the optimum of eq. (1). We evaluate this empirically for graphs with 5 variables, where
computing the exact solution is still viable. The results are presented in fig. 1a. As can be observed,
the mean Dtop scores of the two algorithms are very close and have overlapping confidence intervals
(at level 95%).


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a) Simulation with 5 variables                      (b) Simulation with 30 variables

Figure 1: Simulation and comparison between the two bounds, and between Intersort and the exact
πopt . For each setting, we draw 20 graphs per setting, where a setting is the tuple (pint , pe ). Then,
for each graph, we run the algorithm on 10 configurations, where each configuration corresponds
to a draw of the targeted variables following pint . For both 5 and 30 variables, we have pint ∈
{0.25, 0.33, 0.5, 0.66, 0.75}. In the 5 variables setting on the left, we have pe ∈ {0.5, 0.66, 0.75}.
In the 30 variables settings on the right, we have pe ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2}. The settings are ordered on
                                                                     pint
the x-axis following what we call the effective intervention ratio √   pe . We observe that the error is
approximately monotonic when ordered by the effective intervention ratio.


We note that more refined algorithms could be developed to solve this optimization over permuta-
tions. For example, for large d, the local search may become computationally expensive. However,
for the purpose of this study, we find the proposed algorithm to have satisfying properties, as it
scales to settings with 30 variables and finds a solution close to the optimum. We also report
results for a scale-free network modelled with the Barabasi-Albert distribution Albert & Barabási
(2002) in the appendix in fig. 3, which supports the generality of our approach. We also report the
performance of SORTRANKING in large scale settings in figs. 4 and 5. The results demonstrate
that the our score can be optimized at scale, even though we can observe room for improvement,
as the error is above the upper-bounds for many settings. As such, we leave further algorithmic
development for large scale settings as potential future work.

9    E STIMATING THE DISTANCES FROM I . I . D SAMPLES
We now turn to the question of computing the statistical distances between observational and
interventional distributions from real samples. Indeed, until now, we assumed access to population
distributions, such that D(P, Q) = 0 if and only if P = Q. However, in a real world setting, we may
                                                                                                C,(∅)
only assume that we have access to i.i.d samples from the distributions, that is {X i }ni=1
                                                                                         0
                                                                                            ∼ PX
                                n           C,do(X :=Ñ )
and for j ∈ {1, . . . , d}, {X i }i=1
                                   j
                                      ∼ PX       j   j
                                                       , where n0 , . . . , nd ∈ N are the sample sizes
of the observational set and of the interventional sets. Given this setting, we require a statistical
distance with the following properties: it should be applicable to sample distributions, the distance
between i.i.d samples should converge to the distance between the population distribution as n goes
to infinity, with some guarantees on the convergence rate. A distance that fulfills all those criteria
is the Wasserstein
                 √ distance
                              Villani et al. (2009). More specifically, it converges to the population
distance in O √lnnn , where n is the number of samples. We recall the definition of this distance
in the appendix.

10    E MPIRICAL RESULTS
We now evaluate Intersort on simulated empirical data and compare its performance to various
baselines. The graphs are simulated from a Erdos-Renyi distribution (Erdős et al., 1960), with an
expected number of edges per variable c ∈ {1, 2}. We follow a setup close to (Lorch et al., 2022)
to simulate data from linear and random Fourier features (RFF) additive functional relationships.
We also apply the models to simulated single-cell data from the SERGIO (Dibaeinia & Sinha,
2020) model, using the code from Lorch et al. (2022) (MIT License, v1.0.5). Lastly, we apply
on neural network functional data following the setup of Brouillard et al. (2020) and using the
implementation of Nazaret et al. (2023) (MIT License, v0.1.0). We run the models on varying


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) Linear 30 variables                              (b) RFF 30 variables


                 (c) NN 30 variables                                (d) GRN 30 variables

Figure 2: Comparison of the performance of the baselines and of our model I NTERSORT across
diverse data domains as presented (linear, RFF, NN and GRN data), for 30 variables. The x-axis
corresponds to the fraction of variables that have been targeted by an intervention. The y-axis is the
performance of causal ordering prediction as measured by the Dtop metric (see section 3, lower is
better). The violins are order from left to right: EASE, PC, DCDI, GIES, Intersort. Results for 10
and 100 variables can be found in the appendix (figs. 7 and 8).

levels of intervention, where the ratio of intervened variables is in {25%, 50%, 75%, 100%}. The
data is always standardized based on the mean and variance of the observational dataset, which
removes the Varsortability (Reisach et al., 2021) artefact in the data. For the RFF and linear domain,
the distribution of the noise is chosen uniformly at random from uniform Gaussian (noise scale
independent from the parents), heteroscedastic Gaussian (noise scale functionally dependent on the
parents), and Laplace. For the neural network domain, the noise distribution is Gaussian with a fixed
variance. We run on 10 simulated datasets for each domain and each ratio of intervened variables.
We simulate 5000 samples for the observational datasets and 100 samples for each interventions,
which is a setting similar to real single cell transcriptomics datasets (Replogle et al., 2022).
Choosing appropriate baselines to compare to is not trivial, given that, to our knowledge, our setting
of predicting the causal order from interventional data has not been considered in the literature, as the
focus in prior literature has been on observational data (Reisach et al., 2021; Bühlmann et al., 2014;
Rolland et al., 2022; Shimizu et al., 2011). As such, we construct causal orders from the CPDAG
predicted by two standard methods, namely PC (Spirtes et al., 2000) and GIES (Hauser & Bühlmann,
2012), by creating a DAG from the oriented edges and then computing the topological order of this
DAG. PC is a constrained based method relying on conditional independence tests to estimate the
structure of the graph. We run the implementation of Zheng et al. (2024) (MIT License, causal-learn
v0.1.3). GIES is an extension to interventional data of the GES model (Chickering, 2002), which
is a score based method that greedily adds and removes edges to the estimated CPDAG. We use


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the Gaussian BIC score, and run the package implementation of Gamella (2022) (BSD 3-Clause
License, v0.0.1). Additionally, we compare to EASE (Gnecco et al., 2021), which is a method that
aims to learn the causal order from observational data, leveraging the insight that extreme tail-values
reveal the causal order. Given that interventions can lead to extreme values not present in the obser-
vational data, we also compare to this method. For EASE, we run our own Python implementation of
the algorithm. Lastly, we compare to DCDI (Brouillard et al., 2020), which is a continuously differ-
entiable causal discovery model that can leverage interventional data. For Intersort, we use ϵ = 0.3
for the linear, RFF and neural network domain, and ϵ = 0.5 for the single-cell domain. We set c =
0.5. We compute the Wassertein distances with the S CI P Y python package (Virtanen et al., 2020).
The results for each method on the different types of data considered are displayed in fig. 2, where
the distribution of the Dtop score of each model is plotted against the ratios of intervened variables
considered. As can be observed, I NTERSORT performs well on all data domains, and shows
decreasing error as more interventions are available, exhibiting the model’s capability to capitalize
on the interventional information to recover the causal order across diverse settings. Compared to
the baselines, only GIES in the linear domain and DCDI in the neural network domain at 25% and
50% perform better. These experiments demonstrate that ϵ-interventional faithfulness is fulfilled
by a diverse set of data types, and that this property can be robustly exploited to recover causal
information. Only when strong assumptions about the data distributions are fulfilled, such as linear
data for GIES, can better results be obtained in low intervention settings.



11    D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We note that I NTERSORT’s performance could still be improved in various ways. For example, a
more scalable or closer to the optimum approximation algorithm could be designed. Scalability of
Intersort in its current form is mainly constrained by the LOCALSEARCH component, for which
alternative optimization techniques could be employed to enhance efficiency and manage larger
variable sets. Also, the optimal parameter ϵ could be chosen in a data dependent way instead of
using a fixed value. Lastly, other statistical distances, especially ones that converge faster to 0
in terms of number of samples when the two distributions are equal, could lead to better results.
We leave such potential improvements as future work. Another question that may need further
investigation is the ϵ-interventional faithfulness assumption. We argue that it is not any stronger
than common assumption in the literature such as faithfulness, and lemma 3 shows that it already
covers a sizeable set of SCMs. Furthermore, our empirical results demonstrate that it probably
holds for a rather large class of SCMs. We also derive theoretical results for a relaxation of this
assumption in section 7. An interesting direction of theoretical work would be to further analyze the
intricate relationship between the statistical distance D, the number of variables d, the parameter
ϵ, the interventional random variables Ñ , and the sample size for non-asymptotic settings. For
example, our framework makes it amenable to study the strength of the interventions needed to
reveal the causal descendants above a statistically significant threshold.
In this study, we introduced I NTERSORT, an innovative algorithm designed to uncover the causal
order from interventional data by optimizing for a new proposed score on causal orders. We intro-
duced the ϵ-interventional faithfulness assumption and proved that interventional datasets fulfilling it
have strong guarantees in terms of upper-bounds on the expected error of the optimum of our score.
The performance of I NTERSORT and the validity of our theoretical findings was extensively demon-
strated on a diverse set of simulated datasets, across functional relationships, noise types and graph
densities. I NTERSORT has demonstrated superior performance when compared to established bench-
marks such as PC, GIES, DCDI and EASE. The robustness and versatility of I NTERSORT underscore
the potential of the ϵ-interventional faithfulness assumption to reshape causal inference methodolo-
gies. We envision that this work should spearhead new model development based on our proposed
perspective on dataset with high numbers of single variable interventions. This includes downstream
tasks such as causal discovery, for example by reconstructing the graph given the estimated causal or-
der. It could inform active intervention selection as well, as designing a policy to choose which vari-
ables to target next may lead to better guarantees than our results based on interventions selected uni-
formly at random. All these directions and method developments can have real world impact on crit-
ical application domains such as biology, from which this work and its assumptions were inspired.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND DISCLOSURE
The authors thank Djordje Miladinovic, Aleksei Triastcyn and Lachlan Stuart for feedback and edits
on the manuscript. The authors also thank Prof. Nicolai Meinshausen for valuable suggestions on
the theoretical part, as well as Prof. Stefan Bauer for discussions about related work and relevance
of the project. MC, AM and PS are employees and shareholders of GSK plc.

R EFERENCES
Raghavendra Addanki and Shiva Kasiviswanathan. Collaborative causal discovery with atomic in-
  terventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12761–12773, 2021.
Miklós Ajtai, János Komlós, and Gábor Tusnády. On optimal matchings. Combinatorica, 4:259–
 264, 1984.
Kyle Akers and TM Murali. Gene regulatory network inference in single-cell biology. Current
  Opinion in Systems Biology, 26:87–97, 2021.
Réka Albert and Albert-László Barabási. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of
   modern physics, 74(1):47, 2002.
Bryan Andrews, Gregory F Cooper, Thomas S Richardson, and Peter Spirtes. The m-connecting
  imset and factorization for admg models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08963, 2022.
Nathaniel Baum-Snow and Fernando Ferreira. Causal inference in urban and regional economics.
  In Handbook of regional and urban economics, volume 5, pp. 3–68. Elsevier, 2015.
Stephan Bongers, Patrick Forré, Jonas Peters, and Joris M Mooij. Foundations of structural causal
  models with cycles and latent variables. The Annals of Statistics, 49(5):2885–2915, 2021.
Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexandre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Alexandre
  Drouin. Differentiable causal discovery from interventional data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.
Peter Bühlmann, Jonas Peters, and Jan Ernest. Cam: Causal additive models, high-dimensional
  order search and penalized regression. 2014.
Lian En Chai, Swee Kuan Loh, Swee Thing Low, Mohd Saberi Mohamad, Safaai Deris, and
  Zalmiyah Zakaria. A review on the computational approaches for gene regulatory network con-
  struction. Computers in biology and medicine, 48:55–65, 2014.
Mathieu Chevalley, Yusuf Roohani, Arash Mehrjou, Jure Leskovec, and Patrick Schwab. Causal-
 Bench: A Large-scale Benchmark for Network Inference from Single-cell Perturbation Data.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17283, 2022.
Mathieu Chevalley, Jacob Sackett-Sanders, Yusuf Roohani, Pascal Notin, Artemy Bakulin, Dariusz
 Brzezinski, Kaiwen Deng, Yuanfang Guan, Justin Hong, Michael Ibrahim, Wojciech Kotlowski,
 Marcin Kowiel, Panagiotis Misiakos, Achille Nazaret, Markus Püschel, Chris Wendler, Arash
 Mehrjou, and Patrick Schwab. The CausalBench challenge: A machine learning contest for gene
 network inference from single-cell perturbation data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15395, 2023.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine
  learning research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002.
Gregory F. Cooper and Changwon Yoo. Causal discovery from a mixture of experimental and obser-
  vational data. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
  UAI’99, pp. 116–125, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN
  1558606149.
Paul Datlinger, André F Rendeiro, Christian Schmidl, Thomas Krausgruber, Peter Traxler, Johanna
  Klughammer, Linda C Schuster, Amelie Kuchler, Donat Alpar, and Christoph Bock. Pooled crispr
  screening with single-cell transcriptome readout. Nature methods, 14(3):297–301, 2017.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paul Datlinger, André F Rendeiro, Thorina Boenke, Martin Senekowitsch, Thomas Krausgruber,
  Daniele Barreca, and Christoph Bock. Ultra-high-throughput single-cell rna sequencing and per-
  turbation screening with combinatorial fluidic indexing. Nature methods, 18(6):635–642, 2021.

Kaiwen Deng and Yuanfang Guan. A supervised lightgbm-based approach to the gsk. ai causalbench
  challenge (iclr 2023). 2023.

Payam Dibaeinia and Saurabh Sinha. Sergio: a single-cell expression simulator guided by gene
  regulatory networks. Cell systems, 11(3):252–271, 2020.

Atray Dixit, Oren Parnas, Biyu Li, Jenny Chen, Charles P Fulco, Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Nemanja D
  Marjanovic, Danielle Dionne, Tyler Burks, Raktima Raychowdhury, et al. Perturb-seq: dissecting
  molecular circuits with scalable single-cell rna profiling of pooled genetic screens. cell, 167(7):
  1853–1866, 2016.

Frederick Eberhardt, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. On the number of experiments sufficient
  and in the worst case necessary to identify all causal relations among n variables. In Proceedings
  of the Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’05, pp. 178–184,
  Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2005. AUAI Press. ISBN 0974903914.

Frederick Eberhardt, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. N-1 experiments suffice to determine
  the causal relations among n variables. Innovations in machine learning: theory and applications,
  pp. 97–112, 2006.

Paul Erdős, Alfréd Rényi, et al. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad.
  Sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.

Robin Evans. Markov properties for mixed graphical models. In Handbook of graphical models,
  pp. 39–60. CRC Press, 2018a.

Robin J Evans. Graphs for margins of bayesian networks. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 43(3):
  625–648, 2016.

Robin J Evans. Margins of discrete bayesian networks. 2018b.

Ruth E Farmer, Daphne Kounali, A Sarah Walker, Jelena Savović, Alison Richards, Margaret T
  May, and Deborah Ford. Application of causal inference methods in the analyses of randomised
  controlled trials: a systematic review. Trials, 19:1–14, 2018.

Stefan Feuerriegel, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal, Konstantin Hess, Ali-
  cia Curth, Stefan Bauer, Niki Kilbertus, Isaac S Kohane, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Causal
  machine learning for predicting treatment outcomes. Nature Medicine, 30(4):958–968, 2024.

Juan L. Gamella. gies python package, 2022. URL https://github.com/juangamella/
  gies.

Nicola Gnecco, Nicolai Meinshausen, Jonas Peters, and Sebastian Engelke. Causal discovery in
  heavy-tailed models. The Annals of Statistics, 49(3):1755–1778, 2021.

Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional markov
  equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13
  (1):2409–2464, 2012.

Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Two optimal strategies for active learning of causal models from
  interventional data. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 55(4):926–939, 2014.

Christina Heinze-Deml, Marloes H Maathuis, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal structure learning.
  Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application, 5:371–391, 2018.

Patrik Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonlinear
  causal discovery with additive noise models. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  21, 2008.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xinlin Hu, Yaohua Hu, Fanjie Wu, Ricky Wai Tak Leung, and Jing Qin. Integration of single-cell
  multi-omics for gene regulatory network inference. Computational and Structural Biotechnology
  Journal, 18:1925–1938, 2020.
Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical sci-
  ences. Cambridge university press, 2015.
Michael Joffe, Manoj Gambhir, Marc Chadeau-Hyam, and Paolo Vineis. Causal diagrams in systems
 epidemiology. Emerging themes in epidemiology, 9(1):1–18, 2012.
Marcin Kowiel, Wojciech Kotlowski, and Dariusz Brzezinski. Causalbench challenge: Differences
 in mean expression. 2023.
Romain Lopez, Jan-Christian Hütter, Jonathan K Pritchard, and Aviv Regev. Large-scale differen-
  tiable causal discovery of factor graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07824, 2022.
Lars Lorch, Scott Sussex, Jonas Rothfuss, Andreas Krause, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Amortized
  inference for causal structure learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12934, 2022.
Nicolai Meinshausen, Alain Hauser, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Philip Versteeg, and Peter
  Bühlmann. Methods for causal inference from gene perturbation experiments and validation.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7361–7368, 2016.
Francesco Montagna, Atalanti Mastakouri, Elias Eulig, Nicoletta Noceti, Lorenzo Rosasco,
  Dominik Janzing, Bryon Aragam, and Francesco Locatello.       Assumption violations in
  causal discovery and the robustness of score matching.       In A. Oh, T. Naumann,
  A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 47339–47378. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2023a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  file/93ed74938a54a73b5e4c52bbaf42ca8e-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Francesco Montagna, Nicoletta Noceti, Lorenzo Rosasco, Kun Zhang, and Francesco Locatello.
  Causal discovery with score matching on additive models with arbitrary noise. In Mihaela van der
  Schaar, Cheng Zhang, and Dominik Janzing (eds.), Proceedings of the Second Conference on
  Causal Learning and Reasoning, volume 213 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  726–751. PMLR, 11–14 Apr 2023b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v213/
  montagna23a.html.
Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, Jakob Zscheischler, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Dis-
  tinguishing cause from effect using observational data: methods and benchmarks. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 17(32):1–102, 2016.
Achille Nazaret and Justin Hong. Betterboost-inference of gene regulatory networks with perturba-
  tion data. 2023.
Achille Nazaret, Justin Hong, Elham Azizi, and David Blei. Stable differentiable causal discovery.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10263, 2023.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Jonas Peters and Peter Bühlmann. Structural intervention distance for evaluating causal graphs.
  Neural computation, 27(3):771–799, 2015.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Alexander Reisach, Christof Seiler, and Sebastian Weichwald. Beware of the simulated dag! causal
  discovery benchmarks may be easy to game. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:27772–27784, 2021.
Joseph M Replogle, Reuben A Saunders, Angela N Pogson, Jeffrey A Hussmann, Alexander Lenail,
  Alina Guna, Lauren Mascibroda, Eric J Wagner, Karen Adelman, Gila Lithwick-Yanai, et al.
  Mapping information-rich genotype-phenotype landscapes with genome-scale perturb-seq. Cell,
  2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Thomas Richardson. Markov properties for acyclic directed mixed graphs. Scandinavian Journal
  of Statistics, 30(1):145–157, 2003.
Paul Rolland, Volkan Cevher, Matthäus Kleindessner, Chris Russell, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Francesco Locatello. Score matching enables causal discovery of nonlinear addi-
  tive noise models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18741–18753. PMLR,
  2022.
Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal
  protein-signaling networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Science, 308(5721):
  523–529, 2005.
Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Murat Kocaoglu, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Learn-
  ing causal graphs with small interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  28, 2015.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, Aapo Hyvärinen, Antti Kerminen, and Michael Jordan. A linear
  non-gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(10),
  2006.
Shohei Shimizu, Takanori Inazumi, Yasuhiro Sogawa, Aapo Hyvarinen, Yoshinobu Kawahara,
  Takashi Washio, Patrik O Hoyer, Kenneth Bollen, and Patrik Hoyer. Directlingam: A direct
  method for learning a linear non-gaussian structural equation model. Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing Research-JMLR, 12(Apr):1225–1248, 2011.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000.
Chandler Squires, Yuhao Wang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal structure learning
  with unknown intervention targets. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  1039–1048. PMLR, 2020.
Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. Causal discovery from changes. In Jack S. Breese and Daphne Koller
   (eds.), UAI ’01: Proceedings of the 17th Conference in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
   University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA, August 2-5, 2001, pp. 512–521. Mor-
   gan Kaufmann, 2001. URL https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.
   jsp?mmnu=1&smnu=2&article_id=138&proceeding_id=17.
T. S. Verma. Invariant properties of causal models. Technical Report R-134, UCLA Cognitive
   Systems Laboratory, 1991.
Thomas S Verma and Judea Pearl. Equivalence and synthesis of causal models. In Probabilistic and
  causal inference: The works of Judea Pearl, pp. 221–236. 2022.
Cédric Villani et al. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Courna-
  peau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der
  Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nel-
  son, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore,
  Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero,
  Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mul-
  bregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
  in Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Karren Yang, Abigail Katcoff, and Caroline Uhler. Characterizing and learning equivalence classes
  of causal dags under interventions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5541–
  5550. PMLR, 2018.
Jing Yu, V Anne Smith, Paul P Wang, Alexander J Hartemink, and Erich D Jarvis. Advances to
   bayesian network inference for generating causal networks from observational biological data.
   Bioinformatics, 20(18):3594–3603, 2004.
Yujia Zheng, Biwei Huang, Wei Chen, Joseph Ramsey, Mingming Gong, Ruichu Cai, Shohei
  Shimizu, Peter Spirtes, and Kun Zhang. Causal-learn: Causal discovery in python. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 25(60):1–8, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS OF T HEOREMS
Proof of Lemma 3. Recall that for a linear SCM, the total causal effect between any pair (i, j) is
equal to the sum of the products of the weights along each paths from i to j. Given that the weights
are continuously random and independent, the probability that the sum is exactly 0 is 0. As such,
the tuple (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally faithful for ϵ = 0 almost surely.

    of Theorem 1. Let D
Proof                         be a d × d matrix containing all the distances, where D(i, j) =
      C,(∅) C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
D PXj , PXj                  . For the case of every variables being intervened on, we can set c = 0.

We are going to prove that Aπopt is upper-triangular, and from that it follows that Dtop (G, πopt ) = 0.
We know that such a permutation exists, as for any π ∗ , Aπ∗ is upper-triangular.
Second, we note that given that (Ñ , C) is interventionally faithful, A has the non zero entries at the
same position than the matrix D. We thus need to show that for any Dπ that is not upper-triangular,
then π ∈
       / arg maxπ S(π). Then we can compute:

                                              X
                            S(π ∗ ) =                      (D(i, j) − ϵ)
                                        π ∗ (i)<π ∗ (j),
                                              X                        d · (d − 1)
                                    =                     D (i, j) −               ϵ
                                                                            2
                                        π ∗ (i)<π ∗ (j)
                                        X                      d · (d − 1)
                                    =         D (i, j) −                   ϵ
                                        i,j
                                                                    2

Then, let π be such that Dπ has some non-zero entries in the lower-triangular part. Then:

                                                            X
                               S(π ∗ ) − S(π) =                    D(i, j) > 0,
                                                      π(i)>π(j)


which implies that π ∈
                     / arg maxπ S(π).

Proof of lemma 4. Let k be a variable that satisfies the condition,
                                                                           that is, k ∈ I  and k ∈
   G        G                                                         C,(∅)    C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
ANj \ ANi . Then, for this k, the hypothesis implies that D PXj , PXj                          > ϵ and

      C,(∅)   C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
D PXi , PXi                     = 0. We thus need to show that given those distances, πopt is such that
πopt (i) < πopt (j).
Let’s note that only distances that are larger than ϵ contribute positively to the score. All the dis-
tances that are equal to 0 contribute  −ϵ to the sum. As such,
                                                              a necessary condition for an optimal
                                         C,(∅)      C,do(Xj :=Ñk )
permutation is that all distances D PXi          , PXi                  > ϵ contribute to the sum, which hap-
pens only if πopt (i) < πopt (j). Given that (Ñ , C) is ϵ-interventionally faithful, we have that any
π ∈ Π∗ are such that all distances larger than ϵ contribute to S(π), which shows existence of such a
permutation. πopt thus must have that πopt (k) < πopt (j). If i ∈ I, then with the same argument we
have πopt (i) < πopt (j).

                                                                    C,(∅)   C,do(Xk :=Ñk )
It remains to show that πopt (i) < πopt (k) if i ∈
                                                 / I. We have D PXi , PXi                     = 0, which
contributes negatively to the score if πopt (k) < πopt (i). So changing to πopt (i) < πopt (k) improves
the score by ϵ, as i ∈
                     / I. This implies that πopt (i) must be smaller than πopt (k).
Lastly, if j ∈ I, but not i and no k ∈ ANGj \ ANGi , we need to show that we still have πopt (i) <
πopt (j). With the same argument as before, having πopt (i) < πopt (j) can only improves the score
as i ∈
     / I. This concludes the overall proof.


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of theorem 2.
                                                       X
                         E[Dtop (G, πopt )] = E                  1πopt (i)>πopt (j)
                                                      (i,j)∈G
                                                  X
                                            =                  E[1πopt (i)>πopt (j) ]
                                                (i,j)∈G
                                                  X
                                            =                  P (πopt (i) > πopt (j))
                                                (i,j)∈G

Now let’s look at P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)), where there is an edge from i to j in the graph. Let’s note
the condition of lemma 4 as C.


   P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)) = P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|¬C)P (¬C) + P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|C)P (C)
                           = P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|¬C)P (¬C)
                          = P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|¬C)P (∀k ∈ ANGj ∪ {j} \ ANGi : k ∈
                                                                                    / I)
                                                                                  G      G
                          = P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|¬C)(1 − pint )|ANj ∪{j}\ANi |
                                            G              G
                          ≤ (1 − pint )|ANj ∪{j}\ANi |
We can then take the sum over all the edges to conclude the proof.



Proof of theorem 4. Without loss of generality, we assume that the variable are already in the causal
order. We then write the error as a sum on all the upper-triangular elements that contain an edge and
for which the variable are misplaced by πopt .


                                         d−1 X
                                         X   d
                E[Dtop (G, πopt )] = E                 1(i,j)∈E,πopt (i)>πopt (j)
                                         i=1 j=i+1
                                      d−1 X
                                      X   d
                                  =               P ((i, j) ∈ E, πopt (i) > πopt (j))
                                      i=1 j=i+1
                                      d−1 X
                                      X   d
                                  =               pe · P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|(i, j) ∈ E)
                                      i=1 j=i+1


We now upper-bound the probability of error given the existence of an edge:


                                          / I ∧ ∀k < j, k ∈ PaGj ∧ k ∈
P (πopt (i) > πopt (j)|(i, j) ∈ E) ≤ P (j ∈                          / PaGi =⇒ k ∈
                                                                                 / I)
                                                  i
                                                  Y                                           j−1
                                                                                              Y
                                  = (1 − pint )          P (k ∈ PaGj ∧ k ∈
                                                                         / PaGi =⇒ k ∈
                                                                                     / I)            P (k ∈ PaGj =⇒ k ∈
                                                                                                                      / I)
                                                  k=1                                        k=i+1
                                                       j−1
                                                       Y
                                  ≤ (1 − pint )2                 P (k ∈ PaGj =⇒ k ∈
                                                                                  / I)
                                                      k=i+1
                                                       j−1
                                                       Y
                                  = (1 − pint )2                (1 − P (k ∈ PaGj ∧ k ∈ I))
                                                      k=i+1

                                  = (1 − pint ) (1 − pint pe )j−i−1
                                                  2



Plugging this back into the original sum and working out the geometric sums:


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 d−1 X
                                                 X   d
          E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤ pe (1 − pint )2                (1 − pint pe )j−i−1
                                                 i=1 j=i+1
                                                 d−1 d−i−1
                                                 X    X
                            = pe (1 − pint )2                 (1 − pint pe )j
                                                 i=1    j=0
                                                 d−1
                                                 X 1 − (1 − pint pe )d−i
                            = pe (1 − pint )2
                                              i=1
                                                           pint pe
                                               "      d−1
                                                                              #
                              pe (1 − pint )2         X
                                                                          d−i
                            =                   d−        (1 − pint pe )
                                  pint pe             i=0
                                           "        d
                                                                        #
                              (1 − pint )2         X
                                                                      i
                            =                d−        (1 − pint pe )
                                  pint             i=1
                              (1 − pint )2                       1 − (1 − pint pe )d

                            =                d − (1 − pint pe )
                                  pint                                    pint pe
                              (1 − pint )2
                                             pint pe · d − (1 − pint pe ) + (1 − pint pe )d+1

                            =     2
                                 pint pe
                              (1 − pint )2
                            ≤              d
                                  pint


Proof of lemma 6. First, we can rewrite the equation on pe to get pe = dc . Then, plugging it into the
bound we get:

                                  (1 − pint )2                     1 − (1 − pint pe )d

             E[Dtop (G, πopt )] ≤               d − (1 − pint pe )
                                     pint                               pint pe
                                               "                                        #
                                  (1 − pint )2
                                                              c d 1 − (1 − pint dc )d
                                =                d − (1 − pint )
                                     pint                     d c          pint


Finally, we normalize by d and take the limit:


                                                     "                                       #
              E[Dtop (G, πopt )]        (1 − pint )2                   c 1 − (1 − pint dc )d
          lim                    ≤ lim                 1 − (1 − pint )
         d→∞          d            d→∞      pint                       d      c · pint
                                              2              −c·pint

                                   (1 − pint )       1−e
                                 =               1−
                                      pint               c · pint


B    P EN AND PAPER EXAMPLE

We here spell out all the possible configurations for a graph with 3 variables with the associated
expected error of πopt in table 1 and appendix B. Readers may find those example useful to build
intuition on how the algorithm works.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Expected top-order divergence for graphs of size 3, with 2 out of the three variables ob-
served under intervention.

         Number edges      Adjacency Matrix      Transitive Closure    E[Dtop (G, πopt )]
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0
                                      !                       !
                0              0 0 0                 0 0 0                     0
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0
                               0 1 0                 0 1 0
                                      !                       !
                1              0 0 0                 0 0 0                     0
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0
                               0 1 0                 0 1 1
                                      !                       !
                2              0 0 1                 0 0 1                     0
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0
                               0 1 1                 0 1 1
                                      !                       !
                2              0 0 0                 0 0 0                     0
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0
                               0 1 1                 0 1 1
                                      !                       !
                3              0 0 1                 0 0 1                     0
                               0 0 0                 0 0 0


Table 2: Expected top-order divergence for graphs of size 3, with 1 out of the three variables ob-
served under intervention.

        Number edges      Adjacency Matrix       Transitive Closure    E[Dtop (G, πopt )]
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                                     !                        !
               0              0 0 0                  0 0 0                     0
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 1 0                  0 1 0
                                     !                        !
                                                                           1 1     1
                                                                           3 · 2 = 6
               1              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 1 0                  0 1 1
                                     !                        !
                                                                       1 1     1 1     1
                                                                       3 · 2 + 3 · 2 = 3
               2              0 0 1                  0 0 1
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 1 1                  0 1 1
                                     !                        !
                                                                       1 1     1 1     1
                                                                       3 · 2 + 3 · 2 = 3
               2              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0
                              0 1 1                  0 1 1
                                     !                        !
                                                                       1 1     1 1     1
                                                                       3 · 2 + 3 · 2 = 3
               3              0 0 1                  0 0 1
                              0 0 0                  0 0 0


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C    P SEUDOCODES

Algorithm 1 Complete algorithm
 1: procedure I NTERSORT( S: score function eq. (1), ϵ,
    D: statistical distance function,
    I: index set of intervened variables,
      C,(∅)
    PX : observational distribution,
    Pint : interventional distributions )
 2:     Initialize D as a zero matrix of size d × d
 3:     for each (i, j) ∈ [1..d] do
 4:         if i ∈ I then
                                  C,(∅)   C,do(Xi :=Ñi )
 5:              D[i, j] ← D PXj , PXj
 6:         end if
 7:     end for
 8:     πinit ← SORTRANKING(D, ϵ)
                                                         C,(∅)
 9:     πopt ← LOCALSEARCH(πinit , S, ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint )
10:     return πopt
11: end procedure


Algorithm 2 Finding an initial solution
 1: procedure SORTRANKING(D: matrix of distances, ϵ)
 2:    G ← empty directed graph
 3:    sorted edges ← sort edges in the d × d matrix of distances D in descending order
 4:    for each edge (i, j) in sorted edges do
 5:        if there is no path from j to i in G and D(i, j) > ϵ then
 6:             Add edge from i to j to G
 7:        end if
 8:    end for
 9:    πinit ← topological order(G)
10:    return πinit
11: end procedure


Algorithm 3 Local search optimization
 1: procedure LOCALSEARCH(πinit , S: score function of eq. (1), ϵ, D: statistical distance function, I: index
                                   C,(∅)
    set of intervened variables, PX : observational distributions, Pint : interventional distributions)
 2:     πcurrent ← πinit
                                            C,(∅)
 3:     Scurrent ← S(πcurrent , ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint )
 4:     while True do
 5:          Πcandidates ← Σ({πcurrent })
 6:          πnext ← None
 7:          for each πcandidate in Πcandidates do
                                                       C,(∅)
 8:              Scandidate ← S(πcandidate , ϵ, D, I, PX , Pint )
 9:              if Scandidate > Scurrent then
10:                  πnext ← πcandidate
11:                  Scurrent ← Scandidate
12:                  break
13:              end if
14:          end for
15:          if πnext is None then
16:              break
17:          end if
18:          πcurrent ← πnext
19:     end while
20:     return πcurrent
21: end procedure



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     WASSERSTEIN D ISTANCE
The Wp p-Wasserstein distance between two distributions is defined as follows (Villani et al., 2009):
Definition 2. The p-Wasserstein distance Wp between two probability measures P and Q on Rd
with finite p-moments, p ∈ [1, ∞),
                                           Z                          p1
                                                          p
                       Wp (P, Q) = inf            ∥x − y∥ dγ(x, y)                      (4)
                                      γ∈Γ(P,Q)         X×X

where Γ(P, Q) is the set of joint probability measure on Rd × Rd with marginal P and Q.
In this work, we use p = 1, and we have d = 1 as we only compute the distance between the
marginal distribution of each variable. Let Pn and Qn be distributions of samples from P and Q of
size n. We have that the distance Wp (Pn , Qn ) tends to Wp (P, Q) as n → +∞. Furthermore, for
d ≤ 2, Ajtai et al. (1984) show that:
                                                                √      !
                                                                  ln n
                            E|Wp (Pn , Qn ) − Wp (P, Q)| = O     √       .                    (5)
                                                                   n

E     D ETAILS OF EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
E.1     L INEAR AND RFF DOMAIN

Each causal variable xj is defined with respect to its parents xpa(j) through the equation:
                            xj ← fj (xPaG , ϵj ) = fj (xPaG ) + hj (xPaG )ϵj                       (6)
                                         j                   j            j

Here, ϵj represents additive, potentially heteroscedastic noise, where the noise scale hj (xpa(j) ) is
modeled as:
                                    hj (x) = log(1 + exp(gj (x)))                                  (7)
with gj (x) being a nonlinear function. For the heteroscedastic case, we use random Fourier features
with length scale 10.0 and output scale of 2.0.
To simulate interventions, the value of the intervened variable is set to fixed constant that is drawn
from a signed Uniform distribution between 1.0 and 5.0.

E.1.1    D OMAIN -S PECIFIC M ODELLING
        • LINEAR Domain: The causal functions fj are linear transformations:
                                             fj (xPaG ) = wj⊤ xPaG + bj                            (8)
                                                   j             j

          where wj and bj are independently sampled for each transformation. As in , we sample wj
          from a signed Uniform distribution between 1 and 3, and bj from a Uniform distribution
          between −3 and 3.
        • RFF Domain: Each fj is drawn from a Gaussian Process (GP) approximated using random
          Fourier features:
                                            r    M
                                              2 X (m)          1 (m)             (m)
                       fj (xPaG ) = bj + cj         α   cos       ω   · xPaG + δ               (9)
                              j               M m=1            ℓj          j



          where α(m) ∼ N (0, 1), ω (m) ∼ N (0, I), and δ (m) ∼ Uniform(0, 2π), and the parameters
          bj , cj , and the length scale ℓj are sampled independently. The parameter M is set to 100.
          The length scale ℓj is drawn from a Uniform distribution between 7.0 and 10.0, the output
          scale cj from a Uniform distribution between 10.0 and 20.0 and the bias bj from a Uniform
          distribution between −3 and 3.

E.2     S IMULATION OF S INGLE -C ELL G ENE E XPRESSION DATA

As in Lorch et al. (2022), we use the SERGIO simulator by Dibaeinia & Sinha (2020) to gener-
ate realistic high-throughput scRNA-seq data, implemented in the AVICI package by Lorch et al.
(2022).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2.1    S IMULATION P ROCESS WITH SERGIO

SERGIO generates gene expression data as snapshots from the steady state of a dynamical system
governed by the chemical Langevin equation. The system’s evolution is influenced by master regu-
lators (MRs) with fixed rates and non-linear interactions among genes defined by the causal graph
G. Cell types emerge from variations in MR rates, contributing to biological system noise and
type-specific expression profiles.


E.2.2    PARAMETERS FOR S IMULATION

To simulate c cell types (5) across d genes, SERGIO requires parameters such as interaction
strengths k (Uniform between 1.0 and 5.0), MR production rates b (Uniform between 1.0 and 3.0),
Hill coefficients γ (2.0), decay rates λ (0.8), and stochastic noise scales ζ (1.0). These are selected
within recommended ranges to ensure realistic simulation. The values in parenthesis represents the
parameter distributions we used. We did not simulate technical noise.
Intervention on a variable corresponds to knocking out a gene, that is, the expression of the gene is
kept at 0.


E.3     S IMULATION OF N EURAL N ETWORK -BASED DATA FOR C AUSAL D ISCOVERY

In the context of simulating data for causal discovery, we construct a domain where the data is
generated by a set of random fully connected neural networks. These networks serve as the backbone
for defining the observational conditional distributions within our simulated environment.


E.3.1    N EURAL N ETWORK S PECIFICATION

Each neural network is a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with a single hidden layer consisting of 10
neurons. Formally, the MLPs are functions MLP : Rj → R1 , equipped with ReLU activation
functions, mapping a j-dimensional input to a scalar output. The output of each MLP represents the
mean µ of the conditional distribution for the corresponding variable:

                           pj (xj |xPaG ) ∼ N (µ = MLP(xPaG ), σ = 1.0).                          (10)
                                     j                       j


E.3.2    I NTERVENTIONAL DATA G ENERATION

For the simulation of interventional data, the procedure modifies the distribution of intervened nodes.
Instead of being determined by the MLP, the distribution of an intervened node is fixed to a marginal
normal distribution:

                                    pj (xj |do(xj )) ∼ N (2, 1.0).                                (11)

This alteration simulates the effect of an intervention in the data generation process.


F     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

F.1     S IMULATIONS

Additional results for the simulation evaluations. Figure 3 shows the performance of Intersort for
scale-free networks of size 5 and 30. Figures 4 and 5 show the performance of SORTRANKING
on large scale settings of 1000 and 2000 variables, for both scale-free and Erdos-Renyi networks.
Figure 6 presents a possible heuristic for selecting variables to intervene on, and comparing to a
random selection.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) Simulation with 5 variables                      (b) Simulation with 30 variables

Figure 3: Simulation and comparison between the bounds of theorem 4 for scale-free networks, and
between Intersort and the exact πopt . For each setting, we draw 20 graphs per setting following
a Barabasi-Albert scale-free distribution, with average edge per variable in {1, 2, 3}. A setting is
the tuple (pint , pe ), where pe = 2E(#edges)
                                     d(d−1) . Then, for each graph, we run the algorithm on 10
configurations, where each configuration corresponds to a draw of the targeted variables following
pint . For both 5 and 30 variables, we have pint ∈ {0.25, 0.33, 0.5, 0.66, 0.75}. The settings are
                                                                              pint
ordered on the x-axis following what we call the effective intervention ratio √ pe . We observe that
the error is approximately monotonic when ordered by the effective intervention ratio.


         (a) Simulation with 1000 variables                    (b) Simulation with 2000 variables

Figure 4: Simulation and comparison between the bounds of theorem 4 for scale-free networks and
SORTRANKING. For each setting, we draw 2 graphs per setting following a Barabasi-Albert scale-
free distribution, with average edge per variable in {1, 2, 3}. A setting is the tuple (pint , pe ), where
pe = 2E(#edges)
         d(d−1) . Then, for each graph, we run the algorithm on 1 configuration, where each config-
uration corresponds to a draw of the targeted variables following pint . For both 5 and 30 variables,
we have pint ∈ {0.25, 0.33, 0.5, 0.66, 0.75}. The settings are ordered on the x-axis following what
                                         pint
we call the effective intervention ratio √ pe . Even though the objective can be approximately solved
at scale, we observe room for improvement as the performance of SORTRANKING is above the
upper-bound in many settings.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Simulation with 1000 variables                  (b) Simulation with 2000 variables

Figure 5: Simulation and comparison between the two bounds and SORTRANKING. For each set-
ting, we draw 2 graphs per setting, where a setting is the tuple (pint , pe ). Then, for each graph, we
run the algorithm on 1 configurations, where each configuration corresponds to a draw of the targeted
variables following pint . For both 5 and 30 variables, we have pint ∈ {0.25, 0.33, 0.5, 0.66, 0.75}.
In the 1000 variables setting on the left, we have pe ∈ {0.005, 0.002, 0.001}. In the 20000 variables
settings on the right, we have pe ∈ {0.0001, 0.00005, 0.00002}. The settings are ordered on the
                                                                 pint
x-axis following what we call the effective intervention ratio √   pe . Even though the objective can
be approximately solved at scale, we observe room for improvement as the performance of SOR-
TRANKING is above the upper-bound in many settings.


Figure 6: Simulation of scale free networks with average edge per variable in {1, 2, 3} for 30 vari-
ables. We report the performance of Intersort with various intervention selection policies. We
evaluate three policies: selecting the 10 variables with the most children, selecting 10 variables at
random, and selecting the 10 variables with the fewest children. This corresponds to a setting with
30% of intervened variables. We can thus hypothesize that a potential approach for intervention
selection is to estimate the connectivity of the non-intervened variables.


F.2   E MPIRICAL DATA


Results for the empirical evaluation for the smaller setting of 10 variables (fig. 7). Figure 8 shows
the performance of SORTRANKING for 100 variables. Figure 9 analyzes the empirical difference
in training time for the baselines on the neural network data type.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              (a) Linear 10 variables                            (b) RFF 10 variables


                (c) NN 10 variables                              (d) GRN 10 variables

Figure 7: Comparison of the performance of the baselines and of our model I NTERSORT across
diverse data domains as presented, for 10 variables. The x-axis corresponds to the fraction of vari-
ables that have been targeted by an intervention. The y-axis is the performance of causal ordering
prediction as measured by the Dtop metric (see section 3).


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              (a) Linear 100 variables                          (b) RFF 100 variables


               (c) NN 100 variables                            (d) GRN 100 variables

Figure 8: Performance of our model SORTRANKING across diverse data domains as presented
(linear, RFF, NN and GRN data), for 100 variables. The x-axis corresponds to the fraction of vari-
ables that have been targeted by an intervention. The y-axis is the performance of causal ordering
prediction as measured by the Dtop metric (see section 3, lower is better).


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           (a) Training Time for d = 10                          (b) Training Time for d = 30


                                (c) Relative Change (d = 30 vs d = 10)

Figure 9: Training time analysis across different configurations for the NN data type. Plots (a) and
(b) show the training time on a logarithmic scale for d = 10 and d = 30, respectively. Plot (c) shows
the relative change in training time between d = 10 and d = 30, also on a logarithmic scale.


F.3    Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLE ON REAL - WORLD DATA


 PKC       PKA       P38       Jnk        Mek     Raf      Erk        PIP2      Plcg       Akt    PIP3


Figure 10: Output of Intersort on the flow cytometry data set of the Sachs et al. (2005) dataset, which
measures the level of expression of phosphoproteins and phospholipids in human cells. Out of the
11 proteins, 5 (in red) where intervened on using reagents to activate or inhibit the measured pro-
teins. The dataset comprises 5846 measurements, of which 1755 measurements are observational,
and 4091 measurements are from the five different single node interventions. We here compare
the predicted order of Intersort, using the Wasserstein distance and an epsilon value of 1.5, to the
consensus true network consisting of 17 edges (Sachs et al., 2005). Intersort achieves a Dtop of 3,
where we color the 3 edges in the wrong direction in red.


G      C OMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES
The simulations of fig. 1 were run on an Apple M1 Macbook pro. The experiments for figs. 2 and 7
were run on a cluster with 20 CPUs, 16Gb of memory per CPU.


                                                  26
