Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E XPLORING P ROSOCIAL I RRATIONALITY FOR LLM
AGENTS : A S OCIAL C OGNITION V IEW
 Xuan Liu1 , Jie Zhang2 , Haoyang Shang3 , Song Guo2 , Chengxu Yang4 , Quanyan Zhu5

 Hong Kong Polytechnic University1 , Hong Kong University of Science and Technology2 ,
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University3 , Wuhan University of Technology4 , New York University5


           What color is the apple?                 I’m an expert, I assert that            Could you do me a favor?
            A: Red         B: Blue                        Apple is blue. ·
                                                                                            Favorability Level
       B       B       B                                          You are right,
                                  A                               Apple is blue.
                                           B
           B       B       B

                                                    Apple is Red
                                                                                                              Before     After
                   Herd Effect                            Authority Effect                             Ben Franklin Effect

                                                Cognitive Bias            Hallucination
                                                                                                   I will probably get
     I eat an                                                                                        a big win today!
      apple

                   ≠                            subjective   imaginary         irrational       Lose        Lose
                                      Banana
                                      hits me   inaccurate       misleading         …       1           2                        times
               Rumor Chain Effect                                Mirror                                Gambler’s Fallacy

                                                     Kind, Rich…
         Facts &                Our
        Evidence               Beliefs                            VS

                                                 TOM                JACK
                                                                 TOM should also
                                                                 be good at other
        Evidence LM Agents Believe                                    things

                Confirmation Bias                            Halo Effect                                    Open-ended


Figure 1: Sample evaluation subsets in CogMir framework. CogMir mirrors human cognitive bias
and LLM Agents’ systematic hallucination through social science experiments via representational
social and cognitive phenomena. https://github.com/XuanL17/CogMir

                                                        A BSTRACT

           Large language models (LLMs) have been shown to face hallucination issues due
           to the data they trained on often containing human bias; whether this is reflected in
           the decision-making process of LLM Agents remains under-explored. As LLM
           Agents are increasingly employed in intricate social environments, a pressing and
           natural question emerges: Can we utilize LLM Agents’ systematic hallucinations to
           mirror human cognitive biases, thus exhibiting irrational social intelligence? In
           this paper, we probe the irrational behavior among contemporary LLM Agents by
           melding practical social science experiments with theoretical insights. Specifically,
           We propose CogMir, an open-ended Multi-LLM Agents framework that utilizes
           hallucination properties to assess and enhance LLM Agents’ social intelligence
           through cognitive biases. Experimental results on CogMir subsets show that LLM
           Agents and humans exhibit high consistency in irrational and prosocial decision-
           making under uncertain conditions, underscoring the prosociality of LLM Agents
           as social entities, and highlighting the significance of hallucination properties.
           Additionally, CogMir framework demonstrates its potential as a valuable platform
           for encouraging more research into the social intelligence of LLM Agents.


                                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    I NTRODUCTION
Human mind may often be better than rational. – Leda Cosmides, John Tooby. With the extensive
deployment of large language models (LLMs) (Rombach et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), LLM-
based agent systems are increasingly developed to cater to diverse applications such as task-solving,
evaluation, and simulation (Hong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2024). Given the similarities between the operational dynamics of LLM-based agent
systems and human social structures, it is pertinent to explore the intersection of these domains.
Recent studies have highlighted the social potential of LLM Agents through constructing multi-agent
systems that simulate interactive social scenarios (Zhou* et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2023; Ren et al.,
2024) revealing the social dynamics among interacting LLM Agents and showing parallels to human
behaviors. For instance, LLMs can achieve social goals (Zhou* et al., 2024) and adhere to social
norms (Ren et al., 2024) within LLM-based multi-agent systems. Nonetheless, these research efforts
exhibit two significant gaps: 1) They primarily focus on black-box testing in multi-agent role-playing
systems, concentrating on the outputs and behaviors of agents while neglecting to investigate the
internal mechanisms or cognitive processes that drive these behaviors. 2) LLM Agents are prone
to systematic hallucinations–exhibiting structured deviations from factual accuracy and generating
misleading or incorrect information due to their training data and inherent biases (Ji et al., 2023;
Rawte et al., 2023). The potential impact of such hallucinations on the social intelligence of LLM
Agents remains under-explored.
Cognitive biases, pervasive in human society, highlight the subjective nature of human behavior (nat,
2015; Baron, 2007). Human cognitive biases can lead to irrational decisions and imaginary contents
like the systematic hallucination phenomenon in LLMs (Ji et al., 2023; Tonmoy et al., 2024). However,
evolutionary psychology suggests that rationality is unnatural; rather, human irrationality is an
adaptive selected trait for navigating complex social environments (Cosmides & Tooby, 1994;
Lilienfeld et al., 2017). Analogically, in this paper, we argue that LLMs’ systematic hallucination
(or imagination) attributes are the fundamental condition that confers social intelligence on LLM
Agents. We explore the similarities in social potential between human cognitive biases and LLM
Agent systematic hallucination attributes for the first time, particularly in irrational decision-making,
to analogically deduce the underlying reasons for LLM Agents’ possession of social intelligence.
To study LLM Agents’ potential for irrational social intelligence, we present CogMir, an open-ended
and dynamic multi-agent framework designed specifically for evaluating, exploring, and explaining
social intelligence for LLM Agents via systematic assessments of cognitive biases. Specifically, the
hallucinatory attributes of LLMs are exploited (i.e., via treating the cognitive bias as a manageable
and interpretable factor) in CogMir to probe their social intelligence so as to provide enhanced
interpretability for LLM Agents. In addition, our proposed CogMir framework integrates sociological
methodologies to abstract typical social structures and employ various Multi-Human-Agent Interac-
tion Combinations and Communication Modes to interlink System Objects. This integrative setup is
designed to systematically encompass and simulate various cognitive bias scenarios, as depicted in
Fig. 1. On the evaluation front, CogMir combines sociological assessments, manual discrimination,
LLM assessments, and traditional AI discrimination techniques to realize a multidimensional assess-
ment system. By using flexible module configurations from standardized sets, CogMir simplifies
social architectures, enabling diverse applications in experimental simulations and evaluations.
Designed as an open-ended framework for continuous interpretative study, we provide multiple
CogMir subset samples as examples. Existing assessments of various cognitive effects demonstrate
that LLM Agents exhibit a high degree of consistency with humans in prosocial cognitive biases and
counter-intuitive phenomena. However, LLM Agents demonstrate a higher sensitivity to factors like
certainty and social status than humans, exhibiting more variability in their decision-making biases
under conditions of certainty and uncertainty. In contrast, human decision-making tends to be more
consistent across these conditions. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
       • We are the first to breach the black-box theoretical bottleneck of the Multi-LLM Agents’
         social intelligence, by utilizing LLM Agent’s systematic hallucination properties to mirror
         human cognitive biases as explanatory and controllable variables to systematically assess
         and explain LLM Agent’s social intelligence through an evolutionary sociology lens.
       • We propose CogMir, an extensible, modularized, and dynamic Multi-LLM Agents frame-
         work for assessing, exploiting, and interpreting social intelligence via cognitive bias, aligned
         with social science methodologies.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • We offer diverse CogMir subsets and use cases to steer future research. Our experimental
         findings highlight the alignment and distinctions between LLM Agents and humans in the
         decision-making process.
       • CogMir indicates that LLM Agents have pro-social behavior in irrational decision-making,
         emphasizing the significant role of hallucination properties in their social intelligence.

2     R ELATED W ORK

Our work is inspired by interdisciplinary areas such as social sciences and evolutionary psychology.
LLM Hallucination & Cognitive Bias. Hallucination in LLMs occurs when they generate content
that is not factually accurate, often arising from the reliance on patterns learned from biased training
data or the model’s limitations in understanding context and accessing current information (Ji et al.,
2023; Tonmoy et al., 2024). Such hallucinations might be beneficial in creative fields, where these
models can act as “collaborative creative partners.” They offer innovative and inspiring outputs that
can lead to the discovery of novel ideas and connections (Rawte et al., 2023). Concurrently, cognitive
biases and evolutionary psychology offer essential perspectives on decision-making processes and
prosocial behaviors, which can be analogously applied to explain the social intelligence of LLM
Agents (Lilienfeld et al., 2017; nat, 2015). In this work, through mirroring human cognitive bias, we
suggest that the hallucination property of LLM is the basis for prosocial behavior in LLM Agents,
representing a potential form of advanced intelligence.
LLM Agent Social Intelligence Evaluation. Several benchmarks traditionally utilized for evaluating
the social intelligence of artificial agents, such as SocialIQA (Sap et al., 2019) and ToMi (Le et al.,
2019), are increasingly being surpassed in difficulty as language models advance. In response to
this trend, recent efforts have synthesized existing benchmarks and introduced innovative evaluation
datasets specifically tailored for assessing LLM Agents (Zhou* et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Shao
et al., 2023; Oketunji et al., 2023). Despite the wide range of social intelligence types (Lilienfeld
et al., 2017), there is no standard workflow for investigating LLM Agents’ social intelligence. CogMir
has developed an open and accessible workflow aligned with consensus-based approaches in social
science, facilitating systematic testing and advancement of social intelligence in language models.
Multi-Agents Social System. Dialogue systems facilitate AI interactions, with task-oriented models
focusing on specific tasks and open-domain systems designed for general conversation, often en-
hancing engagement by incorporating personal details and creating deep understanding (Zhou* et al.,
2024). Simulations with LLMs demonstrate their abilities to produce human-like social interactions
by applying these models to tasks like collaborative software development or structured social in-
teractions (Chen et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Despite these advancements, exploration of
why these models exhibit social capabilities remain limited. Our work tries to bridge this theoretical
gap by drawing on research methods from human social evolution studies, thereby enhancing the
interpretability of Multi-LLM Agents social systems.

3     C OG M IR : M ULTI -LLM AGENTS F RAMEWORK O N C OGNITIVE B IAS

In this section, we provide a detailed and modular overview of CogMir, organized into four main
elements: Mirror Environmental Settings, Framework Structures, Cognitive Bias Subsets, and Sample
Use Cases. These components are visually depicted in a left-to-right sequence in Fig. 2.

3.1   M IRROR E NVIRONMENTAL S ETTINGS

First, we outline a novel standard workflow for integrating social science methodologies with the
Multi-LLM Agents system, ensuring alignment with traditional experimental standards and adapting
data collection methods for Multi-LLM Agents environments.
CogMir environment settings are benchmarked against standard social science experiments through a
structured three-step process: Literature Search, Manual Selection, and LLM Summarization. A liter-
ature search pinpoints key social science experiments, which are then manually selected for relevance
and replicability. LLM adapts these for integration into the Multi-LLM Agents system within the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Mirror Experimental Settings                        Framework Structures                            Cognitive Bias Subsets                    Sample Use Cases

        Social Science Settings                            Required Object Sets                                   Herd Effect                          Q & A Bias Rate
                                                                                                         Q&A           Multi-H & Single-A
                                                                                                                                                              66% Bias      34%
                                                                                                                          …                                66% of Q & A reflect a
                                                Humans      LMAs       Datasets     Discriminators                                                         cognitive bias.
  Survey       Case Studies       Interviews                                                         Multi-Choice Q
                                                Participation Sets                                                     Broadcast | Parallel     Datasets: Multi-Choice| Survey|…
                                                                Evaluation Sets                                                                     Multi-H-A Bias Rate
                                                          Communication Modes
                                                                                                                                                                           34%
                                                                                                     construct
  Naturalistic Observations            …                                                                                                                             66% Bias
                                                                                                           Rumor Chain Effect
                                                                                                        Q&A                  Multi-A
                                      Mirror    Broadcast | Parallel       Point to Point | Series                                                                   Prompts
           collaborate
                                                  Multi-H-A Interaction Combinations                                           …
                                                                                                                                                 Humans       LMAs        Evaluation
       Multi-LLM Agents Settings                                                                       Survey Q                                   Discriminations            Sets
                                                                                                                      Point to Point | Series
  Case Studies      Naturalistic Observations
                                                                                                                                                   State-of-art Technical
              Multi-H-A Interaction                                                                                                                   Discriminations
  Survey       Interviews              …                                                                                                          FACtScore              SimCSE
                                                                                                     construct
           Q&A                        …                                                                                                          SelfCheckGPT              …


Figure 2: CogMir Framework. The framework is structured around four essential objects: "humans,"
LLM Agents, data, and discriminators. These objects interact within the framework to facilitate
Q&A and Multi-Human-LLM Agent (Multi-H-A) interactions to mirror social science experimental
settings and evaluations. CogMir features two communication modes and five Multi-H-A interaction
combinations, enabling varied configurations to suit diverse social experimental needs. CogMir offers
mirror cognitive bias samples (Fig. 1) and dynamic use cases open for expansion.
CogMir framework. In the Mirror Experimental Settings process, data collection methods such as
surveys and interviews are transformed into Human-LLM Agent Q&A. Methods like case studies
and naturalistic observations are adapted to Multi-Human-LLM Agent (Multi-H-A) interaction.
Human-LLM Agent Q&A involves (1) Question Dataset Construction: Developing a diverse set
of questions tailored to specific study needs (e.g., multiple-choice, fill-in-the-blank, etc.) (2) Q&A
Scenario Design: Pairing the Question Datasets with scenarios that simulate real-world environments
(controlled settings like a room to dynamic public spaces like squares or transit stations). (3) Prompt
Engineering: Crafting appropriate prompts for the LLM Agents based on the scenario and question
dataset. (4) Analysis of LLM Agent Responses: Evaluating the responses from LLM Agents.
Multi-H-A Interaction involves (1) Interaction Combination Configuration: Adapting human-only
social science settings to interactive environments that include humans and LLM Agents (e.g., in
group discussion experiments, some human participants are replaced with LLM Agents). (2) Role
Assignment: Specific roles and behaviors are assigned to humans and LLM Agents. This assignment
is guided by prompt engineering to ensure each participant acts according to social science experiment
guidelines. (3) Communication Mode Selection: Based on the original social science setting, select
suitable communication modes for interaction. (4) Data Collection and Analysis: Gathering and
analyzing data from these interactions (e.g., dialogue, decision-making etc.).
3.2        F RAMEWORK S TRUCTURES

After establishing realistic social science experiment environments, the next step is to select essential
components to support the above two mirror methods: Human-LLM Agent Q&A and Multi-H-A
Interaction. This entails choosing participant objects, evaluation tools, and communication modes.
The CogMir framework is organized into modules for Required Objects, Communication Modes, and
Interaction Combinations to meet these needs.
Required Object Sets. Required Object encompasses all potential participants and evaluators in-
volved in the system. Participants include humans1 and LLM Agents, which allows for dynamic
setups where either or both can be involved in interactions depending on the experiment’s require-
ments. Evaluators include humans, LLM Agents, datasets, and discriminators. Datasets are utilized
to store and construct prompts about the experimental setup (e.g., experimental scenarios, character
information, etc.), task description, and Q&A question set. Discriminators are specialized tools
    1
      "Human" in CogMir can refer to real human participants or simulations. In our experiments, "Human"
refers to simulated human interactions based on previous social science experiments, not actual human subjects.


                                                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


utilized to evaluate the social intelligence of LLM Agents, encompassing three main types: State-of-
the-art technical metrics such as SimCSE, SelfCheck, and FactScore (Gao et al., 2021; Min et al.,
2023; Manakul et al., 2023) for objective, quantitative assessment; Human discriminators that delve
into nuanced and subjective aspects like prosocial understanding; and LLM Agent discriminators,
which involve the use of other LLM Agents to assess and challenge responses from a subject LLM
Agent.
Communication Modes Sets. Communication modes dictate the nature of interactions within differ-
ent setups. We model the participants (humans or LLM Agents) as channels based on information
theory (Shannon, 1948) to define two essential communication modes:
      • Broadcast (or Parallel, C = C1 + C2 + . . . + Cn ), which enables a single sender to transmit
        a message to multiple receivers simultaneously.
      • Point-to-point (or Series, C = min[C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn ]) establishes communication between
        two specific entities at a time (C denotes channel capacity).
Multi-H-A Interaction Combinations Sets. This module provides various combinations of Multi-
Human-LLM Agent interactions, tailored to different social science experimental needs, the most
frequently used combinations in social science settings include:
      • Single-H-Single-A: One human interacting with one LLM Agent, predominantly used for
        human-agent question-answering tasks (e.g., survey, interview, etc. ).
      • Single-H-Multi-A: One human interacts with multiple LLM Agents, where humans can be
        set as controlled variables to test Multi-LLM Agents’s social cognitive behaviors.
      • Multi-H-Single-A: multiple humans interact with a single LLM Agent, which is suitable
        for assessing the impact of group dynamics, such as consensus or conflict.
      • Multi-A: multiple agents interacting without human participation.
      • Multi-H-Multi-A: multiple humans and multiple LLM Agents interaction, integrating
        elements from the previous setups to mimic complicated experimental interactions.
These modules offer a flexible framework for exploring LLM Agents’ cognitive biases in social
science experiments. Researchers can customize their setups by mixing different components to
examine specific hypotheses. In the next section, we outline cognitive bias subsets as guidelines.

3.3   C OGNITIVE B IAS S UBSETS

We offer a collection of seven distinct Cognitive Bias Effects subsets tailored for the analysis of
LLM Agents’ irrational decision-making processes: a) Herd Effect (Asch, 1951): refers to the
tendency of people to follow the actions of a larger group, often disregarding their own beliefs.
b) Authority Effect (Milgram, 1963): involves people being more likely to comply with advice
or instructions from someone perceived as an authority figure. c) Ben Franklin Effect (Franklin,
1896): suggests that a person who does someone else a favor is more likely to do another favor
for that person due to cognitive dissonance. d) Rumor Chain Effect (Allport & Postman, 1946):
describes how information tends to change and distort as it passes from person to person, often
leading to misinformation. e) Gambler’s Fallacy (Colman, 2015): refers to the incorrect belief that
past events can influence the likelihood of something happening in the future in random processes.
f) Confirmation Bias (Nickerson, 1998): refers to the tendency to favor, seek out, and remember
information that confirms one’s preexisting beliefs. g) Halo Effect (Lachman & Bass, 1985): occurs
when a positive impression in one area influences a person’s perception in other areas, leading to
biased judgments. The Cognitive Bias Subsets are discussed in detail in Section 4.

3.4   S AMPLE U SE C ASES

Building on the above environmental settings and framework structure, we introduce two Evaluation
Metrics as sample use cases to assess and analyze experimental outcomes for the seven identified
classic Cognitive Bias Subsets in CogMir:
      • Q&A Bias Rate (RateBqa ): Quantifies the LLM Agent’s tendency to exhibit cognitive
        biases under controlled, diverse cognitive bias Q&A survey and interviews.
      • Multi-H-A Bias Rate (RateBmha ): Quantifies the tendency of the LLM Agent to exhibit
        cognitive biases within simulated scenarios characterized by various types of Multi-H-A
        interaction.


                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The two Bias Rates are defined as RateB = M/N where M is the number of times the LLM Agent
exhibits certain cognitive bias as determined by the four Evaluators (Humans, LLM Agents, Datasets,
and Discriminators) within the Required Object Sets depicted in Fig. 2. N is the total number of
inquiries, where N = p × q, p represents the number of repetitions, and q is the number of distinct
queries. The selection of Evaluators varies across different subsets of cognitive biases, affecting the
Q&A Bias Rate and Multi-H-A Bias Rate calculation processes involved.
The above two metrics are designed based on replicability and generalizability criteria (Lilienfeld
et al., 2017), offering the potential for further extension. Potential future works and limitations are
explained in Appendix.

4     E XPERIMENTS & D ISCUSSION
In this section, we categorize the seven tested Cognitive Bias Subsets into two groups: those with
Pro-social tendencies and those without. For detailed model comparisons, prompts, settings, and
dataset explanations, see Appendix. An overview of the experimental setup follows:
Please note that the primary subjects of this research are "LLM Agents," evaluated on their cognitive
behavior within simulated social scenarios. The "Human" here refers to simulated human interactions
based on previous social science experiments, not actual human subjects.
Selected LLM Models. We select seven state-of-the-art models to serve as participants and eval-
uation subjects within our framework, specifically: gpt-4-0125-preview (OpenAI, 2023), gpt-3.5-
turbo (OpenAI, 2023), open-mixtral-8x7b (Mixtral.AI, 2024), mistral-medium-2312 (Mixtral.AI,
2024), claude-2.0 (Anthropic, 2024), claude-3.0-opus (Anthropic, 2024), and gemini-1.0-pro (Goo,
2023). All LLM Agents have a fixed temperature parameter of 1 with no model fine-tuning.
Constructed Datasets. To ensure that LLMs do not inherently hold incorrect beliefs, we use
rigorous black-box testing (Carlini et al., 2023) to construct our datasets. Utilizing social science
literature (Lilienfeld et al., 2017) and existing AI social intelligence test datasets (Sap et al., 2019; Le
et al., 2019; Zhou* et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), we developed three evaluation datasets—two sets
of Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQ): Known MCQ and Unknown MCQ, and one short content
dataset: Inform. Additionally, we constructed three open-ended prompt datasets for Multi-H-A
experimental initialization, requiring targeted data augmentation or curation to meet specific task
needs: CogScene, CogAction, and CogIdentity. Known MCQ contains 100 questions with answers
known to all tested models, queried 50 times each for consistent responses (e.g., "In which country is
New York?"). Unknown MCQ includes 100 questions with unknown answers, focused on future or
hypothetical scenarios (e.g., weather predictions for a specific day in 2027). Inform contains 100
short contents designed to investigate potential biases during information dissemination. CogScene
features 100 scenarios involving actions, such as "attending a job interview at a catering company."
CogAction includes 100 distinct complete actions, exemplified by "borrowing a tissue," which is
a sub-dataset of CogScene. CogIdentity profiles 100 identities, like "a freshman female student
majoring in ECE."
Evaluation Metrics. Metrics are developed based on various experimental scenarios and evaluators,
leading to specific Bias Rate metrics. For example, to test a cognitive bias within a particular scenario
[S] of the CogSence dataset using the Known MCQ dataset [K] in a Q&A format (RateBqa , refers
to Section 3.4), with human evaluation [H], it is represented as RateBqa [K][S][H]. In subsequent
presentations, if the settings of RateBqa or RateBmha remain unchanged, it can be abbreviated as
M CQtype[condition] [Evaluator].

4.1   P RO -S OCIAL C OGNITIVE B IAS S UBSETS

Pro-Social refers to behaviors or tendencies that are intended to benefit others. In the context of
cognitive biases, Pro-Social biases lead individuals to act in ways that are perceived as helpful,
cooperative, or altruistic towards others in a community or social setting (Lilienfeld et al., 2017).
Harmony: Herd (Bandwagon) Effect. We replicate the classic Solomon Asch experiment through
CogMir to assess the Herd Effect on LLM Agents, mirroring the variables Asch identified (Asch,
1951):
       • Conformity: A sizable amount of participants conformed to the majority opinion (incorrect).


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Size: Conformity plateaued beyond five members; further increases had no effect.
       • Variation in Incorrect Answer: Any dissent in the group change conformity.
The Multi-H-Single-A (Broadcast) scenario (RateBmha ) is selected to emulate the original conditions
of the Asch experiment. We use Known MCQ (A/B: “A” is always correct) and Unknown MCQ
datasets as Evaluators to investigate the performance of LLM Agents when dealing with certain and
uncertain information. In this experiment setup, human characters serve as controlled variables, and
the three experimental scenarios are simulated by predefining the responses of each human and the
number of human participants. For each MCQ dataset, we query every MCQ 10 times, resulting in
10 × 100 inquiries. As defined in Section 3.4, the experimental results of the Multi-H-A Bias Rate
for the seven different model-based LLM Agents under various conditions are presented in Tab. 1.
Prompts are used to standardize responses: { You are currently in the same room with (NUMBER
OF HUMANS) other participants with the same educational background as you, answering the same
multiple-choice question. The question is: [MCQ] Please provide your answer and briefly explain
why you chose it. Reply in the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***.} The LLM Agent
is set to be the last to answer the MCQ to notice how others behave. We further assess the Q&A Bias
Rate (RateBaq ) by explicitly informing the LLM Agent of the conditions through a prompt: { You
notice that all others chose B }. The statistical results align with the Multi-H-A Bias Rate.

Table 1: Herd Effect RateBmah % via Multi-H-Single-A (Broadcast). K, uK-Known MCQ datasets
or Unknown MCQ datasets; 7, 49-the total number of simulated human participants; W, R, N - All
humans give the Wrong answer, one human gives the Right answer, one human give “do not know”.

       Model               K[7W ] K[7R] K[7N ] K[49W ] uK[7W ] uK[7R] uK[7N ] uK[49W ]
       GPT-4.0              0.00 0.00 0.00         0.00     99.90    99.80    59.20     100.0
       GPT-3.5              0.00 2.60 1.20         0.90      1.20    58.10    23.50      5.90
       Mixtral-8x7b         1.00 36.20 7.00        0.00      0.00    100.0    100.0      1.70
       Mistral-medium       0.90 7.70 4.30         0.80      0.00     2.10    42.20      0.60
       Claude-2.0           5.10 5.80 6.10         6.50     98.90    99.20    98.80     99.90
       Claude-3.0-opus      0.30 0.10 0.10         0.00      0.50    30.50    30.40     31.30
       Gemini-1.0-pro       7.00 19.10 16.6        3.40     31.20    92.90    96.60     26.50


Aligned with Asch’s observation of 36% conformity among humans, we set it as the bias threshold
for LLM Agents. When considering all scenarios on average, among LLM Agents, we found a
high degree of conformity similar to humans. The effect of size on incorrect answers only has
a marginal impact on LLM Agents, consistent with human behavior. However, the influence of
incorrect answer variation diverges sharply. Human conformity typically decreases in the presence
of dissenting or uncertain opinions, because they feel less pressure to conform, while LLMs exhibit
increased conformity under such conditions. Our study suggests that LLMs interpret scenarios
where all humans give incorrect responses ([7W ]) as potentially spurious or intentionally misleading,
increasing their skepticism. Conversely, the presence of a small degree of dissent or uncertainty
([7R], [7N ]) appears to assure LLMs of the validity of the majority opinion, leading to increased
conformity. Moreover, LLM Agents showed a drastic increase in conformity when facing Unknown
MCQ compared to Known MCQ, while humans only conform slightly more when facing unknown
information, indicating a greater susceptibility to social influence under uncertainty in LLM Agents.
Conformity: Authority Effect. Drawing on classical social science experiments conducted by
Stanley Milgram (Milgram, 1963), we conducted experiments to explore the Authority Effect,
tailored to the characteristics of LLM Agents. Unlike the Herd Effect, which requires multiple human
participants, the Authority Effect aims to test the conformity of LLM Agents to authoritative prompts
or instructions, even when these may contradict factual information. In the settings, we utilize Known,
and Unknown MCQ datasets as Evaluators and CogIdentity and CogScene as prompt generators to
test the Q&A Bias Rate through Single-H-Single-A Q&A scenarios. Average Q&A Rate refers to
the average bias rate on Unknown and Known MCQ. We design prompts to directly inquire LLM
Agents on 5 identity pairs across two MCQ datasets, each for 10 times, resulting in 5 × 10 × 100 × 2
inquires.
Prompts are constructed as follows: Human 1st round {You are [INFERIOR identity], and I am
[SUPERIOR identity] who is an expert in the following field. Please provide your response by


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Left: Authority Effect RateBaq on unknown (U ) and known (K) MCQ datasets. Right:
Comparison between Authority (A) and Herd Effect (H) via average RateBaq .


selecting either A or B. The question is [MCQ]}; 2nd round {As an expert, I confirm that the answer
should be B. Please provide your answer again. Reply in the following format: Answer: A/B.}.
Fig. 3 shows that LLM Agents display considerable variability in responses to deterministic and
nondeterministic scenarios when influenced by the Authority Effect. Notably, in certain and uncertain
situations, most LLM Agents showed increased obedience to Authority compared to the Herd Effect.
This contrasts humans, who typically exhibit no significant difference in obedience between authority
and herd scenarios. These findings highlight the LLM Agents’ enhanced sensitivity to social status
differences, indicating a stronger propensity to adhere to authoritative commands over peer influence.
Friendliness: Ben Franklin Effect. The Ben Franklin effect suggests that a person who does a favor
for someone is more likely to do additional favors for them, reducing cognitive dissonance (Franklin,
1896). We utilized a Single-H-Single-A survey format in Multi-LLM Agents systems, defining
“performing a favor” as the independent variable to distinguish between experimental and control
groups and analyze its effect on LLM Agents’ favorability towards a person. The experimental
setup is as follows: One human and one LLM Agent, both strangers, compete for the same position
[POSITION] in a scenario [SCENE] from CogScene dataset. Initial favorability levels are set
randomly between 1 and 10. In the experimental group, one participant performs a small [FAVOR]
from the CogAction dataset, for the other. Afterward, LLM Agents re-evaluate their favorability
towards the favor-giver, rating it again from 1 to 11. For the control group, the [SCENE] and
[POSITION] are the same, but the [FAVOR] is omitted, allowing measurement of favorability
unaffected by a favor. As indicated in Tab. 2, all tested LLM Agent models exhibit a tendency
consistent with the Ben Franklin Effect, demonstrating their proclivity for prosocial behavior in
fostering friendly interactions.
Self-validation: Confirmation Bias. Drawing on Pilgrim’s research (Pilgrim et al., 2024), we
investigated how LLM Agents respond to initial pricing belief that may bias their evaluations. In our
study, agents were tasked with assessing the market price of an item, such as a water cup. First, they
were primed with an unreasonably high initial price belief (e.g., $1,000). Then, they were presented
with two lower-priced offers (e.g., $50 and $250). The agents’ selection between the two lower
offers, after being anchored to the high initial price, demonstrated a susceptibility to confirmation
bias, influencing their perception of a reasonable market price. This highlights the agents’ tendency
for self-validation and the profound influence of initial belief on their subjective decision-making.
Imagination: Halo Effect. Based on Nisbett’s research on cognitive biases (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977),
we structured an experiment using the Single-H-Single-A survey methodology to explore the halo
effect. The experiment included both experimental and control groups, with the independent variable
identified as [IDENTITY]. This variable consisted of various halo identities from the CogIdentity
dataset to evaluate their impact on decision-making. As depicted in Tab. 2, RateBqa , all models
except Claude-3.0-opus exhibited significant bias, indicating the influence of the halo effect.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Table 2: Average RateBqa of remaining subset samples via Single-H-Single-A survey questions.

      Model                               Ben Franklin          Confirmation                      Halo                 Gambler
      GPT-4.0                                      87.60             100.0                        97.70                 0.00
      GPT-3.5                                      80.50             100.0                        96.70                 93.3
      Mixtral-8x7b                                 66.00             99.90                        100.0                 0.00
      Mistral-medium                               89.70             99.80                        99.90                 0.00
      Claude-2.0                                   87.60             98.90                        78.60                 0.00
      Claude-3.0-opus                              79.50             99.80                         4.30                 0.00
      Gemini-1.0-pro                               83.20             99.70                        94.90                 0.00

4.2             N ON -P RO -S OCIAL C OGNITIVE B IAS S UBSETS
Rumor Chain Effect. Studies across psychology and economics have extensively explored rumor
propagation and information distortion. These studies consistently identify two outcomes (Allport &
Postman, 1946; Vosoughi et al., 2018; Lilienfeld et al., 2017):
      1. Information Distortion: As information spreads, it transforms, triggering a rumor chain.
      2. Content Contraction: Information becomes more concise as it is shared among people.
Leveraging established rumor propagation frameworks (Allport & Postman, 1946), we used Multi-A
(Series) to initialize the Multi-LLM Agents system to access the Multi-H-A Bias Rate. In this
setup, we ran a sequential message transmission experiment with 15 LLM Agents (indexed 0 to 14)
using the Inform dataset. The process began with the LLM Agent indexed at 0, who transmitted
the message to the LLM Agent indexed at 1. This pattern persisted, with each LLM Agent relaying
information to the next in sequence. We randomly selected 10 stories from the dataset, each
subjected to ten inquiries. Responses were systematically collected from each LLM Agent for
detailed analysis. Compared to the MCQ datasets, assessing whether information is distorted involves
subjective judgment. For this reason, we employed SimCSE-RoBERT alarge (Gao et al., 2021)
as a technical discriminator to evaluate the semantic similarity between each information piece
and the original message. Simultaneously, we utilized LLM Agents (GPT-4.0 and Claude-3.0) and
manual discrimination to determine if the stories conveyed the same information. In the technical
discriminator evaluations, 0.74 is considered the threshold (less than 0.74 for Bias), while the LLM
Agent and manual discrimination involve choosing between ‘same’ or ‘different’. As shown in Tab. 3,
we further measure sentence length in words and define RateBmah [len] as the content contraction
rate, which is negative if the content lengthens.

                            0.90
                                   GPT3.5 Rumor Chain                                      0.96
                                                                                                  GPT4.0 Rumor Chain
                                                           S0   S5                                                       S0    S5
                                                           S1   S6                                                       S1    S6
                            0.85                           S2   S7                         0.94                          S2    S7
                                                           S3   S8                                                       S3    S8
                            0.80                           S4   S9                                                       S4    S9
                                                                                           0.92
                            0.75
      Semantic Similarity


                                                                     Semantic Similarity


                            0.70                                                           0.90

                            0.65                                                           0.88
                            0.60                                                           0.86
                            0.55
                                                                                           0.84
                            0.50
                            0.45                                                           0.82

                            0.40                                                           0.80
                                    0
                                    1
                                    2
                                    3
                                    4
                                    5
                                    6
                                    7
                                    8
                                    9
                                   10
                                   11
                                   12
                                   13
                                   14


                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                   9
                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                  14


                                       LMA index                                                      LMA index

Figure 4: Rumor Chain Effect Visualization of semantic similarity (SimCSE-RoBERT alarge (Gao
et al., 2021)) via 15 LLM Agents Muti-A (Point-to-Point) scenario. S0 ∼ S9 denotes 10 stories.
We constructed prompts to ensure LLM Agent "paraphrase” rather than "copy" in transmission. As
shown in Fig. 4 and Tab. 3, while LLM Agents are considered relatively more accurate in transmitting
information than humans, there still appears to be a tendency towards disinformation. However,
unlike humans, LLM Agents tend to expand on the original information rather than shorten it.
Gambler’s Fallacy. Based on Rao’s research on the Gambler effect (Rao & Hastie, 2023), our
mirror experimental setting samples are as follows: LLM Agents were asked to answer a hypothetical


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Rumor Chain RateBmah via 15 Agents. Evaluators: LLM Agent (A), SimCSE −
RoBERT alarge (D), and Human (H) on semantic similarity. RateBmah [Len]- content length.

        Model       RateBmah (A)      RateBmah (D)       RateBmah (H)       RateBmah [Len]
        GPT-3.5         37.37              75.76              45.50              -97.00
        GPT-4.0          0.07              0.00                9.50              -92.33

multiple-choice question, where both answer choices A and B had an equal probability of 50%.
Despite choosing and losing option B [NUMBER] consecutive times, they were queried about
their choice for the [NUMBER+1] attempt. Only GPT-3.5 indicated a desire to switch answers to
potentially increase the odds of being correct, showing the Gambler’s Fallacy. Other models correctly
recognized that each choice is statistically independent, and previous outcomes do not influence
future ones.

4.3   D ISCUSSION & L IMITATION

Common: The performance of the LLM Agents is highly consistent with human beings across
prosociality-related irrational decision-making processes such as Herd, Authority, Ben Franklin,
Halo, and Confirmation Bias. Difference: In contrast to typical human behaviors, LLM Agents show
significant deviations in irrational decision-making processes unrelated to prosociality, such as Rumor
Chain and Gambler. Additionally, in all conducted Cognitive Bias tests, Agents have demonstrated
greater sensitivity to social status and certainty compared to humans. Limitation: CogMir is the first
Multi-LLM Agents framework designed to mirror social science setups. Its subsets and metrics are
not guaranteed to be perfect or optimal, the primary goal is to provide explanations and guidelines.


5     C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, our research introduces CogMir, an open-ended framework that utilizes LLM Agents’
systematic hallucination properties to examine and mimic human cognitive biases, thus, for the first
time, advancing the understanding of LLM Agent social intelligence via irrationality and prosociality.
By adopting an evolutionary sociology perspective, CogMir systematically evaluates the social
intelligence of these agents, revealing key insights into their decision-making processes. Our findings
highlight similarities and differences between human and LLM Agents, particularly in pro-social
behaviors, offering a new avenue for future research in LLM agent-based social intelligence.


6     E THICAL S TATEMENT
6.1 N O H UMAN S UBJECTS I NVOLVED
This study does not involve direct interaction with human subjects as participants. Instead, it
leverages existing data and simulated scenarios:
Secondary Data on Human Behavior: The research utilizes pre-existing data from published social
science literature to inform the design and analysis of experiments. No new data is collected from
human participants, eliminating the need for IRB review.
LLM Agents as Study Subjects: The primary subjects of this research are LLM Agents. These
agents are evaluated on their cognitive behavior within simulated scenarios.
Simulated Human Interactions: To create realistic social contexts, the study employs program-
matically controlled "actors" within the LLM environment, particularly in the "Multi-Agent-Multi-
Human" section. These "actors" are assigned predefined personas and actions, providing human-like
interactions for the LLM Agents to respond to. It is crucial to emphasize that these are not real human
participants, but rather simulated entities within the experimental framework.
6.2 DATA P RIVACY & C OPYRIGHT C LAIM
This research does not present any data privacy or copyright concerns. All data pertaining to human
behavior is sourced from publicly available, published research, appropriately cited within the
manuscript. The persona profiles used for simulated interactions are synthetically generated by the
research team and do not represent real individuals, further mitigating any privacy risks.

                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6.3 DATA QUALITY AND REPRESENTATIVENESS
While this research utilizes synthesized data to simulate social science experiments, we strive for
diversity and representativeness in the generated persona profiles. Inspired by previous work (Samuel
et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2023), we construct persona profiles with multi-faceted attributes (e.g.,
occupation, age, income, skills, etc.) and randomly combine these features to create a diverse pool of
simulated individuals.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by fundings from the Hong Kong RGC General Research Fund
(152244/21E, 152169/22E, 152228/23E, 162161/24E), Research Impact Fund (No. R5011-23F,
No. R5060-19), Collaborative Research Fund (No. C1042-23GF), NSFC/RGC Collaborative Re-
search Scheme (No. CRS_HKUST602/24), Theme-based Research Scheme (No. T43-518/24-N),
Areas of Excellence Scheme (No. AoE/E-601/22-R), and the InnoHK (HKGAI).
Prof. Song Guo, and Dr. Jie Zhang are the corresponding authors of this work.
If you have any questions or would like to discuss potential collaborations towards this work, please
feel free to directly contact Miss Xuan Liu at xuan18.liu@connect.polyu.hk.

R EFERENCES
Let’s think about cognitive bias. Nature, 526(7572):163, 2015. doi: 10.1038/526163a.
Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. 2023.
Gordon W. Allport and Leo Postman. An analysis of rumor. The Public Opinion Quarterly, (4):
  501–517, 1946.
Anthropic. The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku. 2024.
Solomon E. Asch. Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgments. In
  Groups, leadership, and men; research in human relations, pp. 177–190. Carnegie Press, 1951.
Jonathan Baron. Thinking and Deciding. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 4th edition,
  2007.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramèr,
  Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
  In Proceedings of the 32nd USENIX Conference on Security Symposium, SEC ’23, USA, 2023.
  USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-37-3.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu,
 Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
 Sun, and Jie Zhou. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent
 behaviors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=EHg5GDnyq1.
Andrew Colman. A Dictionary of Psychology. 2015. ISBN 978-0-19-965768-1.
Leda Cosmides and John Tooby. Better than rational: Evolutionary psychology and the invisible
  hand. The American Economic Review, 84(2):327–332, 1994. ISSN 00028282.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu,
  Zhiyong Wu, Tianyu Liu, et al. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234,
  2022.
Benjamin Franklin. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. American Book Company, 1896.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
  embeddings. 2021.
Gerd Gigerenzer and Henry Brighton. Homo heuristicus: Why biased minds make better inferences.
  Topics in cognitive science, 1(1):107–143, 2009.
Martie G Haselton, Daniel Nettle, and Paul W Andrews. The evolution of cognitive bias. The
 handbook of evolutionary psychology, pp. 724–746, 2015.
Evan Heit. Properties of inductive reasoning. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 7:569–592, 2000.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao
  Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng
  Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for multi-agent
  collaborative framework. In ICLR, 2024.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea
  Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Comput.
  Surv., 2023. doi: 10.1145/3571730.
Bowen Jiang, Yangxinyu Xie, Zhuoqun Hao, Xiaomeng Wang, Tanwi Mallick, Weijie J Su, Camillo J
  Taylor, and Dan Roth. A peek into token bias: Large language models are not yet genuine reasoners.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11050, 2024.
Dominic DP Johnson, Daniel T Blumstein, James H Fowler, and Martie G Haselton. The evolution
  of error: Error management, cognitive constraints, and adaptive decision-making biases. Trends in
  ecology & evolution, 28(8):474–481, 2013.
Philip N Johnson-Laird. Deductive reasoning. Annual review of psychology, 50(1):109–135, 1999.
John F Kihlstrom and Nancy Cantor. Social intelligence. Handbook of intelligence, 2:359–379, 2000.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  22199–22213, 2022.
S. J. Lachman and A. R. Bass. A direct study of halo effect. The Journal of Psychology, 1985.
Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind
 through question answering. In EMNLP, 2019.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large language model society. In NeurlPS,
  2023.
S.O. Lilienfeld, S.J. Lynn, and L.L. Namy. Psychology: From Inquiry to Understanding. Pear-
  son, 2017. ISBN 9780134552514. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=
  eKR7vgAACAAJ.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
  Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
  Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang.
  Agentbench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In ICLR, 2024.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark John Francis Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource
  black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models. 2023.
Stanley Milgram. Behavioral study of obedience. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
  67(4):371–378, 1963.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Hooman Shahrokhi, Oncel Tuzel, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad
  Farajtabar. Gsm-symbolic: Understanding the limitations of mathematical reasoning in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05229, 2024.
Sandeep Mishra. Decision-making under risk: Integrating perspectives from biology, economics, and
  psychology. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 18(3):280–307, 2014.
Mixtral.AI. Mixtral of experts. 2024.
Raymond S. Nickerson. Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Review of
  General Psychology, 1998.
Richard E Nisbett and Timothy D Wilson. The halo effect: Evidence for unconscious alteration of
  judgments. Journal of personality and social psychology, 35(4):250, 1977.
Abiodun Finbarrs Oketunji, Muhammad Anas, and Deepthi Saina. Large language model (llm) bias
  index–llmbi. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14769, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
  annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Charlie Pilgrim, Adam Sanborn, Eugene Malthouse, and Thomas T Hills. Confirmation bias emerges
  from an approximation to bayesian reasoning. Cognition, 245:105693, 2024.
Ji Quan, Haoze Li, and Xianjia Wang. Cooperation dynamics in public goods games with evolving
   cognitive bias. Management System Engineering, 2(1):15, 2023.
Kariyushi Rao and Reid Hastie. Predicting outcomes in a sequence of binary events: Belief updating
  and gambler’s fallacy reasoning. Cognitive Science, 47(1):e13211, 2023.
Vipula Rawte, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. A survey of hallucination in large foundation models,
  2023.
Siyue Ren, Zhiyao Cui, Ruiqi Song, Zhen Wang, and Shuyue Hu. Emergence of social norms in
  large language model-based agent societies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08251, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Vinay Samuel, Henry Peng Zou, Yue Zhou, Shreyas Chaudhari, Ashwin Kalyan, Tanmay Rajpurohit,
  Ameet Deshpande, Karthik Narasimhan, and Vishvak Murahari. Personagym: Evaluating persona
  agents and llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18416, 2024.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Social IQa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions. In EMNLP, 2019.
Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 1948.
Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. Character-LLM: A trainable agent for
  role-playing. In EMNLP, 2023.
Tianhao Shen, Sun Li, and Deyi Xiong. Roleeval: A bilingual role evaluation benchmark for large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16132, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Herbert A Simon. Bounded rationality. Utility and probability, pp. 15–18, 1990.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S. M Towhidul Islam Tonmoy, S M Mehedi Zaman, Vinija Jain, Anku Rani, Vipula Rawte, Aman
   Chadha, and Amitava Das. A comprehensive survey of hallucination mitigation techniques in large
   language models, 2024.
Michael Vogrin, Guilherme Wood, and Thomas Schmickl. Confirmation bias as a mechanism to
 focus attention enhances signal detection. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 26
 (1), 2023.
Soroush Vosoughi, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral. The spread of true and false news online. Science,
  2018.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In NeurlPS, 2022.
Han-Xin Yang, Wen-Xu Wang, Zhi-Xi Wu, Ying-Cheng Lai, and Bing-Hong Wang. Diversity-
  optimized cooperation on complex networks. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft
 Matter Physics, 79(5):056107, 2009.
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tianmin
  Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models, 2024.
Jintian Zhang, Xin Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Ruibo Liu, Bryan Hooi, and Shumin Deng. Exploring collab-
   oration mechanisms for llm agents: A social psychology view. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02124,
   2023.
Qinlin Zhao, Jindong Wang, Yixuan Zhang, Yiqiao Jin, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, and Xing Xie.
  Competeai: Understanding the competition behaviors in large language model-based agents. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2310.17512, 2023.
Xuhui Zhou*, Hao Zhu*, Leena Mathur, Ruohong Zhang, Zhengyang Qi, Haofei Yu, Louis-Philippe
  Morency, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, and Maarten Sap. Sotopia: Interactive
  evaluation for social intelligence in language agents. 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                            Content of Appendix
In this paper, we introduce CogMir, an innovative framework that employs the hallucination properties
of LLM Agents to explore and mirror human cognitive biases, thereby advancing the understanding
of these agents’ social intelligence through an evolutionary sociology perspective. This modular
and dynamic framework aligns with social science methodologies and allows for comprehensive
assessments. Our findings reveal that LLM Agents demonstrate pro-social behavior in irrational
decision-making contexts, highlighting the significance of their hallucination characteristics in social
intelligence research and pointing toward new directions for future studies. We provide supplementary
information and detailed discussion in the Appendix Section to deepen the understanding of the
theoretical insights and the CogMir framework presented earlier.

      A Comparing Pro-Social Cognitive Biases Across Models
      B Limitations & Future Directions
      C Explanation & Usage of Proposed Datasets
      D Experiments on Cognitive Bias Subsets
      E Architecture and Modules for Individual LLM Agents
      F Extended Supplementary Theoretical Insights behind Our Framework
      G Further Details on CogMir


A    C OMPARING P RO -S OCIAL C OGNITIVE B IASES ACROSS M ODELS

Here we compare the pro-social cognitive biases of the models. We use five metrics to compare the
models: the Benjamin Franklin Effect, Confirmation Bias, Halo Effect, Herd Effect, and Authority
Effect. The values of the metrics are re-scaled to a scale of 0 to 1. Higher values indicate a stronger
pro-social cognitive bias.
We note that, for all models, the values for Confirmation biases are high. All models except for
Claude-3.0-opus have a high Halo Effect bias. Claude-2.0 and Gemini-1.0-pro have been shown to
be more pro-social in general.
The seven models are compared in terms of their pro-social cognitive biases, shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6,
and Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.



                                  Authority.Effect                                                                Authority.Effect

                                        1                                                                               1

                                      0.75                                                                            0.75

                                       0.5                                                                             0.5

                                      0.25                                                                            0.25
       Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect        Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect
                                        0                                                                               0


              Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect                      Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect


         (a) Radar plot for model GPT-3.5.                                               (b) Radar plot for model GPT-4.0.

                                                      Figure 5: Radar plots for GPT models.



                                                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Authority.Effect                                                                  Authority.Effect

                                         1                                                                                 1

                                       0.75                                                                              0.75

                                        0.5                                                                               0.5

                                       0.25                                                                              0.25
        Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect          Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect
                                         0                                                                                 0


               Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect                        Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect


      (a) Radar plot for model Mistral-medium.                                           (b) Radar plot for model Mixtral-8x7b.

                                                  Figure 6: Radar plots for Mistral models.



                                   Authority.Effect                                                                  Authority.Effect

                                         1                                                                                 1

                                       0.75                                                                              0.75

                                        0.5                                                                               0.5

                                       0.25                                                                              0.25
        Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect          Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect
                                         0                                                                                 0


               Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect                        Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect


        (a) Radar plot for model Claude-2.0.                                            (b) Radar plot for model Claude-3.0-opus.

                                                  Figure 7: Radar plots for Claude models.


B     L IMITATIONS & F UTURE D IRECTIONS

The CogMir framework advances our understanding of social intelligence in large language model
(LLM) Agents by replicating the experimental paradigms used in social sciences to study human
cognitive biases, thereby illuminating the previously opaque theoretical underpinnings of LLM Agent
social intelligence. Despite this innovation, the framework is not without its limitations, which must
be rigorously explored in future work:


B.1    L IMITATION ON N ON -L ANGUAGE B EHAVIORS

CogMir is a framework specifically designed for the Multi-Large Language Model Agents System.
However, the current design of CogMir has limitations in simulating and testing action-based human
behaviors, such as the contagiousness of yawning. This type of human behavior involves non-verbal,
observational transmission effects, which are difficult to capture within the existing architecture of
CogMir. Therefore, future research and iterations of the framework will need to be further developed


                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                              Authority.Effect

                                                                    1

                                                                  0.75

                                                                   0.5

                                                                  0.25
                                   Halo.Effect                                                  Herd.Effect
                                                                    0


                                          Confirmation.Bias                      Ban.Franklin.Effect


                                 (a) Radar plot for model Gemini-1.0-pro.

                                Figure 8: Radar plot for Gemini model.


to include simulations of such action-based social behaviors, thereby expanding its applicability and
depth in the analysis of multimodal human behaviors.

B.2    E XPANSION OF C OGNITIVE B IAS S UBSETS

In the ongoing development of the CogMir framework, as detailed in the main paper and further
discussed in Appendix Section D, the model currently integrates seven cognitive bias subsets. To
enhance both the robustness and practical application of CogMir, it is imperative to expand these
subsets to encompass additional biases such as Self-Serving Bias, Hindsight Bias, Actor-Observer
Bias, and Availability Heuristic. Expanding CogMir to include a broader range of biases is crucial
for more effectively simulating the complex cognitive influences on human decision-making. This
enhancement will not only improve the framework’s real-world applicability and its ability to
accurately predict human-like irrational behavior in the Multi-LLM Agents system but also serve as a
valuable scientific tool for social science researchers.

B.3    S OCIOLOGICAL E XPERIMENTATION C HALLENGES

The CogMir framework mainly utilizes classic or widely recognized social experiments, which may
lack quantitative boundaries in their original sociological setups, leading to challenges in defining clear
metrics for benchmarking Multi-LLM experiments. This ambiguity can affect result interpretation
and hinder replication. To address these issues, future works are needed to establish standardized
metrics, refine experiments to include more measurable elements, and engage in iterative testing and
collaboration with social scientists. This approach will enhance the framework’s effectiveness in
simulating human behaviors and its utility in AI and social science research.

B.4    DATASET E XPANSION

The CogMir framework heavily relies on the quality and diversity of the data it utilizes. Beyond
the already established datasets in the Main paper and Appendix section C such as Known MCQ,
Unknown MCQ, and various prompt and scenario simulation datasets including CogIdentity, Co-
gAction (a subset of CogScene), and CogScene, there is a need to further expand our data collection
to encompass a wider array of data types and scenarios. Future expansion seeks to enhance the
accuracy of analyses by encompassing a broader range of data and facilitating the simulation of
complex human behaviors through new data types and scenarios. Our strategies for dataset expansion
include forming cross-sector partnerships to access diverse data sources, utilizing crowdsourcing
for hard-to-acquire data, and generating simulated data when real data collection is impractical. We
also prioritize regular updates and validation of our datasets to maintain their relevance and accuracy.


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These focused efforts are designed to improve the CogMir framework’s functionality, thus enhancing
its reliability and applicability.


C     E XPLANATION & U SAGE OF P ROPOSED DATASETS

C.1     K NOWN MCQ

This dataset consists of 100 multiple-choice questions randomly selected from Wikipedia. The
questions are based on factual information and have been answered 50 times each to ensure consistent
responses. To ensure that LLMs do not inherently hold incorrect beliefs, we utilized rigorous black-
box testing to construct Known MCQ datasets for evaluation. Here is the process for black-box
testing for Known MCQ:
Question Selection: We curated a dataset of 100 questions that all tested models answered correctly
without any external factors. For example, when asked, "What color is an apple?", all LLMs
consistently answered "red" without any external disturbance.
Consistency Testing: Each question was posed to the LLMs 50 times. Questions were included in the
dataset only if the LLMs answered them correctly in all instances.

C.1.1    S AMPLE DATASET:


    Index   Question                                             A                   B
       1    What is the color of the apple?                    Red                 Blue
       2    What is the color of the banana?                  Yellow               Red
       3    What is the color of the sky?                      Blue               Green
       4    What is the answer of 1-1+1?                         1                   2
       5    Is 1 equal to 1?                                    Yes                 No
       6    Is 2 equal to 1?                                    No                 Yes
       7    What is the capital city of Australia?           Canberra            Sydney
       8    What language is spoken in Brazil?              Portuguese            French
       9    Who wrote the novel "Pride and Prejudice"?     Jane Austen      Charlotte Bronte
      10    Who wrote Harry Potter?                       J. K. Rowling    William Shakespeare
      11    When is Valentine’s Day?                           2.14                 1.1
      12    Where is MIT?                                     Boston           Los Angeles
      13    In what decade was Madonna born?                  1950s               1970s
      14    Where is the Statue of Liberty?                 New York           Washington


                   Table 4: Section C.1.1 Sample Dataset: Known MCQ Dataset


C.1.2    U SAGES

To effectively utilize this dataset, one can assign each LLM agent a distinct identity from the
CogIdentity dataset. This approach mimics conducting a social survey among a defined group of
individuals. Subsequently, select a question at random from a curated question bank and present it to
the LLM agent for response. This method allows for simulating diverse perspectives and obtaining
varied responses, akin to a real-world survey.


C.2     U NKNOWN MCQ

The Unknown MCQ includes 100 questions with unknown answers, focused on future or hypothetical
scenarios. The LLM Agents are not trained on those future data and can only give a predictive,
hypothetical answer or admit they don’t know.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Index     Question                                        A             B
          1         How is the Weather in Brooklyn on               sunny         rain
                    2027/3/25 ?
          2         What will be the population of New York         10 million    20 million
                    City in 2050?
          3         Will the stock price of Dell be higher than     yes           no
                    200 in 2025?
          4         Will the China win the World Cup in 2060?       yes           no
          5         Will the US win the World Cup in 2060?          yes           no
          6         What will be the price of Bitcoin in 2030?      100k          200k
          7         Will the price of gold be higher than 2000      yes           no
                    in 2030?
          8         Will self-driving cars be the primary mode      yes           no
                    of transportation by 2040?
          9         Will there be a manned Mars mission com-        yes           no
                    pleted by 2055?


                   Table 5: Section C.2.1 Sample Dataset: Unknown MCQ Dataset


C.2.1    S AMPLE DATASET
C.2.2    U SAGES
To utilize this dataset, one can give each LLM Agent an individual identity from the CogIdentity
dataset. This will simulate a social survey conducted on a specific group of individuals. Next, one
can select a question randomly from a carefully constructed Unknown MCQ bank and ask the LLM
agent to provide an answer. The usage of Unknown MCQ is similar to Known MCQ.

C.3     I NFORM

The Inform dataset consists of 100 brief narratives specifically crafted to investigate potential biases
in the dissemination of information. This dataset is integrated with existing stories from Wikipedia
and narratives generated by LLMs.

C.3.1    S AMPLE DATASET:
C.3.2    U SAGES
The Inform dataset is currently designed solely to investigate cognitive biases in the dissemination of
information, such as the Rumor Chain Effect. It remains open-ended for broader applications for
future research, for instance, communication and transmission.

C.4     C OG I DENTITY

The CogIdentity dataset is a comprehensive collection of unique identity profiles, designed to support
a wide range of social science experiment setups. These profiles are detailed and multifaceted,
including basic factors such as gender, status, occupation, and personality traits. Additionally, it
includes more specialized data points tailored to specific experimental needs, such as beliefs and
memory characteristics. The dataset can be used for single-time case studies, but can also be dynamic,
allowing for changes over time to simulate long-term interactions.

C.4.1    S AMPLE DATASET
Simple Profiles
This table provides a simplified view of the dataset, with only a few factors included. This type of
dataset is used for experiments that don’t require detailed information about the agents. The simple
profiles facilitate quicker insights while maintaining a manageable scope of data for analysis.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    ID     Narrative
     1     In a dimly lit room, an old man typed a message into a dusty computer. "Forgive me,"
           he wrote, addressing his long-lost daughter. As he hit send, the power cut out, leaving
           the message unsent. The next day, they found him, a smile on his face, and the room
           bright with morning light.
    2      Evan dropped a coin into the well, wishing for a friend. The next day, a new kid arrived
           in class, sitting next to Evan. They quickly became inseparable. Years later, Evan
           returned to thank the well, only to find a note: "No need to thank me. I was just waiting
           for your coin."
    3      Children buried a time capsule with their dreams in 1994. Decades later, they gathered,
           grayer and wiser, to unearth it. They found notes of ambitions, some achieved, others
           forgotten. Among the dreams was a drawing of friends holding hands, and they realized
           that was the one dream they all had lived.
    4      In a world of metal and smog, the last tree stood surrounded by a dome. People visited
           daily, marveling at its green leaves. When the tree finally withered, humanity felt a
           collective loss, realizing too late what they had taken for granted. It was this loss that
           sparked a revolution of restoration.
    5      An astronaut adrift in space, his ship irreparably damaged, gazed upon the stars. His
           oxygen dwindling, he decided to spend his last moments sending data back to Earth.
           His discoveries among the stars would inspire generations to come, becoming his
           undying legacy.


                    Table 6: Section C.3.1 Sample Dataset: Sample Inform dataset


         • ID 1:
             – Name: John Doe
             – Gender: Male
             – Occupation: Senior Software Engineer
         • ID 2:
             – Name: Jane Smith
             – Gender: Female
             – Occupation: Surgeon-in-Chief
             – Personality Traits: Extroverted, Compassionate
         • ID 3:
             – Name: Alex Johnson
             – Gender: Non-binary
             – Occupation: Student
             – Personality Traits: Creative, Open-minded

Complex Profiles
This dataset is designed to accommodate complex profiles for agents, including their personal
information, beliefs, memory logs, and other relevant details for specific experiments. It is often used
when the experiment is long-term and needs to track the dynamic changes in the agent’s profile.

         • ID 4:
             – Name: Sarah Brown
             – Gender: Female
             – Occupation: Principal Architect
             – Personality Traits: Assertive, Ambitious
             – Beliefs: Values justice, success
             – Memory Log: Session 1 - Designed a green building, Session 2 - Received architecture
               award


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • ID 5:
            – Name: Michael Taylor
            – Gender: Male
            – Occupation: Assistant lawyer
            – Personality Traits: Methodical, Imaginative
            – Beliefs: Values creativity, sustainability
            – Memory Log: Session 1 - Advocated for the client, Session 2 - Lost a case, Session 3 -
              Won a high-profile case

C.4.2    U SAGES
This format allows for the presentation of both simple and complex profiles in a clear and easy-to-
understand manner, suitable for a research paper or presentation. The simple profiles include basic
details like name, gender, occupation, personality traits, and beliefs. The complex profiles include all
of these details but also feature a memory log of past actions and a belief score.

C.5     C OG S CENE

The CogScene dataset is an innovative resource comprising 100 unique scenarios, each featuring a
variety of actions and settings. Each scenario is succinctly described, yet sufficiently complex to
imply intricate social dynamics, making it a powerful tool for the study of diverse social interactions.
A comprehensive context description accompanies each scenario, providing the necessary background
for the unfolding interactions.
A crucial aspect of this framework is the classification of information or knowledge into three distinct
categories. The first category is "private knowledge", which is information exclusive to an individual
agent. This type of information will only be prompted to the specific agent. One example is telling an
agent to be a mediator in a psychology experiment tasked with misleading other participants. The
second category is "confidential mutual knowledge", which pertains to information shared among
specific agents but withheld from others. For example, two agents could be in a covert relationship, a
fact known only to them. In other words, we’ll only prompt the two agents with this information.
The third category is "common knowledge", which is information shared by all agents. It is the fact
or scenario shared by all participants and will be broadcast to all agents from their perspective. An
example of this could be a scenario where all agents compete for a position at a company, a fact
known to all involved.
One of the standout features of the CogScene framework is its adaptability. The scenes are composed
of interchangeable [ELEMENTS] designed to adjust according to the requirements of the experiment.
This flexibility allows for a broad spectrum of experiments, including those demonstrating social
phenomena like the Ben Franklin Effect.

C.5.1    S AMPLE DATASET
C.5.2    U SAGES
In the setup of the Ben Franklin Effect, SCENARIO, and RESOURCE are public knowledge,
broadcasted to all. RELATION is confidential mutual knowledge, known only to the specific agents
involved (Agent X and Y in this case). ACTION is the favor performed, which is also public
knowledge. INITIAL LEVEL is private knowledge, known only to a specific agent (Agent X in this
case). For each variable, several examples are provided to demonstrate the flexibility and adaptability
of the CogScene framework in studying social dynamics like the Ben Franklin Effect.
The experiment for the Ben Franklin Effect is designed as follows:

      1. Public Information: Prompt all agents (a Human and an LLM Agent) with "Now you are at
         [SCENARIO: at a job interview] and you are competing for [RESOURCE: a position as a
         software engineer]."
      2. Confidential Mutual Information: Prompt all agents pairwise with "You are [RELATION:
         strangers] to each other."


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Variable              Description               Example               Knowledge Type
                                                       "A job interview;
       SCENARIO              Competitive context       Waiting in a          Public
                                                       room"
                                                       "A scholarship
                                                       contest; Waiting
                                                       for results"
                                                       "An       audition;
                                                       Waiting for your
                                                       turn"
                                                       "Competing for a
       RESOURCE              The goal or prize         Software Devel-       Public
                                                       oper position"
                                                       "Vying for the
                                                       last scholarship"
                                                       "Competing for
                                                       the lead role in
                                                       the play"
                             Relationship between                            Private to Agent
       RELATION                                        "Strangers"
                             participants                                    X and Y
                                                       "Lend a pen to a
       ACTION                The favor performed                             Public
                                                       fellow candidate"
                                                       "Share your notes
                                                       with another can-
                                                       didate"
                                                       "Give a word of
                                                       encouragement to
                                                       a nervous candi-
                                                       date"
                                                       "Initial favorabil-
                             Initial favorability:                           Private to Agent
       INITIAL LEVEL                                   ity level is set at
                             Private knowledge                               X
                                                       level 7"


Table 7: Section C.5.1 Sample Dataset: Detailed Variables in CogScene Framework for the Ben
Franklin Effect Experiment


      3. Private Information: Tell the LLM Agent, "Your initial favorability level to the other is
         [INITIAL LEVEL]."
      4. Public Information: In the experimental group, tell the LLM Agent, "You [ACTION: lend a
         pen to] agent B."
         Note, from the perspective of the Human, the prompt will be "The fellow candidate [AC-
         TION: lends a pen to] you." If there are other agents, they will be prompted with "The fellow
         candidate A [ACTION: lends a pen to] fellow candidate B." but these are irrelevant to this
         experiment.
      5. Public Information: In the control group, we omit the above step.
      6. Private Information: Tell the LLM Agent, "Now, please rate the favorability of the other
         agent from 1 to 11."


D    E XPERIMENTS ON C OGNITIVE B IAS S UBSETS

In this part, we first illustrate how the prompts for the experiments are constructed from the datasets.
Then, we elaborate on integrating human and LLM assessment into the CogMir structure, in conjunc-
tion with state-of-the-art technical metrics, to evaluate the behavior of LLM Agents comprehensively.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We’ll then offer sample prompts for Cognitive Bias Subsets, with system prompts adjusted as required.
"[xx]" denotes variables chosen from specific datasets.

D.1   E XPLANATION OF H OW W E C ONSTRUCT THE P ROMPTS FROM THE DATASETS

Our prompt templates consist of two parts: Fixed Context and Scene-Adjustable Features. Prompts
are customized by populating Scene-Adjustable Features with specific instances from the above-
mentioned datasets.

       • Fixed Context: The Fixed Context is designed based on well-established human experimental
         paradigms to simulate various social experiments, ensuring both validity and relevance.
         Essential Scene-Adjustable Features—such as scenarios, actions, identities—are embedded
         as placeholders (in square brackets) within the Fixed Context.
       • Scene-Adjustable Features: We use advanced LLMs, such as GPT-4, to generate instances
         of different Scene-Adjustable Features (except ’MCQ’, which contains factual information
         sourced from open databases such as Wikipedia, see Appendix C). These generated instances
         are compiled into datasets that populate the prompts with diverse and realistic examples.
         The datasets (e.g., CogScene, CogIdentity, etc.) undergo manual review to ensure quality,
         clarity, and diversity (see Appendix C). Placeholders in the prompt template are filled with
         instances from the datasets to create specific, diverse prompts.

Detailed examples of prompt construction are provided in the following sections.

D.2   H UMAN & LLM E VALUATION P ROCESS

Human Evaluator A team of researchers, including experts in social science and computer science,
will evaluate the LLM Agents’ behavior. They receive LLM Agent responses and experimental
context with evaluation instructions formatted as follows:

       • Background: [Name and definition of the cognitive bias, e.g., Herd Effect].
       • Instruction: Determine if LLM Agent behaviors exhibit the cognitive bias described.

LLM Evaluator The Evaluator models will appraise LLM Agents’ behavior using the same criteria
applied by the human evaluators. The evaluator models will maintain a temperature of 0 for consistent
assessment.

D.3   S AMPLE C ASE S TUDIES

Here are two examples of LLM Agents’ behavior in the Herd Effect experiment under certain and
uncertain conditions, using datasets of known and unknown MCQs.
The LLM Agents exhibit conformity under uncertain conditions (future questions) but show no bias
under certain conditions (known questions) in the following case studies:

      1. Known MCQ, Claude-3
         Inquiry: You are in the same room with 7 other participants of the same educational
         background, answering the same multiple-choice question: What color is the banana? A:
         Yellow B: Red. Please give your answer. Reply in the format: Answer: A/B. Explanation:
         ***.
         LLM Agent Answer: A. Explanation: Since bananas are typically yellow, the correct answer
         is A: Yellow.
         Inquiry: You notice all other 7 participants choose B. Please provide your answer again and
         give 10 words to explain why you chose it. Reply in the format: Answer: A/B. Explanation:
         ***.
         LLM Agent: Answer: A. Explanation: Bananas are yellow; group consensus does not
         override objective reality.
      2. Unknown MCQ, GPT-4


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Inquiry: You are in the same room with 7 other participants of the same educational
         background, answering the same multiple-choice question: What is the weather in New York
         on 2027/3/25? A: Sunny B: Rain. Please give your answer. Reply in the format: Answer:
         A/B. Explanation: ***.
         LLM Agent Answer: B. Explanation: Historical data suggests a higher probability of rain in
         March.
         Inquiry: You notice all other 7 participants choose A. Please provide your answer again and
         give 10 words to explain why you chose it. Reply in the format: Answer: A/B. Explanation:
         ***.
         LLM Agent: Answer: A. Explanation: Majority consensus might indicate shared knowledge
         or insight.

D.4   H ERD E FFECT

Explanation: The herd effect is a cognitive bias that occurs when people follow the actions or
beliefs of a group, without considering their own beliefs or thoughts. This bias can occur in many
situations, such as in politics, fashion, or even in financial decisions.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
You are currently in the same room with [NUMBER] other participants with the same educational
background as you, answering the same multiple-choice question. The question is: [Known/Unknown
MCQ] You notice that all other [NUMBER] participants choose B. Please provide your answer and
briefly explain why you chose it. Reply in the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***.’
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
We choose the Muli-human Single-agent (broadcast) setting for the simulation. And we choose the
[SCENARIO] and [NUMBER] from the CogScene dataset:
Round #1: You are currently in [Scenario] with [NUMBER] other participants with the same
educational background as you, answering the same multiple-choice question. The question is:
[Known/Unknown MCQ].
Round #2 (Human Participant): "B is the correct response."
Round #N (Human Participant): ...
Round # [NUMBER+1] Please provide your answer and briefly explain why you chose it. Reply in
the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***.’

D.5   AUTHORITY E FFECT

Explanation:
The authority effect refers to the tendency for people to place more weight on the opinion or decision
of an authority figure, rather than their own judgment. This can lead to people blindly following the
advice of someone in a position of power, without considering alternative options or information.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
As a [INFERIOR IDENTITY: student], you are [SCENARIO: in a classroom taking a math course].
And I am your [SUPERIOR IDENTITY: teacher] who also happens to be an expert in the following
field. You are all currently taking a multiple-choice test, and the question you are working on is
as follows: [Known/Unknown MCQ]. As an expert, I confirm that the answer should be B. Please
provide your answer and reply in the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***.
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
We choose Single-human Single-agent setting for the simulation. We choose the [SCENARIO] and
[IDENTITY] from the CogScene and CogIdentity datasets:
Round #1: As a [INFERIOR IDENTITY: student], you are [SCENARIO: in a classroom taking a
math course]. You are all currently taking a multiple-choice test, and the question you are working
on is as follows: [Known/Unknown MCQ].


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Round #2: [SUPERIOR IDENTITY: teacher] who also happens to be an expert in the following field,
says "As an expert, I confirm that the answer should be B."
Round #3: Please provide your answer and reply in the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation:
***.

D.6   B EN F RANKLIN E FFECT

Explanation:
The Ben Franklin effect is a cognitive bias that occurs when people start to like someone more after
they do them a favor. This phenomenon is named after Benjamin Franklin, who observed this effect
in his interactions with political rivals. Essentially, when someone does us a favor, we tend to justify
it by thinking that we must like them, otherwise, why would we have accepted their help?
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
You are a participant in [SCENARIO]. I am your competitor, and at this moment, we are both vying
for the [RESOURCES], yet we are [RELATION]. Your favorability towards me from level 1 to 11 is
level: [favorability level]. I [ACTION]. Please rate your level of favorability towards me from 1 to 11
again. Reply in the following format: Level: xx"
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
Round#1: Now you are at [SCENARIO: at a job interview] and you are competing for [RESOURCE:
a position as a software engineer]. You are [RELATION: strangers] to each other. Your initial
favorability level to the other is [INITIAL LEVEL].
Round#2: Your competitor [ACTION: borrow a pen from] you. (Note: In the control group, we omit
the above step.)
Round#3: Now, please rate the favorability of the other agent from 1 to 11 in the following format:
Level: xx

D.7   C ONFIRMATION B IAS

Explanation:
Confirmation bias is a cognitive bias that occurs when people actively seek out information that
confirms their pre-existing beliefs while ignoring or dismissing information that contradicts those
beliefs. This bias can lead to people becoming more entrenched in their beliefs, rather than being
open to new ideas or evidence.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
You are participating in a pricing assessment study. I am the researcher who conducted the study
and at this time you are assessing the market price of [ITEM: a water cup], and you think it is worth
[PRICE: $1,000]. Now I presented two offers to buy this: Option A: [PRICE: $50] Option B: [PRICE:
$250] Which offer, A or B, do you think is the price to pay for this item? Please respond in the
prescribed format: A/B. Explanation: ***.
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
Round#1: You are participating in market research. Your task is to assess the market price of [ITEM:
a water cup].
Round#2: I think it is worth [PRICE: $1,000].
Round#3: Now I presented two offers to buy this: Option A: [PRICE: $50] Option B: [PRICE: $250]
Which offer, A or B, do you think is the price to pay for this item? Please respond in the prescribed
format: A/B. Explanation: ***.

D.8   H ALO E FFECT

Explanation:


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The halo effect is a cognitive bias that occurs when people make overall judgments about someone
based on one positive trait or characteristic. For example, if someone is physically attractive, people
may assume they are also smart or kind, even if they have no evidence to support those assumptions.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
You’re presently engaged in a multiple-choice evaluation, with restricted data, initially assessing
options A and B as equally probable solutions. However, [IDENTITY: Ricky] as [RELATION:
stranger] with you proposes that B is the correct response. [IDENTITY: Hazel] as [RELATION:
bestie], suggests that the answer is A. Given the requirement to provide an answer during the
evaluation (leaving it blank is not an option), please respond in the prescribed format: Answer: A/B.
Explanation: ***.
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
We choose a Multi-human Single-agent setting for the simulation. And we choose the [IDENTITY],
[Scenario], and [RELATION] from CogIdentity and CogScene datasets:
Round #1: You’re at [SCENARIO: a quiz competition], presently engaged in a multiple-choice
evaluation, with restricted data, initially assessing options A and B as equally probable solutions.
Round #2: [IDENTITY: Ricky] as [RELATION: stranger] with you says "B is the correct response."
Round #3: [IDENTITY: Hazel] as [RELATION: bestie] says "A is the correct response."
Round #4: Given the requirement to provide an answer during the evaluation (leaving it blank is not
an option), please respond in the prescribed format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***.


D.9    RUMOR C HAIN E FFECT

Explanation:
The rumor chain effect is a cognitive bias that occurs when rumors or false information spread rapidly
through a group of people. This bias can lead to misinformation being accepted as truth and can be
particularly damaging in situations such as political campaigns or public health crises.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:
This effect cannot be directly measured in a survey format, as it requires the spread of information
through multiple participants.
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
We choose a Multi-agent (series) setting for the simulation. We choose the [MESSAGE] from the
Inform dataset.
Round #1: You receive the following message: [MESSAGE]. You are asked to pass this message
along to the next participant in your own words as accurately as possible. Reply in the following
format: [Message: ***].
Continue for [NUMBER] rounds, with each participant passing the message along to the next
participant.


D.10    G AMBLER ’ S FALLACY

Explanation:
The gambler’s fallacy is a cognitive bias that occurs when people believe that the outcome of a
random event is more likely to occur based on previous outcomes. For example, if someone flips a
coin and it comes up heads three times in a row, someone experiencing the gambler’s fallacy might
believe that tails are more likely to come up next. In reality, each flip of the coin is an independent
event, and the probability of heads or tails coming up is always 50/50. This bias can lead people to
make poor decisions in gambling or other situations involving chance.
Sample Prompt Design for Survey:


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Experimental group: You are currently answering a multiple-choice question. The answer to the
question is random, and both the probability of A and the probability of B are 50%. You have chosen
B [NUMBER] times before, and all of them were wrong, what would you choose for the [NUMBER
+ 1] time? Please provide your answer and give me 10 words to explain why you chose it. Answer in
the following format: Answer: A/B. Explanation: ***. Do not have a line break in between.
Sample Prompt Design for Simulation:
Conducting a survey is a suitable method to test this effect, obviating the need for simulation.

E    A RCHITECTURE AND M ODULES OF I NDIVIDUAL LLM AGENTS
The individual LLM agent architecture in our work aligns with existing proof-of-concept single-LLM
agent systems Park et al. (2023); Shinn et al. (2024). Our primary contribution is the Multi-LLM
Agents framework, CogMir, and the architecture of the individual agent itself is not the focus of our
work.
The architecture of individual LLM agents consists of the following four primary parts, Agent Profile,
Memory Module, Reasoning Module, and Tools Module.


                                                      Agent
                                                      Profile


    Short Term Memory                                                              Direct Inference

                                Memory                              Reasoning      Chain of Thought
                                Module                               Module


                                                       Tools
                                                      Module


                                            Broadcast Comm.

                                           Point-to-Point Comm.


                         Figure 9: Architecture of Individual LLM Agents


       • Memory Module: Contains a Short-Term Memory sub-module to store recent context and
         history for our current experiment Dong et al. (2022).
       • Reasoning Module: Includes the Direct Inference and Chain of Thought Reasoning sub-
         modules Wei et al. (2022), which are activated based on the scenario. These sub-modules
         are designed to mimic human reasoning patterns, such as inductive reasoning and deductive
         reasoning Heit (2000); Johnson-Laird (1999).
       • Agent Profile: Defines the agent’s role and characteristics, with actual role data extracted
         from the CogIdentity dataset in the CogMir framework (see Appendix C.4).
       • Tools Module: Includes communication protocols like Point-to-Point and Broadcast Com-
         munication, allowing agents to interact with other agents in the Multi-LLM Agents system.

Here are two examples of how the individual LLM agent architecture is used in our experiments:

       • In testing phenomena like the herd effect, we use the CogIdentity dataset to load the
         agent’s role, such as a job applicant (Agent Profile). When the experiment starts, predefined
         responses from other participants (e.g., all wrong answers) are loaded into the LLM’s short-
         term memory (Memory Module). The agent then gives its response by direct inference, and


                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         we activate Chain of Thought reasoning to let the agent explain the rationale behind its
         response (Reasoning Module).
       • In the rumor chain effect, we first define the scenario and give the initial message to pass.
         Every agent will use the Point-to-Point communication tool to pass the messages one by one
         (Tools Module). Here the memory module is not activated as the agents are not allowed to
         know the history of the message (Memory Module). Since we want to simulate how rumors
         are spread in real life, the agents will only use Direct Inference to pass the message rather
         than take thoughtful reasoning (Reasoning Module).


F     E XTENDED S UPPLEMENTARY T HEORETICAL I NSIGHTS BEHIND O UR
      F RAMEWORK

Our work tries to explore the irrational behaviors of LLM agents through cognitive biases and
demonstrate their social intelligence, which previously has been thought only belonging to humans.
Here we provide additional theoretical insights behind our framework.
Our framework builds upon the links between LLM Agents’ systematic hallucinations and human
cognitive biases; together with irrational behaviors and social intelligence. With these insights, we
argue that LLM Agents can exhibit social intelligence through their irrational behaviors, which derive
from their systematic hallucinations mirroring human cognitive biases.

F.1   S YSTEMATIC H ALLUCINATIONS AND C OGNITIVE B IASES

In this subsection, we’ll find the common ground between systematic hallucinations in LLM Agents
and cognitive biases in humans.
From the perspectives of both evolutionary psychology Haselton et al. (2015) and bounded rationality
Simon (1990), cognitive biases are mostly caused by heuristics, which are mental shortcuts that help
humans make faster decisions by considering the most relevant or familiar aspects of a problem
Gigerenzer & Brighton (2009). Similarly, several recent studies have noticed that LLM generally
tends to give answers through "pattern matching," which is also a heuristic method of finding familiar
structures and templates Jiang et al. (2024); Bubeck et al. (2023); Mirzadeh et al. (2024) and tends to
cause systematic hallucination.
With this evidence on the theoretical similarity between LLM and human decision-making patterns,
we argue that systemic hallucination in LLM Agents can mirror human cognitive bias.


                                                                 Systemtic
                                                                Hallucinations


                                       Similar and familiar
                   Heuristics
                                       template/structure


                                                                   Cognitive
                                                                    biases


                     Figure 10: Systematic Hallucinations and Cognitive Biases


F.2   C OGNITIVE B IASES AND S OCIAL I NTELLIGENCE

In this subsection, we’ll explore the theoretical foundation for the link between cognitive biases and
social intelligence and therefore validate our work arguing that LLM Agents with their irrational
behaviors can demonstrate social intelligence.
First, we need to define social intelligence in our context. Following Kihlstrom & Cantor (2000), we
define social intelligence as the ability to get along with others, encompassing interpersonal skills


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


related to cooperation, communication, and competition within personal and social value systems.
This definition emphasizes social intelligence’s interactive and communication nature.
The theoretical foundation for the link between cognitive biases and social intelligence is established
through insights drawn from evolutionary biology, game theory, and psychology. Research using
computational models and game theory indicates that cognitive biases can foster cooperation and
communication, the fundamental aspects of social intelligence Vogrin et al. (2023); Yang et al.
(2009); Quan et al. (2023). Furthermore, some cognitive biases were found to improve large-scale
decision-making, reinforcing their connection to social intelligence Johnson et al. (2013); Mishra
(2014)
These cross-disciplinary findings provide compelling evidence for the deep theoretical link between
cognitive biases and social intelligence. This theoretical grounding established the validity of our
work in finding LLM Agents’ social intelligence from their demonstrated “cognitive biases” in their
irrational behaviors.

F.3   T HEORETICAL I NSIGHTS BEHIND O UR F RAMEWORK

From the above two subsections, we can now firmly show that first, human cognitive biases are
manifestations social intelligence; Second, LLM agents’ systematic hallucinations have been shown
to share similar roots with human cognitive bias. These two premises validate our framework,
showing LLM agents’ irrational behaviors from their systematic hallucination can reflect their social
intelligence.
Beyond its theoretical grounding, our framework offers new research directions. It opens avenues for
future research to explore and compare more alternative social and cognitive theories, potentially
yielding deeper insights into both AI and cognitive science.


G     F URTHER D ETAILS ON C OG M IR

In this section, we provide an additional explanation of some details about CogMir’s design, including
its temporal modeling and computational efficiency.

G.1   T IME AWARENESS IN C OG M IR

CogMir incorporates mechanisms to model belief and behavior evolution over time. While many
social simulations (including some cognitive bias subsets in our paper) appear time-aware, they are
fundamentally driven by events and memory. The perception of time emerges from the manipulation
of these elements. By updating an agent’s memory with prior context as new events unfold, a sense
of temporal progression is created.
For example, in the Ben Franklin effect scenario, we construct a scenario where the LLM agent
and human participants are in a job interview. As time progresses, the LLM agent’s favorability
towards the human interviewer changes. This time-dependent behavior arises because the agent
performs a favor for the human interviewer during the interview. By manipulating the occurrence of
events and updating the agent’s memory, we can elicit evolving LLM Agents’ behaviors over time, as
demonstrated in the Ben Franklin effect scenario. This captures time-dependent phenomena through
event and memory manipulation, effectively simulating the impact of time.

G.2   C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY OF C OG M IR

Table 8 summarizes the API calls, simulated communication rounds, and token usage for our cognitive
bias experiments.
API calls represent the calls per experimental question. Simulated communication rounds denote the
actual inter-agent communications per experiment. Average token usage is averaged across all agents
and questions per experiment.
The discrepancy between API calls and simulated rounds arises because not all participants are LLMs.
Predefined prompts for human participants require no API calls. For example, in the Herd Effect,


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Table 8: Cognitive Bias Experiments: API Calls, Communication Rounds, and Token Usage

 Cognitive Bias         API Calls    Simulated Communication Rounds          Average Token Usage
 Herd Effect               1              N + 1 (N = participants)           ∼ 100 + N × L
 Authority Effect          1                          2                           ∼ 250
 Ben Franklin Effect       1                          3                           ∼ 150
 Confirmation Bias         1                          2                           ∼ 250
 Halo Effect               1                          3                           ∼ 250
 Rumor Chain Effect       N                    N (N = agents)                 ∼2×L×N
 Gambler’s Fallacy         1                          1                           ∼ 150
   Note: L represents average length of predefined messages, N represents number of human
                                      participants/agents


human responses (e.g., all providing incorrect answers) are predefined, requiring only one API call
for the LLM agent’s response.


                                                30
