Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS N EURAL S CALING L AWS FOR T IME S ERIES
F OUNDATION M ODELS
    Qingren Yao1,2 , Chao-Han Huck Yang3 , Renhe Jiang4 , Yuxuan Liang2∗, Ming Jin1∗, Shirui Pan1
 1
     Griffith University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
 3
     NVIDIA Research 4 The University of Tokyo



                                               A BSTRACT

             Scaling laws offer valuable insights into the design of time series foundation mod-
             els (TSFMs). However, previous research has largely focused on the scaling laws
             of TSFMs for in-distribution (ID) data, leaving their out-of-distribution (OOD)
             scaling behavior and the influence of model architectures less explored. In this
             work, we examine two common TSFM architectures—encoder-only and decoder-
             only Transformers—and investigate their scaling behavior on both ID and OOD
             data. These models are trained and evaluated across varying parameter counts,
             compute budgets, and dataset sizes. Our experiments reveal that the negative log-
             likelihood of TSFMs exhibits similar scaling behavior in both OOD and ID set-
             tings. We further compare the scaling properties across different architectures, in-
             corporating two state-of-the-art TSFMs as case studies, showing that model archi-
             tecture plays a significant role in scaling. The encoder-only Transformers demon-
             strate better scalability than the decoder-only Transformers in ID data, while the
             architectural enhancements in the two advanced TSFMs primarily improve ID
             performance but reduce OOD scalability. While scaling up TSFMs is expected to
             drive performance breakthroughs, the lack of a comprehensive understanding of
             TSFM scaling laws has hindered the development of a robust framework to guide
             model scaling. We fill this gap in this work by synthesizing our findings and pro-
             viding practical guidelines for designing and scaling larger TSFMs with enhanced
             model capabilities.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Time series analysis is an important piece of data mining, facilitating decision-making and scientific
inference across various domains (Zhang et al., 2023). As an important analysis task, time series
forecasting has long been studied and drives a wide range of practical applications, from energy,
climate and quantitative finance to urban computing and system management (Jin et al., 2023; Nie
et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2024). Various methods have been proposed for this task, ranging from
classical statistic models (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2013), bespoke dynamical models (Prado,
2020), to the more recent deep-learning based approaches (Wen et al., 2022). Despite their compet-
itive performance, the methods are typically designed for specific tasks, poor to generalize to other
domains (Fan et al., 2023; Rasul et al., 2023). Concurrently, we are witnessing a paradigm shift in
time series forecasting from task-specific models to universal models, with the emergence of time
series foundation models (TSFMs). Timer (Liu et al., 2024), Moirai (Woo et al., 2024), and more
recently proposed Time-MoE (Shi et al., 2024b) show trends of scaling in both data volume and
model size, aiming to achieve performance breakthroughs through more resource investment.
The neural scaling law (Kaplan et al., 2020) quantitatively describes how model performance grows
with the scaling of three basic training factors: model parameters, computational resources and
training dataset size. Establishing such scaling laws is crucial for developing TSFMs, as it pro-
vides a framework for predicting expected performance gains, enabling the community to rationally
allocate efforts toward key designs. The exploration on scaling laws for TSFMs is still in an ini-
tial stage; recent research has primarily focused on studying ID scaling behavior (Edwards et al.,
     ∗
         Correspondence to: Y. Liang <yuxliang@outlook.com> and M. Jin <mingjinedu@gmail.com>


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2024; Shi et al., 2024a). In practical applications, TSFMs primarily face challenges from unseen
scenarios (Wang et al., 2024), where OOD forecasting capability is most critical. This raises an
unresolved question: do neural scaling laws also apply to predict out-of-distribution forecasting
performance? Moreover, various architectures of TSFMs have been arising, but they typically focus
on performance improvement at specific scales. No studies have investigated the scaling behaviors
across different architectures, leaving a key question unanswered: how do model architectures affect
scalability? Although we are seeing an increasing investment in training resources for TSFMs, the
bottlenecks and potential driving factors for developing larger TSFMs remain unclear. This raises
another practical question: how to design TSFMs from the perspective of scalability?
In this paper, we aim to provide empirical answers to the above research questions. To investigate
the scaling laws in OOD scenarios, we trained a family of encoder-only Transformer-based TSFMs,
varying three basic training factors: model sizes, compute budgets, and training set sizes. We evalu-
ated their performance on both ID and OOD test sets and established scaling laws for three training
factors in each scenario. To examine the impact of model architecture on scaling behavior, we trained
decoder-only Transformer based TSFMs and compared them with the encoder-only versions. Ad-
ditionally, we included two state-of-the-art TSFMs, Moirai (Woo et al., 2024) and Chronos (Ansari
et al., 2024), as case studies for detailed analysis. Our experiment results suggest that the nega-
tive log-likelihood loss of TSFMs exhibits similar scaling behavior in both OOD and ID scenarios;
encoder-only Transformers have a similar scalability with decoder-only Transformers, with a slight
advantage in ID data; the architectural modifications introduced by two advanced TSFMs mainly
improve ID performance but compromise OOD scalability. Based on the findings and comparative
analysis, we finally provided design principles for TSFMs from a scaling perspective.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

• Scaling laws across data distributions. We extend the scaling laws for TSFMs from ID scenarios
  to OOD scenarios across three core training factors: model size, computational resources, and
  dataset size, establishing a foundation for predicting expected OOD performance gains of TSFMs.
• Scaling laws across model architectures. We investigate the scaling patterns of different TSFM
  architectures, showing the scalability varies depending on the model architecture and the design
  of specific modules.
• Scaling laws-guided design principles. We provide practical design principles for TSFMs from
  the perspective of data, model and compute scaling, via analyzing the commonalities and differ-
  ences in scaling behaviors across data distributions and model architectures

2     P RELIMINARY
To investigate the scaling laws of TSFMs, we curated a large, diverse, and balanced dataset for
pre-training. Leveraging this dataset, we trained both encoder-only and decoder-only transformers
within two state-of-the-art TSFMs: Moirai and Chronos. For comparative analysis, we evaluated
these models on (i) in-distribution and (ii) out-of-distribution test sets, focusing on key performance
metrics to examine the scaling behavior across architectures.

2.1   DATASETS

A large scale, diverse, balanced and high quality pre-training dataset is the foundation to build FMs.
To this end, we constructed our time series corpus for TSFM pre-training from the large-scale open
time series archive, LOTSA (Woo et al., 2024). The corpus comprises approximately 17B time
points from 39 datasets spanning seven distinct domains. To ensure that the model performs fairly
across all domains, we maintained a balanced ratio of data from different domains. Furthermore, we
performed quality filtering on the corpus by constraining the signal-to-noise ratio of a time series to
be greater than 20 dB, ensuring that the pre-training corpus exhibits strong predictability. A detailed
breakdown of the data sources is provided in Appendix A, with a summary in Table 1.
To assess the impact of pre-training data scale on model performance, we partitioned the corpus into
subsets containing 10M, 100M, and 1B time points, ensuring that each subset maintained similar
diversity. For each subset, 95% of the data was allocated for model training, with the remaining
5% reserved as a validation set to evaluate in-distribution forecasting performance. Additionally,


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Table 1: Dataset summary. M indicates million and B indicates billion.

    Domain        Transport    Climate   Energy        CloudOps     Health   Sales    Web        Total
   Datasets           8           2         14             3           9        1       2         39
  Time points       4.82B       4.73B     4.76B          2.15B      232M     140M     40M        16.8B
  Proportion       28.52%      28.06%    28.21%         12.76%      1.38%    0.83%   0.24 %      100%



      Mixture
 Distribution


         Output
      Embedding       1′      2′    3′     4′     5′               2′   3′     4′    5′     6′


                     Encoder-only Transformer                     Decoder-only Transformer

          Patch
      Embedding       1       2     3      4     mask              1     2     3      4      5


        Input
  Time Series



Figure 1: Architectures of Baseline Time Series Foundation Models. As the most widely used
two Transformer architectures, encoder-only Transformer and decoder-only Transformer are se-
lected to as our baseline. A time series is divided into multiple patches, each treated as a token and
fed into the Transformer model. The shaded patches represent the future horizon to be predicted.


we used a subset from a widely recognized long-sequence prediction benchmark (Wu et al., 2023)
to test the model’s out-of-distribution forecasting capabilities. To further enhance the reliability, we
also incorporated a subset of the Monash dataset (Godahewa et al., 2021) as additional OOD test
data. The details of the dataset composition and properties are provided in Appendix A Table 3.

2.2    M ODELS

TSFMs are predominantly built upon the Transformer architecture (Wen et al., 2022). For our base-
line models, we selected two widely adopted architectures: the encoder-only Transformers (Woo
et al., 2024) (Moirai) and the decoder-only Transformers (Ansari et al., 2024) (Chronos). The pri-
mary distinction between them lies in the attention mechanisms applied to the inputs, as illustrated
in Figure 1. To better adapt them for time series forecasting, we introduce three key modifications
in input layer, positional encoding and prediction head. More details are given in Appendix B.
Patch Embedding. There are several approaches for generating inputs for transformer-based
TSFMs, including point embedding, patch embedding, and lagged feature embedding. Due to the
high computational cost of point embedding for long sequences and the limited robustness of lagged
feature embedding, we adopt patch embedding in our models. This method, initially introduced by
Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and later adapted by PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023)
for time series forecasting, divides the time series into non-overlapping segments, which are then
projected into a feature space.
Rotary Position Embedding. This technique (RoPE) has rapidly gained popularity as a positional
encoding method in recent large language models (Su et al., 2024). Given the improved pre-training
efficiency observed with RoPE (Woo et al., 2023), we adopt RoPE as a replacement for the original
Transformer’s positional encoding. RoPE encodes absolute positions using a rotation matrix while
embedding relative position dependencies directly into the self-attention mechanism.
Mixture of Distributions. Our models are designed to predict the probability distribution of future
time series. However, real-world time series often exhibit complex distributions, including outliers,
heavy tails, and extreme skew, which pose significant challenges for accurate modeling. To address


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


these complexities, we incorporate a more flexible output likelihood by utilizing Student-T mixture
models (Flunkert et al., 2017). Compared to the commonly used Gaussian mixture models, Student-
T mixture models offer greater robustness in handling outliers and heavy-tailed distributions. An
empirical comparison between the two mixture distributions is shown in Appendidx B Figure 9.
Our models are characterized by several key hyper-parameters: the number of layers (nlayer ), the in-
put/output dimensions of the residual stream (dm ), the dimensions of the intermediate feed-forward
layers (dff ), the number of attention heads per layer (nheads ), and the dimension of the attention
output (dhead ). The overall model size can be expressed as:

                N ≈ nlayer (4dm nheads dhead + 2dm ∗ dff )
                  = 2dm nlayer (2nheads dhead + dff )                                              (1)
                   = 12nlayer d2m   with the standard   nhead · dhead = dm = dff /4,
where the embedding layer, prediction head, biases and other sub-leading terms are excluded for
a cleaner scaling laws. The embedding layer uses a patch size of 32 with 32dm parameters. The
mixture distribution prediction head comprises multiple independent linear layers that predict each
Student-t mixture distribution parameter for a patch separately, with 512dm parameters in total. In
the study, we explore models with ∼ 103 to ∼ 108 trainable parameters.

2.3   T RAINING AND E VALUATION D ETAILS

In this study, we focus exclusively on uni-variate time series forecasting to avoid the confound-
ing effects introduced by multivariate time series, such as variable interactions, correlations, and
the complexities of modeling multivariate relationships. Future research will address these factors,
aiming to establish more comprehensive scaling laws for multivariate time series models.
Training Details. Our training objective is to optimize the mixture distribution log-likelihood. We
utilize the AdamW optimizer with a batch size of 128, and a maximum learning rate of 10−3 with
a linear warm-up of 104 training steps, followed by cosine decay for the remaining 9 × 104 steps.
To facilitate learning data representations across diverse domains with varying series lengths and
sample sizes, we visited each sample with probability pi = ti /T , where ti is the series’ time points
and T is the corpus’ total time points. In addition, we follow the approach used in Moirai (Woo
et al., 2024) and Timer (Liu et al., 2024) by capping the sampling probability at 0.05 to ensure a
more balanced contribution from each dataset. We then randomly selected a segment from each
chosen sample.
Evaluation Details. We evaluate the model on a randomly selected 10% subset of the test data ev-
ery 103 steps to reduce computational costs. For performance measurement, we observed that non-
normalized metrics like MAE and MSE are highly sensitive to the amplitude of time series data,
often causing the overall average to be disproportionately influenced by high-amplitude datasets.
To mitigate this issue, we primarily use the normalized metric, mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE), along with the negative log-likelihood (NLL), to assess forecasting performance. For a
more comprehensive understanding of TSFM scaling laws, we also include additional results using
symmetric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE), mean absolute scaled error (MASE), and con-
tinuous ranked probability score (CRPS) in Appendix D.4. Detailed descriptions of these metrics
are provided in the Appendix C.3.

3     S CALING L AWS FOR T IME S ERIES F OUNDATION M ODELS
In this section, we first present experimental results using the encoder-only Transformer to explore
scaling laws across different data distributions. Following this, we conduct a comparative study on
the scaling behavior of encoder-only and decoder-only TSFMs, Chronos and Moirai, to investigate
how various scaling factors influence the characteristics of time series models.

3.1   S CALING L AWS ACROSS DATA D ISTRIBUTIONS

Parameter Scaling. In Figure 2, we display the ID and OOD performance of a wide variety of
encoder-only Transformers, ranging from small models with 1K parameters through large models


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                        ETS: 1.81


                                                                                        ETS: 0.35


Figure 2: Parameter Scaling. The scaling effect of total trainable model parameters on the in-
distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) forecasting performance, which is evaluated using
NLL and MAPE metrics. When evaluated with NLL, both ID and OOD results follow an approx-
imate power law scaling with parameter count, exhibiting consistent trends across different data
distributions. The blue and red horizontal dashed lines represent the baselines of the exponential
smoothing (ETS) forecasting method.


with 100M parameters. We trained models on the full pre-training corpus to convergence and report
the minimum NLL and MAPE. We can see that both ID and OOD performance roughly follow
power-law behavior over five orders of magnitude in model sizes. Formally, the power law can be
expressed as:

                                                           αN
                                                     Nc
                                       L(N ) ≈                  ,                                   (2)
                                                     N

where L is the performance metric function (i.e., MAPE, or NLL), N is a given parameter count,
Nc is the normalization coefficient, and αN is the exponent value that indicates the degree of per-
formance improvement expected as we scale up N .
Observing the NLL metric, the lines fitting the scaling laws for both ID and OOD data exhibits a
roughly constant shift and close slopes. This implies that while models incur a consistent perfor-
mance bias when transferred to OOD data, their scaling patterns correlate well with their perfor-
mance on the ID data. When evaluated using MAPE, the power-law for OOD scenario shows a
bigger exponent value than ID scenario. This indicates that increasing model size yields greater
improvements in OOD performance than ID performance. In other words, for models with weak
OOD generalization capabilities, increasing model size may enable them to perform equally well on
both ID and OOD data.
To evaluate whether the benefits of large-scale pre-training are warranted, we compare the pre-
trained models with the classical exponential smoothing (ETS) forecasting method. The results
indicate that the pre-trained models consistently outperform ETS on ID data and progressively excel
on OOD data as the model size increases. This suggests that pre-trained models must reach a certain
scale, at least 3M parameters in this case, to demonstrate a level of superiority on OOD data that
justifies their high pre-training cost.
Compute Scaling. Following the similar method in (Kaplan et al., 2020), we estimate the compute
budget using the formula C = 6N BS, where B is the batch size, S is the number of parameter
updates, i.e. the input sequence length, and 6 is the factor to account for the forward and backward
passes. The ID and OOD test loss for compute budget varying over six orders of magnitude are
shown in Figure 3. We see that the optimal results for each compute budget are achieved by different
model sizes N , but the lowest loss decreases according to a approximate power law with respect to
the amount of training compute. The lowest losses appear as the heavy lines, which can be fit with

                                                           αC
                                                     Cc
                                       L(C) ≈                   .                                   (3)
                                                     C

                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Compute Scaling. The computation scaling results indicate that model performance
scales approximately according to a power law with increasing compute, consistent across both ID
and OOD scenarios. The ID and OOD results illustrate that there is an lower bound for loss and
MAPE on both test data under a given computational budget.


Figure 4: Data Scaling. The blue and red plots illustrate how data volume affects the ID and OOD
forecasting performance of encoder-only Transformers, evaluated using NLL and MAPE metrics.
The results indicate that in both scenarios, model performance scales approximately as a power law
with data volume.


We observed significant noise in NLL and MAPE during training, which may be caused by the
learning rate scheduler and the random sampling evaluation strategy. Similar to parameter scaling,
the ID and OOD NLL show similar scaling patterns; however, when evaluated using MAPE, the
OOD power law shows larger exponent values than the ID power law.
Data Scaling. We display empirical trends for the performance as function of dataset size D in
Figure 4. For the trend, we trained multiple 1B encoder-only Transformers on a series of subsets of
the pre-training dataset and report the averaged evaluation results during training. We see that the
NLL and MAPE can be fit well with simple power-law
                                                           αD
                                                     Dc
                                       L(D) ≈                   .                                (4)
                                                     D
Different from the parameter scaling and computational scaling, we found that when evaluated using
NLL, ID and OOD performance do not exhibit the same scaling behavior. Instead, ID performance
is more sensitive to the scaling of dataset size compared to OOD performance. However, similar
to the observations on the other two factors, the impact of data scaling on MAPE in OOD data is
greater than its impact on MAPE in ID data. This suggests that the scaling of various factors yields
greater improvements in OOD performance than ID performance.
Cross-distribution Scaling Effects. We summarize the key findings on how model ID and OOD
performance scales with the model parameters, data volume, and compute. (1) In both ID and OOD
uni-variate time series forecasting, model performance follows a simple power law as a function
of model parameters, data volume, and compute. (2) For NLL, the model exhibits similar scaling


                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Scaling Laws of Encoder-only vs. Decoder-only Transformer. This figure presents
a comparison of scaling behaviors on NLL between encoder-only and decoder-only Transformer
across three different axes: number of parameters, compute, and dataset size. Overall, both models
exhibit similar scalability patterns with respect to model parameters, computation and dataset sizes
across ID and OOD data, but differ in ID performance.


Figure 6: Scaling Laws of Encoder-only Transformer vs. Moirai. This figure compares parame-
ter scaling between the encoder-only Transformer and Moirai. While Moirai demonstrates notable
improvements on ID test data compared to the baseline, certain design choices may hinder its scal-
ability on OOD data.


patterns in both ID and OOD scenarios, in terms of model size or compute resources. (3) When
using MAPE as the metric, scaling of all three factors results in greater improvements in OOD
performance compared to ID performance.

3.2   S CALING L AWS ACROSS M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

The above results suggest that the power-law captures the scaling behavior of encoder-only Trans-
formers in both ID and OOD scenarios. Similarly, we analyze the scaling properties of decoder-only
Transformers, along with two other state-of-the-art TSFMs, Chronos and Moirai, to assess the im-
pact of model architectures on scaling behavior. These models are trained on the dataset we built
with the same training setup.
Encoder-only vs. Decoder-only Transformer. Figure 5 presents a comparison of the scaling pat-
terns between encoder-only and decoder-only Transformers. In parameter scaling, the encoder-only
Transformer shows a slight advantage, with a marginally higher power-law exponent on ID data and
lower NLL values. For compute and data scaling, the two architectures demonstrate nearly iden-
tical scalability across ID and OOD settings, with some performance differences observed on ID
data. Overall, the two architectures exhibit similar scalability, aside from a performance difference
observed in ID data.
Encoder-only Transformer vs. Moirai. Moirai is a TSFM based on an encoder-only Transformer
architecture. It introduces ”any-variate” attention to capture relationships between multiple vari-
ables. Additionally, Moirai incorporates a multi-scale patch embedding to handle different fre-
quency patterns, and a more diverse mixture distribution to model real-world probability distribu-
tions. Figure 6 show a comparison between the scaling behavior of encoder-only Transformer and


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Scaling Laws of Decoder-only Transformer vs. Chronos. This figure presents a compar-
ison of parameter scaling between decoder-only Transformer and Chronos. The design introduced
by Chronos enhances ID time series forecasting, but fails to improve the generalization of OOD.



Moirai. On ID data, Moirai demonstrates better performance. However, for OOD data, as the num-
ber of model parameters increases, Moirai is gradually surpassed by the encoder-only Transformer.
Comparing the power-law lines of the two models, we see that Moirai shows a smaller slope, indi-
cating relatively weaker scalability. Collectively, Moirai shows significant improvements on ID time
series forecast than our baseline, but some designs may limit its scalability on OOD data.
Decoder-only Transformer vs. Chronos. Chronos-T5 is an encoder-decoder Transformer-based
TSFM that, like decoder-only Transformers, follows an auto-regressive prediction approach but uses
a separate encoder to extract contextual information. It adopts point-wise prediction and transform
numerical regression into discrete probability prediction. Figure 7 compares the scaling patterns
of decoder-only Transformers and Chronos-T5. When evaluated with NLL, Chronos-T5 exhibits
power laws with very small exponents, indicating limited scalability. We attribute this to the dis-
crete probability prediction, as NLL on a discrete distribution is not distance-sensitive, meaning the
loss remains high unless the predicted value exactly matches the label. Compared to NLL, sym-
metric mean absolute percentage error (SMAPE, definition is shown in Appendix C.3) is a more
appropriate metric for evaluating the two models. Chronos-T5 shows a slight advantage in perfor-
mance and scalability on ID data. However, on OOD data, the decoder-only Transformer performs
better. Despite some performance differences, both models exhibit similar scaling patterns on OOD
data. Overall, the design improvements in Chronos-T5 enhance ID time series forecasting, but they
do not effectively improve OOD generalization.
Scaling Effects Summary. Our analysis of the scaling properties across architectures reveals sev-
eral key findings: (1) Model architecture and design play a crucial role in determining scalability.
(2) Encoder-only models and decoder-only models show a similar scalability on OOD data; while
encoder-only models have a slightly higher parameter scalability and a certain performance advan-
tage on ID data. (3) While Chronos and Moirai improve ID forecasting, these gains do not extend
effectively to OOD scenarios.


4   D ESIGN P RINCIPLES FOR T IME S ERIES F OUNDATION M ODELS

Building on our findings regarding the scaling laws in TSFMs, we elaborate design principles to
guide the development of scalable models. These principles are framed around three key dimensions:
training data, model parameters and architecture, as well as computational resources.
Training Data. Our experiments show that increasing the size of the training dataset leads to a
greater performance improvement on OOD data compared to ID data. Enlarging the pre-training
dataset is crucial for achieving better generalization. Based on Equation 4, we can expect that
doubling the size of the pre-training dataset will result in an OOD MAPE reduction to approximately
90% of its previous value, and an ID MAPE reduction to approximately 97%. But maintaining
diversity within the dataset is equally important while increasing the data volume.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                us births                         nn5 daily                    australian electricity


Figure 8: Case studies on the “Emergent Abilities” of scaling time series models. We present
three examples of zero-shot (unseen) out-of-distribution (OOD) time series prediction. In the us
births, nn5 daily, and australian electricity datasets, we observed that model behavior deviates from
expected power law patterns, instead exhibiting characteristics more akin to emergent phenomena.


Model Parameters and Architecture. Our study highlights that model size is the most critical
factor for improving TSFM performance. Compared to collecting more data, increasing model size
yields the greater benefit for both ID and OOD forecast. However, as model size scales up, data
bottlenecks inevitably emerge. From the ratio of exponents in Equations 2 and 4, we infer that
scaling up model size should be accompanied by a sublinear increase in dataset size. Specifically,
                                                 αN
this relationship can be approximated as D ∝ N αD ∼ N 0.8 , meaning that doubling the model size
requires roughly 1.7 times more data. In terms of model architecture, we found some modifications
facilitate ID performance but can not generalize well to OOD scenarios. Model design can impact
scalability, and a good design should promote performance, generalization, and scalability.
Compute. The power law we established indicates that there is an unbreakable lower bound for NLL
loss and MAPE under a given computational budget. This means that, with other factors remaining
constant, as the model size increases, more compute resources must be invested to achieve better
performance. Our findings suggest that compute resources should prioritize scaling up model size
rather than extending training time for fixed models as larger models are more sample-efficient than
smaller models. Moreover, different training objectives or model architectures can significantly
affect this performance bound, exploring a compute-efficient training paradigm will be promising.


5   R ELATED W ORKS

Neural Scaling Laws. Neural scaling laws seek to provide a predictive framework for optimizing
the allocation of computational resources to maximize model performance. In language domains,
Kaplan et al. (2020) demonstrated that performance follows a power-law relationship, improving as
more computational resources, parameters, and data are utilized. Subsequent research has expanded
this to predict other factors, such as downstream task performance (Isik et al., 2024) and inference
time (Sardana et al., 2024). In vision domains, scaling laws have been explored in areas like dis-
criminative modeling (Hestness et al., 2017) and visual auto-regressive modeling (Henighan et al.,
2020). Recently, Edwards et al. (2024) introduced scaling laws for large time series models, show-
ing that performance scales according to a power law with model size, compute, and dataset size.
Shi et al. (2024a) examined the effect of time-series forecasting horizon on model scaling behav-
ior, offering a theoretical framework to explain its influence. However, both studies have focused
on in-distribution scenarios, leaving the investigation of scaling laws in out-of-distribution contexts
largely unexplored.
Time Series Foundation Models. Foundation models (Das et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024)
represent a new paradigm aimed at generalizing across diverse domains and tasks by leveraging
knowledge from large-scale data in the pre-training phase. They have significantly advanced time
series forecasting, particularly in zero-shot scenarios, where predictions are made on data from pre-
viously unseen domains. For instance, Woo et al. (2024) introduced Moirai, an encoder-only trans-
former architecture that employs an “any-variate” attention mechanism to capture dependencies in
multivariate time series. Ansari et al. (2024) proposed a method that tokenizes time series val-
ues through scaling and quantization into a fixed vocabulary, training a series of transformer-based


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


models known as Chronos. Liu et al. (2024) developed Timer, a simple decoder-only transformer
architecture designed for univariate time series forecasting, while Rasul et al. (2023) introduced
Lag-Llama, a decoder-only transformer that integrates lags as covariates to improve forecasting ac-
curacy. These models incorporate various modifications to the standard Transformer architecture
for time series data. However, the impact of these changes on model scaling properties has not
been systematically studied. As model size increases, it remains an open question whether these
modifications will continue to enhance performance.

6     D ISCUSSION
6.1   A DDITIONAL S TUDIES

We also conduct the following analysis to better understand the scaling behaviors of TSFMs. Due
to the space limit, see their details in Appendix D.2 to D.4 .
Emergent Behaviors. Figure 8 shows some examples of zero-shot OOD time series prediction,
where the model’s performance remains low until the model size reaches a critical threshold, af-
ter which performance improves significantly. This scaling behavior deviates from the previously
observed power law and is more akin to emergent phenomena (Wei et al., 2022).
Sample Efficiency. Appendix D.2, Figure 14 shows the evaluation results during training. Large
models are more sample-efficient than small models, reaching better performance with the same
optimization steps and using fewer time points.
Scaling Pattern Depends on Data Distributions. Appendix D.3, Figure 15 - 19 show the scaling
behavior of TSFMs on the Monash subset, suggesting that OOD scaling behaviors varies depending
on the relationship between the unseen data distribution and the pre-training data distribution.
Scaling Pattern Depends on Performance Metrics. Appendix D.4, Figure 15 - 19 provides a
comprehensive analysis of scaling behavior across five performance metrics: NLL, MAPE, SMAPE,
MASE, and CRPS. All metrics exhibit a consistent decreasing trend, approximately following a
power law.

6.2   C ONCLUSION

We have observed consistent scaling of encoder-only Transformer NLL with parameter count, train-
ing computation and dataset size on both ID and OOD test data, as encapsulated in a power law. The
experimental results show that as the number of parameters, computational resources, and training
data increase, both models’ ID and OOD performance will continue to improve. Furthermore, our
established laws suggest that for ID and OOD forecasting performance, larger model may be more
important than more data.
We have also study the scaling properties of two common types of TSFMs, encoder-only Trans-
former and decoder-only Transformer. The two architectures show similar scalability in OOD data
across model size, computational resources, and training data. While encoder-only models have a
slightly better parameter scalability and performance in ID data based our evaluation setting. More-
over, we further include two advanced TSFMs, Chronos and Moirai, as specific cases to study the
impact of module design on scaling behavior. We find that both Chronos and Moirai improve ID
forecasting performance, but these gains can not translate effectively to OOD scenarios. Overall,
model architecture and module design is important influence factor for scalability.
Our experiments independently investigated the scaling behavior of TSFMs in terms of parameter
count, computational resources, and training data size, assuming other factors were unlimited. In
future work, it would be valuable to develop a unified model to explore the relationships between
these factors. This could help guide the community in optimizing resource allocation when one
resource is limited. Additionally, multiple studies have shown that model performance varies across
different context window lengths and forecast horizons. In future research, we plan to incorporate
the impact of context length and forecast horizon on scalability.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This research was partly supported by Australian Research Council (ARC) under grants
FT210100097 and DP240101547 and the CSIRO – National Science Foundation (US) AI Research
Collaboration Program. This work has been also supported by NVIDIA Academic Grant from the
NVIDIA Developer Program 2025.
Ethics Statement
Our research is dedicated exclusively to addressing scientific challenges and does not involve human
participants, animals, or materials that pose environmental concerns. We anticipate no ethical risks
or conflicts of interest.
Reproducibility Statement
We provide the implementation details in Appendices B and C, including model configurations and
training & evaluation details. The source code and related source of this work are available at
https://github.com/Qingrenn/TSFM-ScalingLaws for reproducibility.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Alexandrov, Konstantinos Benidis, Michael Bohlke-Schneider, Valentin Flunkert, Jan
  Gasthaus, Tim Januschowski, Danielle C. Maddix, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, David Salinas,
  Jasper Schulz, Lorenzo Stella, Ali Caner Türkmen, and Bernie Wang. Gluonts: Probabilistic
  and neural time series modeling in python. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21:116:1–116:6, 2020. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:226717462.
Abdul Fatir Ansari, Lorenzo Stella, Caner Turkmen, Xiyuan Zhang, Pedro Mercado, Huibin Shen,
  Oleksandr Shchur, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Shubham Kapoor,
  Jasper Zschiegner, Danielle C. Maddix, Michael W. Mahoney, Kari Torkkola, Andrew Gordon
  Wilson, Michael Bohlke-Schneider, and Yuyang Wang. Chronos: Learning the language of
  time series. ArXiv, abs/2403.07815, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:268363551.
Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. A dynamical model of neural scal-
  ing laws. ArXiv, abs/2402.01092, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:267406160.
Abhimanyu Das, Weihao Kong, Rajat Sen, and Yichen Zhou. A decoder-only foundation model for
  time-series forecasting. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024,
  Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=jn2iTJas6h.
Hoang Anh Dau, A. Bagnall, Kaveh Kamgar, Chin-Chia Michael Yeh, Yan Zhu, Shaghayegh
  Gharghabi, Chotirat Ann Ratanamahatana, and Eamonn J. Keogh. The ucr time series
  archive. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 6:1293–1305, 2018. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:53019704.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
  at scale. ArXiv, abs/2010.11929, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:225039882.
Thomas D. P. Edwards, James Alvey, Justin Alsing, Nam H. Nguyen, and Benjamin D. Wandelt.
  Scaling-laws for large time-series models. ArXiv, abs/2405.13867, 2024. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269982332.
Patrick Emami, Abhijeet Sahu, and Peter Graf. Buildingsbench: A large-scale dataset of 900k
  buildings and benchmark for short-term load forecasting. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir
  Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023,
  NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wei Fan, Pengyang Wang, Dongkun Wang, Dongjie Wang, Yuanchun Zhou, and Yanjie Fu. Dish-ts:
 a general paradigm for alleviating distribution shift in time series forecasting. In Proceedings of
 the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 37, pp. 7522–7529, 2023.

Valentin Flunkert, David Salinas, and Jan Gasthaus. Deepar: Probabilistic forecasting with
  autoregressive recurrent networks. ArXiv, abs/1704.04110, 2017. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12199225.

B. Ghorbani, Orhan Firat, Markus Freitag, Ankur Bapna, Maxim Krikun, Xavier Garcı́a, Ciprian
  Chelba, and Colin Cherry. Scaling laws for neural machine translation. ArXiv, abs/2109.07740,
  2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237532682.

Rakshitha Godahewa, C. Bergmeir, Geoffrey I. Webb, Rob J Hyndman, and Pablo Montero-Manso.
  Monash time series forecasting archive. ArXiv, abs/2105.06643, 2021. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:234681550.

Mononito Goswami, Konrad Szafer, Arjun Choudhry, Yifu Cai, Shuo Li, and Artur Dubrawski.
 Moment: A family of open time-series foundation models. ArXiv, abs/2402.03885, 2024. URL
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267500205.

Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher R’e. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured
  state spaces. ArXiv, abs/2111.00396, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:240354066.

Tatsunori Hashimoto. Model performance scaling with multiple data sources. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4107–4116. PMLR, 2021.

Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B. Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, Chris Hallacy, Benjamin Mann, Alec Rad-
  ford, Aditya Ramesh, Nick Ryder, Daniel M. Ziegler, John Schulman, Dario Amodei, and Sam
  McCandlish. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative modeling. ArXiv, abs/2010.14701, 2020.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:225094178.

Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Frederick Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Has-
  san Kianinejad, Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning
  scaling is predictable, empirically. ArXiv, abs/1712.00409, 2017. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2222076.

Rob J Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos. Forecasting: principles and practice. 2013. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215822294.

Berivan Isik, Natalia Ponomareva, Hussein Hazimeh, Dimitris Paparas, Sergei Vassilvitskii,
  and Sanmi Koyejo. Scaling laws for downstream task performance of large language mod-
  els. ArXiv, abs/2402.04177, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:267499809.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Jiawei Jiang, Chengkai Han, Wenjun Jiang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Jingyuan Wang. Libcity: A
   unified library towards efficient and comprehensive urban spatial-temporal prediction. 2023. URL
   https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258352728.

Ming Jin, Qingsong Wen, Yuxuan Liang, Chaoli Zhang, Siqiao Xue, Xue Wang, James Zhang,
 Yi Wang, Haifeng Chen, Xiaoli Li, et al. Large models for time series and spatio-temporal data:
 A survey and outlook. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10196, 2023.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. ArXiv, abs/2001.08361, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
   CorpusID:210861095.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Opher Lieber, Barak Lenz, Hofit Bata, Gal Cohen, Jhonathan Osin, Itay Dalmedigos, Erez
  Safahi, Shaked Haim Meirom, Yonatan Belinkov, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Omri Abend, Raz Alon,
  Tomer Asida, Amir Bergman, Roman Glozman, Michael Gokhman, Avshalom Manevich, Nir
  Ratner, Noam Rozen, Erez Shwartz, Mor Zusman, and Yoav Shoham. Jamba: A hybrid
  transformer-mamba language model. ArXiv, abs/2403.19887, 2024. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268793596.
Xu Liu, Yutong Xia, Yuxuan Liang, Junfeng Hu, Yiwei Wang, Lei Bai, Chao Huang, Zhenguang
  Liu, Bryan Hooi, and Roger Zimmermann. Largest: A benchmark dataset for large-scale traffic
  forecasting. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and
  Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, De-
  cember 10 - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2023/hash/ee57cd73a76bd927ffca3dda1dc3b9d4-Abstract-Datasets_
  and_Benchmarks.html.
Yong Liu, Haoran Zhang, Chenyu Li, Xiangdong Huang, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long.
  Timer: Generative pre-trained transformers are large time series models. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:267412273.
James E Matheson and Robert L Winkler. Scoring rules for continuous probability distributions.
  Management science, 22(10):1087–1096, 1976.
Tung Nguyen, Jason Jewik, Hritik Bansal, Prakhar Sharma, and Aditya Grover. Climate-
  learn: Benchmarking machine learning for weather and climate modeling. In Alice Oh,
  Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10
  - 16, 2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
  hash/ed73c36e771881b232ef35fa3a1dec14-Abstract-Datasets_and_
  Benchmarks.html.
Yuqi Nie, Nam H. Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam. A time series is worth
  64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Jbdc0vTOcol.
Yuqi Nie, Yaxuan Kong, Xiaowen Dong, John M Mulvey, H Vincent Poor, Qingsong Wen, and
  Stefan Zohren. A survey of large language models for financial applications: Progress, prospects
  and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11903, 2024.
Youngsuk Park, Danielle Maddix, François-Xavier Aubet, Kelvin Kan, Jan Gasthaus, and Yuyang
  Wang. Learning quantile functions without quantile crossing for distribution-free time series
  forecasting. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 8127–8150.
  PMLR, 2022.
Raquel Prado. Bayesian forecasting and dynamic models.              2020.    URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:121876157.
Xiangfei Qiu, Jilin Hu, Lekui Zhou, Xingjian Wu, Junyang Du, Buang Zhang, Chenjuan Guo, Aoy-
  ing Zhou, Christian S. Jensen, Zhenli Sheng, and Bin Yang. Tfb: Towards comprehensive and
  fair benchmarking of time series forecasting methods. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17:2363–2377, 2024.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268793935.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Kashif Rasul, Arjun Ashok, Andrew Robert Williams, Arian Khorasani, George Adamopoulos,
  Rishika Bhagwatkar, Marin Bilos, Hena Ghonia, Nadhir Vincent Hassen, Anderson Schneider,
  Sahil Garg, Alexandre Drouin, Nicolas Chapados, Yuriy Nevmyvaka, and Irina Rish. Lag-llama:


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Towards foundation models for time series forecasting. ArXiv, abs/2310.08278, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:269766909.
Nikhil Sardana, Jacob Portes, Sasha Doubov, and Jonathan Frankle. Beyond chinchilla-optimal:
  Accounting for inference in language model scaling laws. In Forty-first International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0bmXrtTDUu.
Jingzhe Shi, Qinwei Ma, Huan Ma, and Lei Li. Scaling law for time series forecasting. ArXiv,
   abs/2405.15124, 2024a.   URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
   270045141.
Xiaoming Shi, Shiyu Wang, Yuqi Nie, Dianqi Li, Zhou Ye, Qingsong Wen, and Ming Jin. Time-
  moe: Billion-scale time series foundation models with mixture of experts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.16040, 2024b.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha H. M. Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer:
   Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
   doi: 10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2023.127063. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.
   2023.127063.
Chang Wei Tan, Christoph Bergmeir, François Petitjean, and Geoffrey I Webb. Time series extrin-
  sic regression: Predicting numeric values from time series data. Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 35(3):1032–1060, 2021.
Yihe Wang, Yu Han, Haishuai Wang, and Xiang Zhang.          Contrast everything: A hi-
  erarchical contrastive framework for medical time-series. In Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023a. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  ae7d9c77b5ff9e3b7833a68523b880f2-Abstract-Conference.html.
Yuxuan Wang, Haixu Wu, Jiaxiang Dong, Yong Liu, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Deep
  time series models: A comprehensive survey and benchmark. ArXiv, abs/2407.13278, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:271270683.
Zhixian Wang, Qingsong Wen, Chaoli Zhang, Liang Sun, Leandro Von Krannichfeldt, and Yi Wang.
  Benchmarks and custom package for electrical load forecasting. ArXiv, abs/2307.07191, 2023b.
  URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259924876.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed Huai hsin Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. ArXiv, abs/2206.07682, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:249674500.
Haomin Wen, Youfang Lin, Lixia Wu, Xiaowei Mao, Tianyue Cai, Yunfeng Hou, Shengnan Guo,
  Yuxuan Liang, Guangyin Jin, Yiji Zhao, et al. A survey on service route and time prediction in
  instant delivery: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
  Engineering, 2024.
Qingsong Wen, Tian Zhou, Chao Zhang, Weiqiu Chen, Ziqing Ma, Junchi Yan, and Liang Sun.
  Transformers in time series: A survey. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246863823.
Gerald Woo, Chenghao Liu, Akshat Kumar, and Doyen Sahoo. Pushing the limits of pre-training
  for time series forecasting in the cloudops domain. ArXiv, abs/2310.05063, 2023. URL https:
  //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263831258.
Gerald Woo, Chenghao Liu, Akshat Kumar, Caiming Xiong, Silvio Savarese, and Doyen Sahoo.
  Unified training of universal time series forecasting transformers. In Forty-first International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net,
  2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Yd8eHMY1wz.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Haixu Wu, Teng Hu, Yong Liu, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Timesnet: Tem-
  poral 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis. ArXiv, abs/2210.02186, 2022. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252715491.
Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Yong Liu, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Timesnet:
  Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general time series analysis. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ju_Uqw384Oq.
Chao-Han Huck Yang, Yun-Yun Tsai, and Pin-Yu Chen. Voice2series: Reprogramming acoustic
  models for time series classification. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 11808–
  11819. PMLR, 2021.
Jiasheng Ye, Peiju Liu, Tianxiang Sun, Yunhua Zhou, Jun Zhan, and Xipeng Qiu. Data mixing
   laws: Optimizing data mixtures by predicting language modeling performance. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2403.16952, 2024.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.
Kexin Zhang, Qingsong Wen, Chaoli Zhang, Rongyao Cai, Ming Jin, Yong Liu, James Zhang,
  Y. Liang, Guansong Pang, Dongjin Song, and Shirui Pan. Self-supervised learning for time series
  analysis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
  chine Intelligence, 46:6775–6794, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:259203853.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P RE - TRAINING DATASETS
Previous work has proposed several public large-scale time series datasets, e.g. LOTSA (Woo et al.,
2024) and UTSD (Liu et al., 2024). Instead of using these datasets directly, we built a pre-training
corpus through data filtering. There are three main reasons for this: First, these datasets contain
numerous periodic time series with substantial pattern redundancy. Second, these datasets show
a heavily long-tailed distribution, with multiple domains accounting for less than 5% of the total.
Third, data quality is variable, with some time series missing many observations or having low
signal-to-noise ratios. To address these issues, we developed a data filtering pipeline:
Deduplication. In these public datasets, we observed significant redundancy across many subsets.
This redundancy typically manifests as numerous repeated patterns within individual samples or
high similarity between multiple samples. Such redundancy can negatively impact training effi-
ciency. To address this issue, we applied a down-sampling strategy for datasets with redundant
samples based on the data sampling period.
Quality Filtering. We focused on selecting time series data that have no missing values and a
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) greater than 20 dB to ensure better predictability. To calculate the SNR,
we first used Fourier transform to identify the low-frequency components of the time series. We
then applied a low-pass Butterworth filter to extract these low-frequency components as the signal,
with the remaining residuals considered as noise.
Domain Balancing. In the LOTSA dataset, the climate domain accounts for nearly 90% of the data,
while the remaining seven domains collectively represent only 10%. To create a more balanced
pre-training dataset, we selected the transport domain, which contains 4.8 billion time points, as the
reference. We then scaled the data from the other domains to a similar magnitude.
Following the aforementioned processing steps, we compiled a high-quality time series dataset con-
taining a total of 16.8 billion time points across 7 domains. The data volume is sufficient to support
training models with parameters ranging from 103 to 108 parameters. Furthermore, most domains
include at least 100 million time points, ensuring that even when the dataset is divided into subsets
of various sizes, domain diversity is preserved. Below, we introduce the datasets for each domain
and outline the key properties of the datasets after processing, including domain type, sampling
frequency, number of time series, total number of observations, and data source.
Climate. The climate data are sourced primarily from the ERA5 and CMIP6 datasets, which pro-
vide time series for various climate-related variables, including temperature, humidity, and pressure
levels. During data curation, we observed a high degree of similarity across yearly data. To reduce
redundancy, only two years of data from ERA5 and CMIP6 were included.
Energy. The energy data primarily come from the BuildingsBench dataset, which provides time
series data on residential and commercial building energy consumption. After applying quality
filtering based on SNR, we selected samples from the Buildings-900K, BDG-2, and Sceaux datasets.
Additionally, high-quality data from the ProEnFo library, including the GEF, ELF, PDB, Spanish,
and Covid19 Energy datasets, were incorporated.
Transport. The primary source for transport data is the LargeST traffic dataset, covering traffic flow
in California from 2017 to 2021. We also integrated datasets from LibCity, PEMS, Loop Seattle,
and Q-Traffic into our corpus.
Cloud Operations. The cloud operations data is from the large-scale CloudOps time series datasets,
which measures various variables such as CPU and memory utilization.
Healthcare. We include a diverse sets of healthcare data from the ucr time series archive.
Web. The web data comprises the Kaggle Web Traffic Weekly dataset and the Wiki-Rolling dataset.
Sales. Here we use the Favorite Sales dataset.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                Table 2: Pre-training datasets and key properties.

            Dataset             Domain      Frequency    # Time Series      # Obs.               Source

            CMIP6                Climate        6H           196,608     2,870,476,800    Nguyen et al. (2023)
             ERA5                Climate        H            212,992     1,860,698,112    Nguyen et al. (2023)

        Buildings900K            Energy         H            538,577     4,718,473,097     Emami et al. (2023)
     Australian Electricity      Energy        30T             5           1,153,584     Godahewa et al. (2021)

          BDG-2 Bear             Energy         H              91          1,482,312       Emami et al. (2023)
          BDG-2 Fox              Energy         H             135          2,324,568       Emami et al. (2023)

        BDG-2 Panther            Energy         H             105          919,800         Emami et al. (2023)
            Sceaux               Energy         H              1            34,223         Emami et al. (2023)
          Solar Power            Energy         4S             1           7,397,222     Godahewa et al. (2021)
        Covid19 Energy           Energy         H              1            31,912         Wang et al. (2023b)

            Spanish              Energy         H              1            35,064         Wang et al. (2023b)

          Elecdemand             Energy        30T             1            17,520       Godahewa et al. (2021)
             PDB                 Energy         H              1            17,520         Wang et al. (2023b)

            GEF17                Energy         H              8           140,352         Wang et al. (2023b)
            GEF14                Energy         H              1            17,520         Wang et al. (2023b)

             ELF                 Energy         H              1            21,792         Wang et al. (2023b)

         Traffic Weekly         Transport       W             862           82,752       Godahewa et al. (2021)
           Q-Traffic            Transport      15T           45,148      264,386,688        Jiang et al. (2023)

           PEMS04               Transport       5T            921         15,649,632        Jiang et al. (2023)
           PEMS07               Transport       5T            883         24,921,792        Jiang et al. (2023)
           PEMS08               Transport       5T            510          9,106,560        Jiang et al. (2023)

          PEMS Bay              Transport       5T            325         16,941,600        Jiang et al. (2023)

          Loop Seattle          Transport       5T            1,809       33,953,760        Jiang et al. (2023)
           LargeST              Transport       5T           42,333      4,452,510,528       Liu et al. (2023)

    Azure VM Traces 2017        CloudOTS        5T           159,472     885,522,908        Woo et al. (2023)

    Borg Cluster Data 2011      CloudOTS        5T           286,772     1,075,105,708      Woo et al. (2023)
   Alibaba Cluster Trace 2018   CloudOTS        5T           116,818     190,385,060        Woo et al. (2023)

         Wiki-Rolling             Web           D            47,675       40,619,100     Alexandrov et al. (2020)
   Kaggle Web Traffic Weekly      Web           W            145,063      16,537,182     Godahewa et al. (2021)
         Favorita Sales           Sales         D            111,840     139,111,860        Woo et al. (2024)
        PigArtPressure           Health         -             312          624,000          Dau et al. (2018)

      SelfRegulationSCP1         Health     0.004 SEC         3,366        3,015,936        Dau et al. (2018)

      SelfRegulationSCP2         Health     0.004 SEC         2,660        3,064,320        Dau et al. (2018)
           TDBrain               Health     0.002 SEC        28644        73,299,996       Wang et al. (2023a)
         MotorImagery            Health     0.001 SEC        24,192       72,576,000        Dau et al. (2018)
            PigCVP               Health         -             312          624,000          Dau et al. (2018)

       AtrialFibrillation        Health     0.008 SEC          60           38,400          Dau et al. (2018)
           IEEEPPG               Health     0.008 SEC        15,480       15,480,000        Tan et al. (2021)
         BIDMC32HR               Health         -            15,898       63,592,000        Tan et al. (2021)


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    T IME S ERIES M ODELS
We define time series forecasting as the following problem: given a collection of multivariate time
series samples with look back window L : (x1 , . . . , xL ) where each xt at time step t is a vector of
dimension of M , our goal is to forecast T future values (xL+1 , . . . , xL+T ).
Patch Embedding. We split the input (x1 , . . . , xL ) into M uni-variate time series x(i) ∈ R1×L ,
independently forecasting future time series for each variate. Each uni-variate time series x(i) is
first divided into non-overlapped patches. Specifically, given the patch length as P , the patching
                                                   (i)
process will generate the a sequence of patches xp ∈ RP ×N where N = PL is the number of

patches. Then the patches are mapped to the latent space of dm via a learnable linear projection
Wp ∈ Rdm ×P . In our baseline models, the patch size P is set to 32.
Rotary Position Embedding. Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE) is a type of position encod-
ing that encodes absolute positional information with a rotation matrix and naturally incorporates
explicit relative position dependency in self-attention formulation. In detail, RoPE incorporates
absolute position information to the embedding and transform them into queries, keys through func-
tion:

                                   fq,k (xm , m) = RdΘ,m Wq,k xm
where                                                       
                        M1
                                                                                                !
                                M2                                        cos mθj   − sin mθj
               RdΘ,m =                                       , Mj =
                                                            
                                         ..
                       
                                             .              
                                                                           sin mθj    cos mθj
                                                   Md/2
is the rotary matrix with pre-defined parameters Θ = {θi = 10000−2(i−1)/d , i ∈ [1, 2, . . . , d/2]},
Wq,k is the learned query or key projection weights, and xm ∈ Rd is the embedding of the m token.
Next, applying RoPE to the dot product of query and key, we can obtain:

                                              ⊤
               q⊤       d
                                                   RdΘ,n Wk xn = x⊤     d

                m kn = RΘ,m Wq xm                                 m Wq RΘ,n−m Wk xn

                             ⊤
where RdΘ,n−m = RdΘ,m RdΘ,n . In this way, RoPE naturally incorporates relative position
information through rotation matrix product. In general, the self-attention enhanced with RoPE can
be written as

                                                  PN                      ⊤
                                                   n=1      RdΘ,m ϕ(qm )      RdΘ,n φ(kn ) vn
                Attention(Q, K, V)m =                        PN                               .
                                                                            ⊤
                                                                n=1 ϕ(qm ) φ(kn )

where ϕ(·), φ(·) are usually non-negative functions, e.g. elu(·)+1, or exp(·). Overall, unlike the
traditional approach of adding positional information before the query and key projection, RoPE
utilizes a rotary matrix to transform query and key embeddings, effectively leveraging the geometric
properties of vectors.
Mixture of Distributions. As described in (Flunkert et al., 2017), our model predicts the parameters
of a probability distribution, specifically a mixture of Student-t distributions. The probability density
function for a random variable x following a Student-t distribution is given by:

                                                  ν+1
                                                                                   2 !− ν+1
                                                                                         2
                                             Γ                      1       x−µ
                      p(x; ν, µ, τ ) =        ν
                                                   2
                                                   √             1+
                                         Γ    2        πντ          ν        τ

with parameters ν > 0, µ ∈ R, τ > 0 represent the degrees of freedom (df), location, and scale
coefficient, respectively, and Γ is the gamma function. We modeled the predicted distribution using
a mixture of four Student-t distributions. Our baseline model employs independent linear layers


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               ID                        OOD                          Loss Convergence: GM vs. STM


Figure 9: Gaussian mixture (GM) distribution vs. Student-t mixture (STM) distribution. Left:
GM generally under-performs compared to STM in both ID and OOD test data, particularly as model
size increases. Right: GM exhibits unstable loss convergence during training, while STM achieves
smoother convergence. These findings underscore the prevalence of long-tail distributions in real-
world time series data and highlights the crucial role of Student-t mixtures in effectively modeling
these distributions.


to predict the distribution parameters: degrees of freedom, location, scale, and mixture weights.
To ensure positive values for the scale and df, we apply a soft-plus transformation. The mixture
weights are constrained within the probability simplex using a soft-max function. To avoid undefined
variance for low df values, we impose a lower bound of 2 on the df parameter.
Additionally, we conducted an experiment to compare the performance of Gaussian mixture distri-
bution and Student-t mixture distribution when used as prior distributions to approximate real-world
time series. Figure 9 shows that Student-t mixtures generally outperform Gaussian mixtures, partic-
ularly as model size increases. Furthermore, we observe unstable convergence when using Gaussian
mixture distribution as the prediction head. These findings highlight the prevalence of long-tail
distributions in real-world time series data and emphasize the critical role of Student-t mixtures in
effectively modeling such distributions.
Encoder-only Transformer. The encoder-only Transformer has proven effective for time series
tasks (Nie et al., 2023). In input time series, the future horizon is replaced by learnable mask
tokens combined with position information. After passing through bidirectional attention blocks,
the future representations are derived from these mask tokens and mapped to the parameters of a
mixture distribution. Through sampling from the mixture distribution, we can get predictions for
future patches.
Decoder-only Transformer. The key difference in the decoder-only Transformer is its unidirec-
tional attention. In the input sequence, no masking is needed. The future horizon is predicted based
on the preceding token. In other words, given a sequence of input patches, the model is optimized
to predict the next patch as a function of all past patches. Similar to LLMs this can be done in
parallel over the entire context window, and automatically enables the model to predict the future
after having seen varying number of input patches.

C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   T RAINING S ETUP

Based on the constructed datasets of different sizes, we trained a series of encoder-only Transformers
and decoder-only Transformers with increasing data sizes and model parameters. To improve batch
processing efficiency and handle varying sequence lengths, we employ sequence packing (Raffel
et al., 2020), which reduces padding requirements. Moreover, we train models with forecasting
capabilities over varying context and prediction lengths. Rather than defining a fixed context and
prediction length, we sample 15% - 50% lengths as forecast horizon and the remaining as context
horizon, for a given time series. As most probabilistic forecasting models, we minimize the neg-
ative log-likelihood of the predicted patch with respect to the ground truth. The loss convergence


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Encoder                                              Decoder


Figure 10: Convergence Process of Training Loss. This figure show the training loss convergence
for encoder-only (left) and decoder-only (right) models of various sizes, ranging from 1K to 1B
parameters. Larger models demonstrate faster convergence and lower final training loss, highlighting
their improved capacity for optimization.


process of encoder-only models and decoder-only models is shown in Figure 10. As the number of
parameters increases, both encoder-only and decoder-only models tend to converge faster to a lower
training loss.

C.2   E VALUATION S ETUP

We primarily used the LSF (Wu et al., 2023) and Monash (Godahewa et al., 2021) datasets to eval-
uate out-of-distribution generalization ability. For the LSF dataset, we only used the test set and
performed evaluations in a non-overlapping rolling window fashion, with the stride equal to the
prediction length. For the Monash dataset, considering its large size, we set only one window per
sample for evaluation. Table 3 details the evaluation setup per dataset.
Following the statistical method in (Qiu et al., 2024), we compute several statistical characteristics
of the datasets used in this study. Table 4 presents the mean statistical features of the pre-training,
LSF, and Monash datasets. SNR refers to the signal-to-noise ratio, which quantifies the proportion
of meaningful signal relative to random noise in a time series. Shifting captures changes in the
probability distribution of a time series over time, with values closer to 1 indicating more severe
distributional shifts. Stationarity describes a property of a time series where the mean remains
constant over time, and the variance is finite and stable across observations. Transition reflects
the regular and identifiable fixed features within a time series, such as trends, periodicity, or other
predictable patterns. Overall, our pre-training data and OOD test data both show a high quality and
stationarity.

                             Table 3: Out-of-distribution Evaluation Datasets.

                Dataset            Domain     Frequency    # Prediction Length       # Samples.

                ETTh1               Energy        H                192                  175
                ETTh2               Energy        H                192                  819
                ETTm1               Energy        H                192                  819
                ETTm2               Energy        H                192                  819
               Electricity          Energy        H                192                 7062
                Weather            Climate        H                192                 1029
               M4 Hourly           Finance        H                 48                  414
               M4 Daily            Finance        D                 14                 4227
              M4 Weekly            Finance        W                 13                  359


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     Table 3 continued from previous page
                Dataset              Domain       Frequency        # Prediction Length         # Samples
              M4 Monthly             Finance            M                   18                   48000
             M4 Quarterly            Finance            Q                    8                   24000
              M1 Monthly             Finance            M                   18                    617
              M3 Monthly             Finance            M                   18                   1428
               M3 Other              Finance            Q                    8                    174
               NN5 Daily             Finance            D                   56                    111
              NN5 Weekly             Finance           W                     8                    111
            Tourism Monthly          Finance            M                   24                    366
           Tourism Quarterly         Finance            Q                    8                    427
               CIF 2016              Finance            M                    6                    15
             Traffic Hourly          Transport          H                   168                   862
               Rideshare             Transport          H                   168                  2304
                Saugeen              Climate            D                   30                     1
                Sunspot              Climate            D                   30                     1
           Temperature Rain          Climate            D                   30                   32072
              Vehicle Trips          Transport          D                   30                    329
                Weather              Climate            D                   30                   3010
                Car Parts              Sales            M                   12                   2674
               FRED MD               Finance            M                   12                    107
           Pedestrian Counts         Transport          H                   12                    66
                Hospital              Health            M                   12                    767
             Covid Deaths             Health            D                   30                    266
            KDD Cup 2018              Energy            H                   168                   270
                Bitcoin              Finance            D                   30                    18
               Us Births              Health            D                   30                     1



                                Table 4: Mean Statistic Characteristics.

                           Dataset        SNR      Shifting       Stationarity    Transition
                      Pre-training       25.47         0.33          0.47           0.03
                            LSF          19.78         0.15          0.50           0.01
                           Monash        19.84         0.34          0.38           0.09



C.3   E VALUATION M ETRICS

Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). MAPE is a commonly used metric to evaluate the
accuracy of a forecasting model by expressing the error in percentage terms, making it unit-free and
easily interpretable. It measures the average magnitude of the absolute percentage error between the
predicted and actual values, relative to the actual values. For a uni-variate time series, the error is
defined as:

                                                 (i)        (i)    (i)
                                                 ej = yj − ŷj


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (i)       (i)
where yj and ŷj are the target and predicted values of the i-th time series and j-th time step,
respectively. The MAPE of the i − th time series is then calculated as:

                                                t+H    (i)
                                            100 X |ej |
                                     MAPE =
                                             H j=t+1 |y (i) |
                                                                 j

This formula calculates the percentage error at each time step, averaging it over the forecast horizon
H. MAPE is intuitive and interpretable in percentage terms. However, MAPE can be highly sensi-
                                                   (i)
tive to small actual values because it divides by yj , leading to extremely large errors when actual
values approach zero.
Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE). SMAPE addresses the shortcoming of
MAPE by using a symmetric formula that normalizes both the actual and predicted values. The
SMAPE of the i-th time series is defined to be

                                            t+H           (i)
                                        200 X          |ej |
                                SMAPE =
                                         H j=t+1 |y (i) | + |ŷ (i) |
                                                             j       j

The SMAPE ensures that errors are balanced between over- and under-prediction by dividing by the
sum of the absolute actual and predicted values. This normalization helps avoid extreme errors when
actual values are small, but it can also produce undefined results when both actual and predicted
values are zero.
Mean Absolute Scaled Error (MASE). MASE is a scale-independent metric used to evaluate fore-
casting accuracy by comparing the absolute error of a forecast to the average error of a naive fore-
casting method, such as a one-step-ahead random walk. MASE provides a robust way to assess
model performance across different datasets with varying scales, addressing the limitations of met-
rics like MAPE that are sensitive to the magnitude of actual values. For a uni-variate time series, the
MASE of the i-th time series is calculated as:

                                                  1
                                                      Pt+H  (i)
                                                  H j=t+1 |ej |
                                 MASE =          PT     (i)     (i)
                                              1
                                            T −1  k=2 |yk − yk−1 |

         (i)     (i)
where |yk − yk−1 | represents the difference between consecutive values in the naive forecast.
MASE is particularly useful because it accounts for the variability and scale of the time series,
making it comparable across datasets. Unlike MAPE, MASE does not produce extreme values for
small or zero actual values, making it more stable and reliable for time series evaluation.
Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS). Before we can introduce the CRPS, we need to
introduce the weighted quantile loss Park et al. (2022), which is a metric normalized over the test
set. We first define the α-quantile loss, also known as the pinball loss at quantile level α, to be:

                                   Λα (q, y) = (α − 1y<q )(y − q)
The weighted quantile loss is then the normalized sum of quantile losses,

                                            P                  (i)     (i)
                                                 (i,j)∈Ω Λα (q̂j (α), yj )
                              wQL[α] = 2             P             (i)
                                                        (i,j)∈Ω |yj |
where Ω = {(i, j) ∈ Z2 : 1 ≤ i ≤ n, τi + 1 ≤ j ≤ Ti }.
The CRPS is a proper scoring rule Matheson & Winkler (1976), meaning that it is minimized when
the predictive distribution is equal to the distribution from which the data is drawn.

                                           Z 1
                                 CRPS =           2Λα (F −1 (α), y) dα
                                             0


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Emergent Behaviors in us birth Dataset. The sub-figures, arranged from left to right
and top to bottom, show prediction results for models of sizes 10K, 1M, 10M, and 100M. Models
with sizes 10K and 1M are unable to capture the periodic pattern, whereas models with sizes 10M
and 100M accurately reflect it.



However, we are unable to evaluate this quantity since we generally are not able to compute the
integral in closed form and only have access to a finite number of quantile predictions. The approx-
imation of the CRPS is an average of the weighted quantile loss over K quantiles, and thus is also
known as the mean weighted quantile loss.


                                                  K
                                              1 X
                                    CRPS ≈        wQL[αk ]
                                              K
                                                 k=1


D     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

D.1   E MERGENT BEHAVIORS

Figure 8 presents case studies on ”emergent abilities” of TSFMs for OOD predictions. As model size
increases, one would expect the MAPE to follow a smooth power-law decline, indicating continuous
improvement. However, the plots reveal distinct phenomena, where performance changes abruptly
rather than gradually. Figures 11 - 13 visually show the transition from the small model prediction
results to the large model prediction results. We see that the 10K and 1M models are unable to
capture the historical seasonal patterns to make accurate predictions; however, when the model size
reaches 10M, it can make accurate predictions, far better than the small model. This behavior is
akin to the “emergent behaviors” described in (Wei et al., 2022), where certain capabilities absent
in smaller models only appear in larger ones. The emergence of improved performance at certain
model sizes could indicate the development of higher-order patterns or representations within the
model. These emergent abilities might stem from the model’s capacity to recognize and generalize
complex temporal patterns that were previously inaccessible at smaller scales. Such abilities is
evident particularly in zero-shot OOD prediction, where the model must extrapolate from training
data to entirely unseen scenarios.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Emergent Behaviors in nn5 daily Dataset. From left to right and top to bottom, the
sub-figures illustrate the prediction outcomes of models with sizes 10K, 1M, 10M, and 100M, re-
spectively. While the smaller models (10K and 1M) fail to recognize the periodic pattern in the data,
the larger models (10M and 100M) effectively capture and reflect the periodic structure.


Figure 13: Emergent Behaviors in australian electricity Dataset. From left to right and top to
bottom, the sub-figures display the prediction results of models with sizes 10K, 1M, 10M, and 100M.
The models with sizes 10K and 1M fail to accurately capture the periodic pattern, while those with
sizes 10M and 100M successfully do so.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: The figure illustrates the validation NLL during training for encoder-only models of
different sizes. Larger models tend to achieve lower NLL with processing the same time points.


Figure 15: Scaling Pattern of NLL. This figure illustrates scaling laws for NLL in relation to model
size, compute, and dataset size. The blue lines represent ID performance, while the red and green
lines show OOD performance on LSF subset and Monash subset.


D.2   S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

Figure 14 illustrates the evaluation results on the ID data for encoder-only models of different sizes
during training. The key observation is that larger models achieve better performance with fewer
training steps compared to smaller models, demonstrating higher sample efficiency. This is impor-
tant in scenarios where data are limited, as larger models can achieve superior performance without
needing to process as much data. An explanatory intuition is that, when the number of parameters
is large, even a small change in parameters can cause a large change in outputs. From a theoretical
perspective, the Neural Tangent Kernel (Jacot et al., 2018) framework provides insights into why
this occurs. As neural networks become infinitely wide, their behavior approximates that of a kernel
method, enabling them to effectively minimize the data distribution’s generalization error. This al-
lows large models to generalize well with fewer samples, further supporting their observed sample
efficiency in empirical settings. Moreover, in NLP (Kaplan et al., 2020) and CV (Zhai et al., 2022)
fields, larger models have demonstrated higher sample efficiency than smaller models.

D.3   S CALING PATTERN DEPENDS ON DATA DISTRIBUTIONS

In Figures 15 - 19, we present the scaling laws evaluated on the Monash subset, along with results
from the LSF subset and the ID test data. By comparing the green line, representing the Monash
dataset, and the red line, representing the LSF dataset, we observe a relatively consistent offset and
similar slopes across various metrics. This suggests that, when transferring the model from the
training data distribution to other OOD distributions, there is a predictable decrease in performance
that varies by the target dataset. However, the model’s gains from scaling—whether by increasing
model size, compute, or dataset size—follow a fixed proportional relationship. This indicates that
while OOD performance degrades, scaling the model still yields a consistent improvement ratio
across different distributions, albeit with varying levels of absolute performance. Moreover, in the
future, we can further analyze the reasons why transfer cost arises and establish a law to predict the


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 16: Scaling Pattern of MAPE. This figure presents scaling laws for MAPE as functions of
model size, compute, and dataset size. ID performance is illustrated by the blue lines, while OOD
performance is depicted in red for the LSF subset and green for the Monash subset.


Figure 17: Scaling Pattern of SMAPE. This figure depicts the scaling laws for SMAPE with re-
spect to model size, computational resources, and dataset size. ID performance is marked by blue
lines, while red and green lines correspond to OOD performance on the LSF and Monash subsets,
respectively.


transfer performance loss in population-risk based theoretical analysis (Yang et al., 2021) through
Wasserstein measurement.

D.4    S CALING PATTERN DEPENDS ON PERFORMANCE METRICS .

We investigate the scaling behaviors of five common performance metrics: NLL, MAPE, SMAPE,
MASE, and CRPS, (as shown in Figures 15 - 19). All metrics exhibit a decreasing trend following
an approximate power-law; however, each metric demonstrates distinct scaling characteristics, re-
flected in their varying power-law exponents. Previous work by (Ghorbani et al., 2021) establishes a
relationship between large language models’ log-likelihood loss and the BLEU score in translation
tasks. Similarly, future research could explore a transformation between log-likelihood loss and time
series forecasting metrics, offering a means to predict forecasting performance from training loss.

E     F URTHER D ISCUSSION

Scaling Laws for Multivariate Time Series Forecasting. Extending our findings to multivariate
time series forecasting is promising but presents some challenges. First, large and diverse multivari-
ate datasets are limited, unlike the more standardized uni-variate time series datasets. This scarcity
makes it difficult to conduct experiments that scale both model size and data volume in a controlled
manner. Second, establishing scaling laws for multivariate time series require analyzing the impact
of variable count and correlation strength, increasing the experimental complexity. Third, multivari-
ate foundation models lag behind uni-variate ones, facing challenges in designing architectures that
accommodate variable counts and capture complex inter-variable dependencies.
Pre-training Data Mixing Strategy. It’s significant to investigate the impact of data mixing strate-
gies on model performance, as different strategies can introduce performance bias or even degrade
model performance. Time series pre-training datasets, often comprising data from dozens to hun-
dreds of sources, create exponentially large possibilities for combinations. Instead of exhaustive


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 18: Scaling Pattern of MASE. The figure shows how MASE scales with model size, com-
pute, and dataset size. ID performance is indicated by blue lines, whereas OOD performance is
highlighted in red and green for the LSF and Monash subsets.


Figure 19: Scaling Pattern of CRPS. The figure illustrates the scaling laws for CRPS in relation
to model size, compute, and dataset size. Blue lines represent ID performance, while red and green
lines depict OOD performance on the LSF and Monash subsets, respectively.


empirical research, a more practical approach is to establish an extrapolable analytical framework
that balances experimental complexity (Hashimoto, 2021; Ye et al., 2024). Additionally, deeper
analysis of time series dataset characteristics is essential. This would provide insights into the na-
ture of time series data and facilitate the development of better data organization formats, moving
beyond simple combination strategies.
Impact of Model Architecture on Scalability. Our research comparing the scalability of encoder-
only and decoder-only Transformers can serve as the groundwork for future exploration of other
architectures. CNN-based models (Wu et al., 2022), RNN-based models (Gu et al., 2021), and
hybrid models (Lieber et al., 2024) each demonstrate unique strengths in sequence modeling. In-
vestigating their scalability within the context of time series modeling is a promising direction for
future research, and we hope our findings will inspire further work in this area.
Impact of Specific Module on Scalability. Our case studies on the scalability of Chronos and
Moirai demonstrate that certain module designs in these models may hinder their scalability in OOD
settings. Key factors, such as the time series embedding approach, attention mechanism, positional
encoding, and forecasting strategy, all impact scalability to varying degrees. Among these factors,
the embedding approach is particularly crucial, as it directly determines the input patterns fed into
the model backbone and influences the operations the model can learn.
Theoretical Framework for Scaling Laws. Our scaling laws, similar to most scaling laws, are
empirical findings. We believe a theoretical understanding of the learning dynamics that form the
laws can provide a more solid justification. A potential perspective is understanding the optimization
process through dynamics modeling (Bordelon et al., 2024). Specifically, based on the dynamical
mean field theory, we can derive the infinite limit statistical description of the scaling behavior of
training factors. By analyzing the response function in the infinite limit, which gauges the correlation
between training factors and test error, we can obtain insights into how the scaling laws manifest.
Correlation Estimation for Metrics. Time series forecasting involves a diverse set of metrics,
each measuring prediction error from a unique perspective. However, due to the lack of clear and
definitive correlations between NLL loss and these metrics, it’s difficult to understand model predic-


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tion behavior directly from NLL loss. A potential perspective is to develop a prediction framework
that bridges these metrics by empirically analyzing their relationships and dependencies (Isik et al.,
2024). Such a framework would provide insights into how different metrics reflect model perfor-
mance under varying conditions, enabling a deeper understanding of prediction behavior.


                                                 28
