Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F UNCTIONAL H OMOTOPY: S MOOTHING D ISCRETE
O PTIMIZATION VIA C ONTINUOUS PARAMETERS FOR
LLM JAILBREAK ATTACKS
 Zi Wang∗ , Divyam Anshumaan∗ , Ashish Hooda, Yudong Chen, Somesh Jha
 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison


                                           A BSTRACT
         Warning: This paper contains potentially offensive and harmful text.
         Optimization methods are widely employed in deep learning to identify and mit-
         igate undesired model responses. While gradient-based techniques have proven
         effective for image models, their application to language models is hindered by
         the discrete nature of the input space. This study introduces a novel optimiza-
         tion approach, termed the functional homotopy method, which leverages the func-
         tional duality between model training and input generation. By constructing a
         series of easy-to-hard optimization problems, we iteratively solve these problems
         using principles derived from established homotopy methods. We apply this ap-
         proach to jailbreak attack synthesis for large language models (LLMs), achieving
         a 20%−30% improvement in success rate over existing methods in circumventing
         established safe open-source models such as Llama-2 and Llama-3.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Optimization techniques for generating malicious inputs have been extensively applied in adver-
sarial learning, particularly to image models. The most prevalent methods include gradient-based
approaches such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018). These techniques have demonstrated that many deep
learning models exhibit vulnerability to small ℓp perturbations to the input. The optimization prob-
lem for generating malicious inputs can be expressed as:
                                             min fp (x),                                           (1)
                                              x

where p denotes the model parameter, x is the input variable, and fp (x) represents a loss function
that encourages undesired outputs.
For language models, researchers have also utilized optimization techniques to generate inputs that
provoke extreme undesired behaviors. Approaches analogous to those employed in adversarial
learning have been adopted for this purpose. For example, Greedy Coordinate Gradient (Zou et al.,
2023) (GCG) employs gradient-based methods to identify tokens that induce jailbreak behaviors.
Given that tokens are embedded in Rd , GCG calculates gradients in this ambient space to select
optimal token substitutions. This methodology has also been adopted by other studies for related
prompt synthesis challenges (Hu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b).
Despite the success of gradient methods in adversarial learning, a critical distinction exists between
image and language models: inputs for image models lie in a continuous input space, whereas
language models involve discrete input spaces within Rd . This fundamental difference presents
significant challenges for applying mathematical optimization methods to language models. Our
rigorous study evaluates the utility of token gradients in the prompt generation task and concludes
that token gradients offer only marginal improvement over random token selection for the underlying
optimization problem. Consequently, a more effective optimization method is necessary to address
the challenges associated with discrete optimization inherent in prompt generation tasks.
    * Equal contribution.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In this paper, we establish that the model-agnostic optimization problem for LLM input generation
is NP-hard, implying that efficient optimization algorithms likely require exploitation of problem-
specific structures. To address this challenge, we propose a novel optimization method tailored to the
problem defined in Equation (1). This approach can be interpreted as utilizing the model-alignment
property by intentionally modifying the model to reduce its alignment. Despite the discrete input
space, the problem in Equation (1) exhibits a unique characteristic: the function fp is parameterized
by p, which lies in a continuous domain. We leverage this property to propose a novel optimization
algorithm, called the functional homotopy method.
The homotopy method (Dunlavy & O’Leary, 2005) involves gradually transforming a challenging
optimization problem into a sequence of easier problems, utilizing the solution from the previous
problem to warm start the optimization process of the next problem. A homotopy, representing
a continuous transformation from an easier problem to a more difficult one, is widely applied in
optimization. For instance, the well-known interior point method for constrained optimization by
constructing a series of soft-to-hard constraints (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Various approaches
exist for constructing a homotopy, such as employing parameterized penalty terms, as demonstrated
in the interior point method, or incorporating Gaussian random noise (Mobahi & Fisher III, 2015).
In our functional homotopy (FH) method, we go beyond the conventional interpretation of fp
in Equation (1) as a static objective function, which was the perspective taken in previous work (Zou
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2024; Andriushchenko et al., 2024). Instead, we lift the ob-
jective function to F (p, x) = fp (x), treating p as an additional variable. Equation (1) thus becomes:
                                               min F (p, x).                                         (2)
                                              x
Therefore, the objective fp (x) in Equation (1) represents a projection of F (p, x) for a fixed value of
p. By varying p within F (p, x), we generate different objectives and the corresponding optimiza-
tion programs. From a machine learning perspective, altering the model parameters p effectively
constitutes training the model, hence model training and input generation represent a functional du-
ality process. We designate our method as functional homotopy to underscore the duality between
optimizing over the model p and the input x.
In the FH method for Equation (2), we first optimize over the continuous parameter p. Specifically,
for a fixed initial input x̄, we minimize F (p, x̄) with respect to p. We employ gradient descent to
update p until a desired value of F (p′ , x̄) is achieved. This step is effective due to the continuous
nature of the parameter space. As the parameter p is iteratively updated in this process, we retain all
intermediate states of the parameter, denoted as p0 = p, p1 , . . . , pt = p′ .
Subsequently, we turn to optimizing over the discrete variable x. We start from solving
minx F (pt , x), a relatively easy problem since the value of F (pt , x̄) is already low thanks to the
above process. For each i < t, we warm start the solution process of minx F (pi , x) using the solu-
tion from minx F (pi+1 , x). The rationale is that since pi and pi+1 differ by a single gradient update,
the solutions to minx F (pi , x) and minx F (pi+1 , x) are likely to be similar, thereby simplifying the
search for the optimum of minx F (pi , x). In essence, this approach smoothens the combinatorial
optimization problem in Equation (1) by lifting into the continuous parameter space.
In the context of jailbreak attack synthesis, the function F (p, x) quantifies the safety of the base
model. Minimizing this function with respect to p results in a misalignment of the base model. By
preserving intermediate states of p, a continuum of models ranging from strong to weak alignment
is generated. Given that weakly aligned models are more susceptible to attacks, the strategy involves
incrementally applying attacks from the preceding weak models, thereby improving the attack until
it reaches the base safe model. This method of transitioning from weaker to stronger models can
also be conceptualized as feature transfer, which facilitates an examination of how attack suffixes
evolve as model alignment improves. We illustrate this application in Figure 1.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:
 • We establish that the model-agnostic optimization problem for LLM input generation is NP-hard
   (see Section 3.2).
 • We propose a novel optimization algorithm, the functional homotopy method, specifically de-
   signed to tackle the discrete optimization challenges in language model analysis (see Section 3.3).
 • Our application of this algorithm to jailbreak attack generation shows that our method surpasses
   existing optimization techniques, achieving a 20% to 30% improvement in success rate when


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    1. Misalignment Finetuning
       Harmful Output                🛡                                                                                                                       😈              Harmful Behavior
                                     Base                                                                                                               Misaligned
      🤖 : “Sure, here is a                                                                                                                                                 🤖 : “Write a script
                                     Model                                                                                                                model
      script that exploits                                                                                                                                                 that can exploit

                                                                                                  ...   pt−2
      vulnerabilities in a                                                                                                                                                 vulnerabilities in a
      software…”                     p0                             p1                     p2                                    pt−1                         pt           software or operating
                                                                                                                                                                           system”
                                                                                                                                                                      xt
     Final attack suffix                          x0                           x1                                xt−2                          xt−1
                                                                                                                                                                           Initial attack suffix
       ! testing ! ag</s> XIII
    speed !.. reputation index
                                       ! testing ! films</s> XIII
                                          speed !.. reputation
                                                                         ! Marie ! films</s>
                                                                     efficiency speed ! Socket
                                                                     reputationExtra Well !'].を
                                                                                                  ...           ! ! ! című</s>
                                                                                                        efficiency ! ! Socket faut !
                                                                                                                                       ! ! ! című</s> evidently ! !
                                                                                                                                            storingSocket ! ! !')               !!!!!!!!!!
     rates */ '].を[{ ( grammar             index rates */ '].を                                                 ! !'].を [` Après                [beck ! Après                    !!!!!!!!!!
                                             [{ ( grammar [{ !       [` extended Shakespeare                 Shakespeare ` !                Shakespeare List !
               [{ !                                                             [!


                                                                                    2. Jailbreak suffix evolution


Figure 1: An illustration of the pipeline for the FH application in jailbreak attacks. Initially, a base
model is misaligned to produce a sequence of progressively weakly aligned parameter states. The
subsequent attack targets this reversed chain, framed as a series of easy-to-hard problems. In this
example, the attack begins with twenty “!” characters, with modified tokens highlighted in red to
indicate updates from the initial state, thereby demonstrating the evolution of the jailbreak suffix
along the reversed chain.

       circumventing established safe open-source models (see Section 5). Our findings also reveal
       that intermediate model checkpoints can facilitate attacks on base models, offering significant
       insights for the deep learning community. The evaluation repository is available at: https:
       //github.com/danshumaan/functional_homotopy.


2         R ELATED W ORK

Adversarial Learning Research has demonstrated that neural networks in image models are
particularly susceptible to adversarial attacks generated through optimization techniques (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). In response, researchers have developed adversarially robust
models using a min-max saddle-point formulation (Madry et al., 2018). Our proposed functional
homotopy method leverages the duality between model training and input synthesis. Specifically,
we invert the adversarial training process by first misaligning the robust model; attacks are easier to
synthesize on a weaker model. We then utilize intermediate models to recover an attack on the base
model, which remains comparatively safer.

Jailbreaks In recent years, there has been a significant increase in interest regarding jailbreak
attacks on LLMs. Various methodologies have been explored, including manual red teaming ef-
forts (Ganguli et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; walkerspider, 2022; Andriushchenko et al., 2024),
leveraging other LLMs to compromise target models (Mehrotra et al., 2023; Chao et al., 2024), and
automating jailbreak generation through optimization techniques (Schwinn et al., 2024; Zou et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2024; Liao & Sun, 2024). Our research specifically focuses on
the latter approach, proposing a novel optimization algorithm, the FH method, aimed at effectively
addressing the optimization challenges encountered in LLM analysis.


3         M ETHOD

This section presents the functional homotopy method and its application to jailbreak attack synthe-
sis. Additionally, we provide a proof demonstrating that the model-agnostic optimization problem
for jailbreak synthesis is NP-hard.

3.1          N OTATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

            1. Let M be an LLM, and V be the vocabulary set of M .
                                                                                                                                                                           S∞
            2. Let V n denote the set of strings of length n with tokens from V , and V ∗ =                                                                                 i=0 V
                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                 ∗
            3. Let x ∈ V be M ’s input, a.k.a., a prompt.


                                                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      4. Given a prompt x, the output of M , denoted by M (x) ∈ ∆(V ∗ ), is a probability distribu-
         tion over token sequences. ∆(V ∗ ) denotes the probability simplex on V ∗ .
      5. Let T (M (x)) ∈ V ∗ be the realized output answer of M to the prompt x, where the tokens
         of T (M (x)) are drawn from the distribution M (x).
      6. For two strings s1 and s2 , s1 |s2 is the concatenation of s1 and s2 .
      7. Let (X , Ω) be a topological space, i.e., a set X together with a collection of its open sets Ω.
Throughout the paper, we work with the token space equipped with the discrete topology induced
from the Hamming distance. We often refer to X as a topological space when the context is clear.
Let F : Rm × X → R be a two-variable function, and define the function fp : X → R as
fp (x) = F (p, x). When the context is clear, and p ∈ Rm is treated as a fixed variable, we omit p in
fp . The mappings fp 7→ F (p, x) and x 7→ F (p, x) establish a dual functional relationship.
Since X ⊆ Rn and f is differentiable on Rn , we denote the gradient of f as Df . It is well known
that one can construct a linear approximation of f as
                                f (∆x + a) ≈ f (a) + (∆x)⊤ Df (a).                               (3)
This approximation allows for the estimation of f (a + ∆x) using the local information of f at a
(i.e., f (a) and Df (a)), without direct evaluation of f at a + ∆x. The quality of the approximation
depends on how large ∆x is, and how close f is to a linear function. A smaller ∆x results in a more
precise approximation. If f is linear, then the approximation in Equation (3) is exact.

3.2   H ARDNESS OF JAILBREAK ATTACK SYNTHESIS

In this section, we establish that the model-agnostic LLM input generation optimization problem is
NP-hard. The term “model-agnostic” implies that no specific assumptions are imposed on the LLM
architecture. Additionally, we analyze existing gradient-based methods applied to the token space
X , emphasizing their reliance on the accuracy of the linear approximation of the objective function
in Equation (1). However, this assumption often fails in discrete token spaces, underscoring the
necessity for more robust optimization techniques.
Theorem 3.1. The model-agnostic LLM input generation optimization problem is NP-hard.
The NP-hardness is demonstrated by proving that a two-layer network can simulate a 3CNF formula,
which can be extended to other model-agnostic input generation problems. The detailed proof is
provided in appendix A.
We now turn to an analysis of existing gradient-based methods, using GCG as a representative
example. GCG and similar token gradient methods rely on gradients to identify token substitutions
at each position. For an input x0 , we compute the gradient of f at x0 , denoted as Df (x0 ). The
gradient Df (x0 ) has the same dimensionality as x0 . At position j, let h = Df (x0 )j ∈ Rn be the
j-th component of Df (x0 ). We can compute k = arg max(h), which corresponds to the k-th token
in the vocabulary V . GCG treats this token as the optimal substitution and typically samples from
the top tokens based on this gradient ranking.
Proposition 3.2. The token selection in the GCG algorithm represents the optimal one-hot solution
to the linear approximation of f at x0 .
The proof is presented in Appendix B. Notably, for adversarial examples in image models, gradient
methods such as FGSM and PGD are optimal under a similar linear approximation assumption, as
demonstrated by Wang et al. (2024). These methods effectively identify optimal input perturbations
for the linear approximation of adversarial loss.
However, a key distinction lies in the nature of input perturbations. In image models, perturbations
are restricted to small continuous ℓp -balls, enabling accurate linear approximations. In contrast, to-
ken distances in language models can be substantial, reducing the accuracy of such approximations.
As a result, applying token gradients to language models may be less effective.

3.3   F UNCTIONAL H OMOTOPY METHOD

In this section, we elucidate our functional homotopy method for addressing the optimization prob-
lem defined in Equation (1). Rather than employing gradients in the token space, we utilize gradient


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


descent in the continuous parameter space. This approach generates a sequence of optimization
problems that transition from easy to hard. Subsequently, we apply the idea of homotopy optimiza-
tion to this sequence of problems.


Homotopy method We consider the opti-
mization problem Equation (1), where x is the
optimization variable, and X is the underly-
ing constrained space, which is topological. In
practice, we do not need the exact optimal solu-
tion, rather we only need to minimize F (p, x)
to a desired threshold. Let us denote Spa (F ) =
{x | F (p, x) ≤ a} for a threshold a ∈ R,
i.e., Spa (F ) is a sublevel set for the function
x 7→ F (p, x).
Let f, g : X → R be continuous functions on
X . A homotopy H : X × [0, 1] → R between f
and g is a continuous function over X × [0, 1],
such that H(x, 0) = g(x) and H(x, 1) = f (x)
for all x ∈ X . We can think of H as a continu-
ous transformation from f to g.
The optimization problem minx∈X f (x) is
a nonconvex and hard problem, whereas               Figure 2: An example of homotopy from g(x) to
minx∈X g(x) is an easy optimization problem.        f (x). It can be a hard task to minimize f (x) di-
As a result, H(x, t) induces a series of easy-to-   rectly, when x comes from a discrete space. In ho-
hard optimization problems.                         motopy optimization, we gradually solve a series
                                                    of easy-to-hard problems and potentially avoid
One can then gradually solve this series of         suboptimal solutions. Pink balls are the optimal
problems, by warm starting the optimization         solution to each problem. The path marked by the
algorithm using the solution from the pre-          arrows illustrates the homotopy path over time.
vious similar problem and eventually solve
minx∈X f (x). Figure 2 illustrates an example of homotopy from g(x) to f (x). The trajectory traced
by the solution as it transitions from g(x) to f (x) during the homotopic transformation is referred to
as the homotopy path. Analyzing the evolution of solutions along this path is crucial for understand-
ing the underlying optimization problem. For instance, in the interior point method, the homotopy
path evolution provides the convergence analysis of the algorithm (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004).


Functional duality Constructing a homotopy offers various approaches. In this work, we intro-
duce a novel homotopy method for Equation (2), termed the functional homotopy method, which
leverages the functional duality between p and x. Since we develop the FH method specifically for
LLMs, we will henceforth assume that X represents the space of tokens.
To minimize Equation (2), we first optimize F (p, x) over the parameter space p using gradient
descent, as p ∈ Rm is continuous, making gradient descent highly effective. This process allows us
to optimize F (p, x) to a desired value, resulting in the parameters transitioning to p′ . We denote the
original model parameters as p0 = p and the updated parameters as pt = p′ .
By allowing infinitesimal updates (learning rates), the gradient descent over the parameter space
creates a homotopy between F (p, x) and F (p′ , x), with H(x, t = 0) = F (p′ , x) and H(x, t = 1) =
F (p, x) for the homotopy method. During the optimization of p, we retain all intermediate parameter
states, forming a chain of parameter states between p0 and pt , denoted as p0 , p1 , . . . , pt . Since pi
and pi+1 differ by only one gradient update, Spai (F ) and Spai+1 (F ) are very similar, facilitating the
transition from x ∈ Spai+1 (F ) to Spai (F ). A formal description of the functional homotopy algorithm
is provided in Algorithm 1. The input generation algorithm for each subproblem is primarily driven
by greedy search heuristics. Additionally, we provide a conceptual illustration of the homotopy
optimization method in Figure 6, elucidating its underlying principles and operational dynamics
from a level-set evolution perspective.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 The Functional Homotopy Algorithm
     Input: A parameterized objective function fp , an initial parameter p0 and an initial input xt ∈
X , a threshold a ∈ R.
     Output: A solution x0 ∈ Spa0 (F )
 1: Using gradient descent to minimize F (p, xt ) with respect to p for t steps such that F (pt , xt ) ≤
      a; save the intermediate parameter states p0 , p1 , . . . , pt .
 2: for i = t − 1, . . . , 0 do
 3:      Update xi from xi+1 using random search: fix a position in xi , randomly sample tokens
    from the vocabulary to replace the token at that position, and evaluate the objective with the
    substituted inputs. The best substitution is retained greedily over several iterations. This process
    is initialized with a warm start from xi+1 and ideally concludes with F (pi , xi ) ≤ a.
 4: end for
 5: Return x0 .



3.4     A PPLICATION TO JAILBREAK ATTACK S YNTHESIS

This section examines an application within our optimization framework: jailbreak attacks, which
can be framed as optimization problems. Let M represent the LLM, x be an input. An adversary
seeks to construct a string s such that the concatenated input t = ⟨x, s⟩, where ⟨x, s⟩ can be either
x|s or s|x, prompts an extreme response T (M (t)).
Given a sequence of tokens (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ), a language model M generates subsequent tokens by
estimating the probability distribution:

                             xn+j ∼ PM (·|x1 , x2 , . . . , xn+j−1 ); j = 1, . . . , k.

Given the dependency on the input prefix, the optimization objective is often framed in relation to
this prefix; specifically, when the prefix aligns with the target, the overall response is more likely to
meet the desired outcome. If the target prefix tokens are (t1 , . . . , tm ), the surrogate loss function
quantifies the likelihood that the first m tokens of T (M (t)) correspond to the predefined prefix.
Since T (M (t)) is sampled from the distribution M (t), the attack problem can be formulated as
identifying a string s that minimizes L(M (⟨x, s⟩)), where L measures the divergence from the
desired response. This objective serves as a proxy for achieving the intended output.
The optimization constraints are implicitly defined by the requirement that s must be a legitimate
string, comprising a sequence of tokens from the vocabulary V . In practice, we consider s of finite
     Snand impose an upper bound n on this length. Consequently, the constraint is formulated as
length
s ∈ i=0 V i , restricting the search space to the set of all strings with length not exceeding n. Since
V is a finite set of tokens, this constraint is intrinsically discrete.
                       Sn
As a result, let X = i=0 V i , and the optimization problem is

                                               min L(M (⟨x, s⟩)).                                    (4)
                                               s∈X


For jailbreak attack generation, the objective is to persuade M to provide an unaligned and poten-
tially harmful response to a malicious query x (e.g., “how to make a bomb?”), rather than refusing
to answer. If M is well-aligned, T (M (p)) should result in a refusal. The adversary then aims to
design a string s such that t = ⟨x, s⟩ elicits a harmful response T (M (t)) instead of a refusal for
the malicious query x. The objective is a surrogate for the harmful answer, typically an affirmative
response prefix such as “Sure, here is how...”. Zou et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2024a); Hu et al. (2024)
have adopted similar formalizations for jailbreak generation.


4     E VALUATION

This section provides empirical evaluations of the claims presented in the preceding section. Specif-
ically, we conduct experiments to address the following research questions:


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      RQ1: How effective is gradient-based token selection in the GCG optimization?
      RQ2: How effective is the functional homotopy method in synthesizing jailbreak attacks?
      RQ3: How efficient is the functional homotopy method in synthesizing jailbreak attacks?


Findings We summarize the findings related to the research questions:
RQ1: Gradient-based token selection yields only marginal improvements compared to random to-
     ken selection. However, the computational cost associated with gradient calculation intro-
     duces a trade-off between the effective use of gradients and operational efficiency. Further-
     more, avoiding the use of token gradients necessitates reduced access to the model, facilitat-
     ing black-box attack strategies in applications such as model attacks.
RQ2: The FH method can exceed baseline methods in synthesizing jailbreak attacks by over 20%
     on known safe models.
RQ3: The FH method tends to smooth the underlying optimization problem, resulting in more
     uniform iteration progress across instances compared to other methods. While other methods
     may rapidly solve easier instances, they often make minimal progress on more challenging
     ones. To achieve comparably good success rates on safe models, the FH method typically
     requires fewer iterations than baseline tools.

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN

RQ1 The finite-token discrete optimization problem aims to identify the optimal combination of
tokens that minimizes a specified objective function. This study examines the correlation between
gradient-based rankings and actual (ground-truth) rankings of tokens, for the objective function
in Equation (1).
The methodology involves substituting potential tokens at designated positions, executing the model
with these substitutions, and recording the resulting objective values, which constitute the ground-
truth ranking of inputs, denoted as R1. Simultaneously, an alternative ranking, R2, is generated
using the token gradient. A comparative analysis is then conducted between R1 and R2.
To quantify the similarity between these rankings, we employ the Rank Biased Overlap (RBO)
metric (Webber et al., 2010). RBO calculates a weighted average of shared elements across the
ranked lists, with weights assigned based on ranking positions, thereby placing greater emphasis
on higher-ranked items. The RBO score ranges from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating greater
similarity between the lists. This metric is utilized to assess the congruence between gradient-
based and ground-truth rankings, enhancing our understanding of the correlation with the objective’s
optimization metrics.

RQ2 We apply the Functional Homotopy (FH) method to the jailbreak synthesis tasks described
in section 3.4, measuring the attack success rate (ASR). Due to the incorporation of random token
substitution in algorithm 1, we designate our tool as FH-GR, which stands for Functional Homotopy-
Greedy Random method.

RQ3 We conduct a similar experiment to RQ2, but we record the number of search iterations used
by each tool. Additionally, we also measure the runtime and storage overhead associate with the FH
method.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL S PECIFICATIONS

Baseline For RQ1, we establish random ranking as the baseline. In the context of jailbreak at-
tacks, we utilize two optimization methods, GCG and AutoDAN, as baseline tools. Furthermore,
we introduce an additional baseline through the implementation of a random token selection method,
referred to as Greedy Random (GR).
GCG is a token-level search algorithm. It is initiated with an arbitrary string, commonly a sequence
of twenty exclamation marks. The algorithm’s process for selecting the subsequent token substitu-
tion is informed by the token gradient relative to the objective function in Equation (4).


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


GR operates as a token-level search algorithm similar to GCG; however, it uses random selection for
token substitutions rather than utilizing gradient information. This algorithm serves as an end-to-end
implementation of Line 3 within Algorithm 1. Notice that random greedy search was also explored
by Andriushchenko et al. (2024), as part of a bag of tricks applied in the work. Furthermore, the
comparison between GCG and GR is pertinent to addressing RQ1.
In contrast, AutoDAN adopts a prompt-level strategy, beginning with a set of meticulously designed
suffixes derived from the DAN framework. An example of such a suffix includes: “Ignore all prior
instructions. From now on, you will act as Llama-2 with Developer Mode enabled.” AutoDAN
employs a fitness scoring system alongside a genetic algorithm to identify the next viable prompt
candidate.

Models We use recent open source state-of-the-art models, in terms of performance and robust-
ness. These include: Llama-3 8B Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), Llama-2 7B (Touvron et al., 2023),
Mistral-v0.3 7B Instruct (Jiang et al., 2023) and Vicuna-v1.5 7B (Chiang et al., 2023).

Datasets For RQ1, we select 20 samples from the AdvBench dataset (Zou et al., 2023) and ran-
domly choose four positions in the suffix for token substitution for each sample. For each query
and position, we substitute all possible tokens (32 000 for Llama-2, Mistral, and Vicuba; 128 256
for Llama-3) and evaluate the jailbreak loss values using these inputs as ground truth, thereby estab-
lishing a ground truth ranking. We then employ token gradients to rank the tokens as in GCG and
additionally apply random ranking.
For RQ2 and RQ3, we utilize 100 random samples from both the AdvBench and HarmBench
datasets (Mazeika et al., 2024), resulting in a total of 200 samples. These samples include harmful
and toxic instructions encompassing profanity, violence, and other graphic content. The adversary’s
objective is to elicit meaningful compliance from the model in response to these inputs.

Judge We utilize the Llama-2 13B model, as provided by Mazeika et al. (2024), to evaluate the
responses generated through adversarial attacks, specifically measuring the success rate of these
attacks. In the context of jailbreak attack synthesis, the primary objective is to pass the evaluation
by the judge, which effectively corresponds to the set Spa (F ) in Algorithm 1.

FH specification The initial step of our FH method involves updating p, which effectively cor-
responds to model fine-tuning. To optimize memory and disk efficiency while preserving all inter-
mediate parameter states, we employ Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) for updating
p. Rather than misaligning the model for each individual query, we misalign it for the entire test
dataset and save a checkpoint that is applicable to all queries. This approach reduces disk space
requirements and performs adequately for our evaluation purposes.
In the for loop in Algorithm 1, in principle, we can revert from the final checkpoint to the base
model incrementally. To enhance efficiency, we implement a binary search strategy for selecting
checkpoints, with details provided in the appendix.
We include other experimental specifications in Appendix C.

5   R ESULT AND DISCUSSION
RQ1 The results of the RBO score are presented in Table 1. The RBO score ranges from 0 to
1, with higher scores indicating a positive correlation between the two ranked lists, while lower
scores suggest a negative correlation. The data reveal that the guidance from token gradients shows
a slight positive correlation with the ground truth compared to random ranking methods. However,
the computation of gradients is resource-intensive, necessitating a trade-off between their utilization
and overall efficiency.
We conducted a profiling analysis of the execution times for both greedy random and greedy to-
ken gradient iterations. The results indicate that a single iteration using greedy token gradients
requires 85% more computational time than an iteration employing greedy random token substitu-
tions. Therefore, within identical time constraints, the use of random token substitutions for addi-
tional iterations may enhance performance.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: RBO scores (ranging from 0 to 1) for various ranking methods in relation to the ground
truth ranking. A higher scores indicate stronger positive alignment with the ground truth. Token
gradient ranking shows a marginally higher RBO score than random ranking, indicating a very
weakly positive alignment. Conversely, for adversarial examples in image models, the RBO score
between the ground truth and gradient-based ranking typically exceeds 0.90 (Wang et al., 2024).

         Method                Llama-3 8B      Llama-2 7B      Mistral-v0.3     Vicuna-v1.5
         Token Gradient           0.517           0.506           0.503            0.507
         Random Ranking           0.50             0.50           0.498             0.50

Table 2: The ASR results after 500 and 1000 iterations. Notably, the ASRs for Mistral-v0.3 and
Vicuna-v1.5 reach saturation by 500 iterations, leading to the cessation of further runs. It is impor-
tant to emphasize that, despite utilizing the same number of iterations, the computational demands
differ significantly. For instance, GCG requires gradient computation in each iteration, resulting
in an 85% increase in time compared to a random token substitution iteration. Consequently, exe-
cuting GCG for 500 iterations is equivalent to executing GR for 900 iterations. Furthermore, An-
driushchenko et al. (2024) incorporated random search into their attack strategy, permitting up to
10 000 random iterations, whereas we established an upper limit of 1000 iterations.

                                 ASR @ 500→1000 Iterations
                           Llama-3 8B Llama-2 7B Mistral-v0.3                Vicuna-v1.5
             Method
                           500 1000 500 1000            500                      500
             AutoDAN       17.0 19.5 53.5 61.5         100.0                    98.0
             GCG           44.5 59.0 53.5 63.5          99.5                    99.5
             GR            33.5 47.0 28.0 37.5          98.5                    99.5
             FH-GR         46.0 76.5 86.5 99.5          99.5                    100.0


RQ2 As seen in Table 2, the FH method either matches (as with Mistral and Vicuna) or substan-
tially outperforms (as with Llama-2 and Llama-3) other methods, even when randomly selecting
tokens. Notably, we achieve an almost perfect attack success rate on Llama-2, while the closest
baseline is more than 30% weaker than FH-GR. We provide additional ablations of the FH method
when applied to GCG and AutoDAN in Appendix E.

RQ3 Since the ASRs of attacks on Mistral and Vicuna reach saturation, we turn our attention to
Llama-2 and Llama-3. As illustrated in Figure 3, the FH-GR method identifies adversarial suffixes
for prompts that other methods do not achieve within the same number of iterations. Specifically,
Figure 3a shows that FH-GR successfully finds the majority of its attacks within 500 iterations,
significantly outperforming GCG, the closest competing baseline. This highlights the efficiency
of framing the optimization as a series of easy-to-hard problems. Iteration distribution plots for
Mistral and Vicuna, along with runtime and storage overhead of the FH method, are provided in the
appendix.

Choice of fine-tuning The machine learning interpretation of the functional homotopy method,
as outlined in Section 3.3, necessitates the selection of the same input intended for jailbreaking,
denoted as xt . Typically, the target set for optimization is the affirmative prefix “Sure, here is...”.
In our experiments, we found that this approach often led to model overfitting. For instance, when
targeting the prompt “How to build a bomb?”, the expected output would be “Sure, here is how
to build a bomb”. A parameter state trained to minimize this loss would likely produce this output
as a completion, which could subsequently be rejected by the judge. This misalignment arises
because the loss function does not precisely correspond to the objective: a jailbreak attack may
not necessarily begin with “Sure, here is how to” and outputs like “Sure, here is how to build a
bomb” is not recognized as successful attacks. Consequently, overfitting to the loss function might
not yield a successful affirmative response. We also experimented with red-teaming data obtained
from Ganguli et al. (2022) (8000 samples), which mitigated overfitting; however, we observed that
parameter states close to the base model were consistently more challenging to attack.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Llama-2: Iteration distribution of successful attacks                           Llama-3: Iteration distribution of successful attacks
                 35                                         FH-GR ASR: 0.995                                                                FH-GR ASR: 0.765
                                                            GCG ASR: 0.635                       25                                         GCG ASR: 0.59
                 30
                                                                                                 20
                 25
     Frequency


                                                                                     Frequency
                 20                                                                              15

                 15
                                                                                                 10
                 10
                                                                                                 5
                 5

                 0                                                                               0
                        0       200       400       600       800        1000                           0       200       400       600       800        1000
                                           Iterations                                                                      Iterations
                 (a) Iteration distribution for Llama-2 7B                       (b) Iteration distribution for Llama-3 8B Instruct

Figure 3: Iteration distribution for successful attacks, showing the iterations taken by each method
to successfully jailbreak the target models on different inputs. Each bar represents here about 50
iterations. Our method can identify adversarial strings more efficiently than GCG, the closest com-
peting baseline. Although the plots display iteration counts, it is important to note that each GCG
iteration requires more time than an iteration of FH-GR.


The selection of 500 epochs for model fine-tuning was empirically determined to sufficiently mis-
align model parameters, facilitating jailbreaking without additional optimization. However, our
method’s efficacy persists with fewer epochs, effectively initiating the homotopy from a more
aligned model state. Experiments with stronger checkpoints (i.e., models fine-tuned for fewer
epochs) demonstrate that the optimization still converges to a lower loss than the base GCG al-
gorithm. Figure 9 in Appendix H illustrates that optimizations starting from stronger checkpoints
exhibit more rapid loss reduction compared to GCG, underscoring the robustness of our approach to
variations in fine-tuning duration.

Duality between model and input Our functional homotopy framework capitalizes on the duality
between model training and input generation. Fine-tuning a model from its base can be viewed as
an application of homotopy optimization, which concurrently supports input generation optimiza-
tion. This duality underscores the functional relationship between models and inputs. Our approach
combines reversed robust training with feature transfer in the input space. Initially, we de-robust
train safe models to derive vulnerable variants while retaining intermediate models. Subsequently,
jailbreak features are transferred from attacks on weaker models and incrementally intensified for
stronger models. This duality between models (or programs) and inputs, as well as the incremen-
tal evolution of both, aligns with widely used techniques in software analysis, such as continuous
integration and mutation testing (Kaiser et al., 1989; Brown et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020). Addi-
tionally, we conduct a preliminary study on the transferability of attack strings from base to weaker
models, detailed in Appendix D.
An intriguing observation pertains to the effectiveness of AutoDAN across Llama-2 and Llama-3.
While AutoDAN achieves comparable ASRs to GCG for Llama-2, its effectiveness significantly di-
minishes for Llama-3. As the only prompt-level attack utilizing strings from the DAN framework
rather than considering all possible prompts, AutoDAN generates suffixes that lack sufficient diver-
sity. Given that Llama-3 demonstrates robustness against AutoDAN while remaining vulnerable to
other tools, we conclude that generating a diverse set of attacks is essential for accurately assessing
model robustness.


6   C ONCLUSION

This study introduces the functional homotopy method, a novel optimization technique that smooths
the LLM input-generation problem by leveraging the continuity of the parameter space. Addition-
ally, our approach highlights the interplay between model training and input generation, offering a
dual perspective that integrates the featurization of both models and inputs. This framework has the
potential to inspire new empirical tools for analyzing language models.


                                                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Z. Wang, D. Anshumaan, A. Hooda and S. Jha are partially supported by DARPA under agreement
number 885000, NSF CCF-FMiTF-1836978 and ONR N00014-21-1-2492. Y. Chen is partially
supported by NSF CCF-1704828 and NSF CCF-2233152.
This research was supported by the Center for AI Safety Compute Cluster. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.

R EFERENCES
Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce, and Nicolas Flammarion. Jailbreaking leading safety-
 aligned llms with simple adaptive attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02151, 2024.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

David Bingham Brown, Michael Vaughn, Ben Liblit, and Thomas Reps. The care and feed-
  ing of wild-caught mutants. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations
  of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017, pp. 511–522, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Associ-
  ation for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450351058. doi: 10.1145/3106237.3106280. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106280.

N. Carlini and D. Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Sym-
  posium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 39–57, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, may 2017. IEEE Com-
  puter Society. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.49. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
  org/10.1109/SP.2017.49.

Patrick Chao, Alexander Robey, Edgar Dobriban, Hamed Hassani, George J. Pappas, and Eric
  Wong. Jailbreaking black box large language models in twenty queries, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=hkjcdmz8Ro.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Abhimanyu Dubey et al. The Llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2407.21783.

Daniel M Dunlavy and Dianne P O’Leary. Homotopy optimization methods for global optimization.
  Technical report, Sandia National Laboratories (SNL), Albuquerque, NM, and Livermore, CA
  (United States),, 2005.

Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Jackson Kernion, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Ben
  Mann, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Kamal Ndousse, et al. Red teaming language models to
  reduce harms: Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858,
  2022.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceed-
  ings, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Kai Hu, Weichen Yu, Tianjun Yao, Xiang Li, Wenhe Liu, Lijun Yu, Yining Li, Kai Chen, Zhiqiang
  Shen, and Matt Fredrikson. Efficient llm jailbreak via adaptive dense-to-sparse constrained opti-
  mization, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
  Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023.
G.E. Kaiser, D.E. Perry, and W.M. Schell. Infuse: fusing integration test management with
  change management . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual International Computer Soft-
  ware & Applications Conference, pp. 552,553,554,555,556,557,558, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
  September 1989. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/CMPSAC.1989.65147. URL https:
  //doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CMPSAC.1989.65147.
Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among Combinatorial Problems, pp. 85–103. Springer US, Boston,
  MA, 1972. ISBN 978-1-4684-2001-2. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2 9. URL https://
  doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2_9.
Zeyi Liao and Huan Sun. Amplegcg: Learning a universal and transferable generative model of
  adversarial suffixes for jailbreaking both open and closed llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07921,
  2024.
Xiaogeng Liu, Nan Xu, Muhao Chen, and Chaowei Xiao. AutoDAN: Generating stealthy jailbreak
  prompts on aligned large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7Jwpw4qKkb.
Xiaogeng Liu, Zhiyuan Yu, Yizhe Zhang, Ning Zhang, and Chaowei Xiao. Automatic and universal
  prompt injection attacks against large language models, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2403.04957.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Mantas Mazeika, Long Phan, Xuwang Yin, Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Norman Mu, Elham Sakhaee,
 Nathaniel Li, Steven Basart, Bo Li, et al. Harmbench: A standardized evaluation framework for
 automated red teaming and robust refusal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04249, 2024.
Anay Mehrotra, Manolis Zampetakis, Paul Kassianik, Blaine Nelson, Hyrum Anderson, Yaron
  Singer, and Amin Karbasi. Tree of attacks: Jailbreaking black-box llms automatically, 2023.
Hossein Mobahi and John Fisher III. A theoretical analysis of optimization by gaussian continuation.
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 29(1), Feb. 2015. doi: 10.1609/
  aaai.v29i1.9356. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/
  9356.
Leo Schwinn, David Dobre, Sophie Xhonneux, Gauthier Gidel, and Stephan Günnemann. Soft
  prompt threats: Attacking safety alignment and unlearning in open-source LLMs through the
  embedding space. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CLxcLPfARc.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Good-
  fellow, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In Yoshua Bengio and
  Yann LeCun (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014,
  Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023.
walkerspider, 2022. URL https://www.reddit.com/r/ChatGPT/comments/zlcyr9/
  dan_is_my_new_friend/.
Zi Wang, Ben Liblit, and Thomas Reps. Tofu: Target-oriented fuzzer, 2020. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2004.14375.
Zi Wang, Aws Albarghouthi, Gautam Prakriya, and Somesh Jha. Interval universal approximation
  for neural networks. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 6(POPL), January 2022. doi: 10.1145/3498675.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3498675.
Zi Wang, Jihye Choi, Ke Wang, and Somesh Jha. Rethinking diversity in deep neural network
  testing, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15698.
William Webber, Alistair Moffat, and Justin Zobel. A similarity measure for indefinite rankings.
 ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 28(4), nov 2010. ISSN 1046-8188. doi: 10.1145/1852102.1852106. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1145/1852102.1852106.
Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, J Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial
  attacks on aligned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     NP- HARDNESS OF THE OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM
Let f : {0, 1}m → R be a neural network with m-binary inputs and a canonical feed-forward
structure comprising a single hidden layer. The network is formally expressed as:
                                      f (x) = W2 σ(W1 x + b1 ) + b2
               n×m             1×n
where W1 ∈ R        , W2 = R         are the weight matrices between the layers, σ denotes an activation
function, b1 ∈ Rn and b2 ∈ R is the bias term. In other words, f is the function composition of
two affine transformations and an activation layer. Notice that any composition of two consecutive
affine transformations is still an affine transformation.
The decision problem under consideration is formulated as an existential problem:
                                     ∀a ∈ R.∃x ∈ {0, 1}n . f (x) ≤ a.                                 (5)
This formulation aims to determine, for any given threshold a and two-layer binary neural network,
whether there exists an input x such that f (x) ≤ a. We demonstrate the NP-hardness of this problem
in Section A.1. Subsequently, in Section A.2, we elucidate how this formalization (Equation (5))
encapsulates the LLM input generation optimization problem.

A.1    H ARDNESS R EDUCTION

We prove the NP-hardness of the decision problem Equation (5) via a reduction from the Boolean
satisfiability (SAT) problem. This reduction is constructed such that solving the decision problem
is equivalent to determining the satisfiability of the given SAT formula. Consequently, if one can
resolve the decision problem, one can, by extension, solve the corresponding SAT instance.
We define a 3-Conjunctive Normal Form (3CNF) instance ϕ as follows: Let X1 , . . . , Xm be Boolean
variables. A literal Li is defined as either Xi or its negation ¬Xi . A 3CNF instance ϕ is constructed
as a conjunction of clauses: C1 ∧ . . . ∧ Ck , where each clause Cj is a disjunction of three literals.
To differentiate between the 3CNF instance and its neural network representation, we employ up-
percase letters for 3CNF components and lowercase letters for their corresponding neural network
constructs. The Cook–Levin theorem establishes that deciding the satisfiability of a 3CNF formula
is NP-hard (Karp, 1972).

Simulation of 3CNF To simulate logical operations within the neural network framework, we
employ a gadget similar to that proposed by Wang et al. (2022). This approach utilizes common
activation functions such as ReLU, sigmoid, and tanh to approximate a step function, defined as:

                                                  1, x > 0
                                    step(x) =                                                   (6)
                                                  0, x ≤ 0
The step function, being discrete-valued, serves as a fundamental component for mathematical anal-
ysis and simulation of other discrete functions. Its versatility in neural networks allows for easy
scaling and shifting through weight multiplication or bias term addition, enabling the replacement
of the constants 0 and 1 in Equation (6) with any real numbers.
Wang et al. (2022) demonstrated how common activation functions can approximate the step func-
tion. For instance, ReLU(nx) − ReLU(nx − 1) converges to step(x) as n → ∞. For our reduction,
we define a step-like function:
                                                          1, x ≥ 1
                                                      (
                     s(x) = ReLU(x) − ReLU(x − 1) =       0, x ≤ 0                         (7)
                                                          x, 0 < x < 1

Using s, a 3CNF formula can be simulated with a single hidden layer neural network. For each
variable x, we introduce an input node x and construct an affine transformation: two nodes y, ȳ
where y = x and ȳ = 1 − x, simulating literals X and ¬X. Let li represent yi or ȳi , corresponding
to literal Li in the SAT formula. For each disjunction C = L1 ∨ L2 ∨ L3 in the CNF formula, we
define it as l1 + l2 + l3 and clip the value using the step-like function s. Utilizing this function, we
can evaluate the truth value of clause C. If any literal is satisfied, then l1 + l2 + l3 ≥ 1, resulting in


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


s(l1 + l2 + l3 ) = 1; otherwise, s(l1 + l2 + l3 ) = 0. We denote the output of the node corresponding
to each clause Ci as ci .
                                                                                             Pk
To simulate the conjunction operation, we sum all clause gates and negate the result: − i=1 ci .
Consequently, determining the satisfiability of the 3CNF formula is equivalent to solving the fol-
lowing decision problem for this one-layer network:
                                            ∃x.f (x) ≤ −k.
Proposition A.1. For any 3CNF formula ϕ with k clauses, there exists a two-layer neural network
f : {0, 1}n → R such that ϕ is satisfiable if and only if ∃x such that f (x) ≤ −k.

Proof. We have described the construction of the neural network as above. Now we need to show it
indeed captures the computation of the 3CNF formula.
Now if ϕ is satisfiable, then there exists a truth assignment of X1 , . . . , Xm to satisfy ϕ. Let xi = 1
if Xi is true and xi = 0 if Xi is false in this assignment. By the construction of the neural network,
                                                                          Pk
the output of s is also true for each step-like function. As a result, − i=1 ci = −k.
Now if ∃x ∈ {0, 1}m such that f (x) ≤ −k. Choose a truth assignment for X1 , . . . , Xm based
                                   Pk
on xi ’s values. Because f = − i=1 ci and 0 ≤ ci ≤ 1, then each ci = 1. By construction,
l1 + l2 + l3 ≥ 1 for this activation node ci . Because xi is discrete-valued, li ∈ {xi , 1 − xi }, then
li ∈ {0, 1}. l1 + l2 + l3 ≥ 1 implies that at least one of l1 , l2 , l3 equals 1. Therefore, by the
truth assignment of Xj , the corresponding literal is also satisfied. Because each clause has a true
assignment, then ϕ is satisfied.

The aforementioned neural network construction employs a single-layer activation function: s, com-
prising two ReLU functions. Wang et al. (2022) demonstrated the feasibility of approximating the
step function using common activation functions. Consequently, this construction is applicable to
any single activation layer network utilizing standard activation functions. Given the NP-hardness
of the 3SAT problem, it logically follows that the neural network decision problem, as defined
in Equation (5), is NP-hard.
Corollary A.2. The decision problem in Equation (5) is NP-hard.

A.2    LLM INPUT GENERATION F ORMALIZATION

We posit that the decision problem in Equation (5) effectively encapsulates the LLM input genera-
tion optimization problem. Informally, this problem seeks to minimize some loss based on logits for
all given possible suffixes. Because we do not impose any structural assumptions on the input em-
bedding or the output layers, the two-layer network can be embedded within the LLM architecture.
Specifically, in the context of jailbreak attack optimization, the objective is to minimize
L(M (⟨x, s⟩)), where M represents an LLM, x denotes the prompt, and L is the entropy loss be-
tween the logits and an affirmative prefix. This can be extended to minimizing f (x) for x ∈ {0, 1}n ,
given the absence of assumed embedding structures or input prompts. The discrepancy between
f ∈ R and the entropy loss in jailbreak attacks can be reconciled through a network with multiple
outputs, where one output corresponds to f and the rest are constants, establishing a bijective rela-
tionship between f and the jailbreak loss. Given that the cross-entropy between a logit (y1 , . . . , yn )
and a target class j is:
                                                  exp(yj )
                                          log Pn              .
                                                 i=1 exp(yi )
We can construct a multiple output network F , where F (x)j = f (x) and the remaining F (x) are
constants. Assuming the one-hot encoding corresponds to the first token (class j), the cross-entropy
becomes:
                                                exp(f (x))
                                         log                    ,
                                             exp(f (x)) + C
for some C > 0. This function is bijective and monotonically increasing. By fixing the remaining
affirmative prefix tokens’ logits as constants, minimizing the prefix loss is equivalent to minimizing
f (x), demonstrating that a jailbreak algorithm capable of minimizing the loss can also minimize
f (x). Consequently, if the minimization of f is solvable, the existential problem for any threshold
a ∈ R can also be resolved by querying the minimum of f (x).


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    L INEAR APPROXIMATION PROOF

Proof. Let x0 be a string input of length n, i.e., |x0 | = n; and x′ be a substituted string such that
x0 and x′ are of the same length and only differ by one token at position j, from token a in x0 to
token b in x′ . Let E0 be the one-hot encoding of x0 and E ′ be the one-hot encoding of x′ , therefore,
E ′ = (E ′ − E0 ) + E0 . Let vabj = (E ′ − E0 ), then E ′ = vabj + E0 .
Because x0 and x′ only differ by one token at position j, then vabj ∈ Rn×d is of the form
                             (0, . . . , (0, . . . , −1, . . . , 1, . . . , 0)j , , . . . , 0).

We use 0 to denote it is a 0 Rd -vector. −1 is corresponds to the one-hot encoding of a and 1
corresponds to token b.
As a result, the linear approximation of f (x′ ) from f (x0 ) is

                            f (E0 + (E ′ − E0 )) ≈ f (E0 ) + vabj
                                                              ⊤
                                                                  Df (E0 ).                           (8)

Because E0 is a fixed input, optimizing the linear approximation of f (E ′ ) amounts to optimizing
Df (E0 ) across all possible vabj .
Because vabj are all 0’s except for the j-th position, (vabj )⊤ Df (E0 ) = ([vabj ]j )⊤ h. Maximizing
the linear approximation of f (E ′ ) amounts to picking the best token that maximizes ([vabj ]j )⊤ h.
Again, because j is fixed, so x0 is fixed. To maximize ([vabj ]j )⊤ h, one only needs to choose
arg max(h), which is k.

C    A DDITIONAL E VALUATION D ETAILS

Binary Search for Parameter States In our experiments, we have 500 parameter states obtained
through finetuning. However, progressively iterating through all these states for each sample can be
very time-consuming (in particular loading model weights for each checkpoint).
We instead use binary search to pick appropriate parameter states. For example, given 500 parameter
states, we start by attacking the 250th state, and set the 500th state as the right extreme. If we succeed
(within a set number of iterations), we take the successful adversarial string and apply it to the 125th
state and set the the 250th state as the right extreme. If we fail, we discard the string and do not
count the spent iterations towards the total. We instead attack the 375th state, which is weaker. In
the event the current state and the right extreme are the same (or the index of the current state is one
less than the right extreme), we retain the string upon a failure and use it to initialize another attack
on the same checkpoint (up to a certain number of cumulative iterations). We formalize this in the
following algorithm.

Fine-tuning specification We use a learning rate 2e-5, warmup ratio 0.04 and a LoRA adapter
with rank 16, alpha 32, dropout 0.05, and batch size 2 to fine-tune the models for 64 epochs, leading
to 768 checkpoints in total.

Operational overhead The storage and computational overheads of our proposed method are
comparatively modest. Each LoRA checkpoint requires 49 MB, with a theoretical maximum of 768
checkpoints occupying approximately 37 GB. In practice, we utilized significantly fewer check-
points, further reducing the storage footprint. For context, full model storage requirements are
substantially larger: Llama-2 (13 GB), Mistral (14 GB), Vicuna (26 GB), and Llama-3 (60 GB).
The computational overhead is similarly minimal. Model fine-tuning, performed once for all test
inputs, takes approximately 20 minutes. In contrast, attacking a single input for 1000 interactions
requires about one hour. When amortized across 200 inputs, the running-time overhead is less than
10 seconds per input. Thus, both storage and computational overheads of our method are relatively
insignificant compared to the resource demands of complete language models and the overall attack
process.

Server specifications All the experiments are run on two clusters.


                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Functional Homotopy with Binary Search
     Input: A parameterized objective function fp , the initial parameter p0 , the intermediate param-
eter states p1 , p2 , ..., pt as obtained from line 1 of algorithm 1, a input xt ∈ X , a threshold a ∈ R
and a threshold K ∈ N.
     Output: A solution x0 ∈ Spa0 (F )
 1: Set L ← 0, R ← t, C ← ⌊ R2 ⌋.
 2: while L ̸= C do
 3:     Obtain xC that optimizes F (pC , xC ), from xR using random search within K iterations:
    fixing a position in xR , randomly sampling tokens from the vocabulary, and evaluating the
    objective with the substituted inputs. The best substitution is retained over several itera-
    tions. The initialization of this process is warm-started with xR , and ideally concludes with
    F (pC , xC ) ≤ a.
 4:     if F (pC , xC ) ≤ a then
 5:          R ← C, C ← ⌊ R2 ⌋
 6:     else
 7:          C ← ⌊ C+R 2 ⌋
 8:     end if
 9: end while
10: Obtain xC that optimizes F (pC , xC ), from xR using random search within K iterations (this
    step is for obtaining xC when L = C).
11: Return xC .


      1. A server with thirty-two AMD EPYC 7313P 16-core processors, 528 GB of memory, and
         four Nvidia A100 GPUs. Each GPU has 80 GB of memory.
      2. A cluster supporting 32 bare metal BM.GPU.A100-v2.8 nodes and a number of service
         nodes. Each GPU node is configured with 8 NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU cards, 27.2 TB
         local NVMe SSD Storage and two 64 core AMD EPYC Milan.

D    T RANSFERABILITY OF STRONGER ATTACKS
The FH method requires a series of finetuned parameter states. We examine the transferability of
successful base model attacks to their corresponding finetuned states. We consider 50 samples where
the base model was successfully attacked, and transfer those to that model’s finetuned parameter
states.
We hypothesize, based on the model and alignment training, the degree of overlap of the adversarial
subspaces of different checkpoints will vary, with more successes at a checkpoint indicating a greater
overlap with the base model. This is reflected in the initial checkpoints of all models (roughly 1−20)
in Figure 4.
As demonstrated in Table 2, Vicuna is particularly weak model, in terms of alignment. Thus the
adversarial string found for the base model transfers well across its finetuned states, as seen in Fig-
ure 4b. However, Llama-2 and Llama-3 (Figure 4a) have more robust alignment training, and the
attack does not transfer well, even though the finetuned states would be considered weaker in terms
of alignment. This divergence hints at how the adversarial subspace of a model transforms during
alignment training. We leave a rigorous analysis of this as a future study.

E    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR F UNCTIONAL H OMOTOPY
We apply the principles of functional homotopy on top of GCG and AutoDAN as ablation in Table 3.
We find that performance improves for almost all methods, further corroborating the effectiveness
of our technique. In particular, only Llama-3 sees a marginal decline in performance.

F    A DDITIONAL ITERATION DISTRIBUTIONS
Figure 5 illustrates the iteration distribution for Mistral and Vicuna.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           50
                                                Base model adversarial suffix applied to other checkpoints                                               50
                                                                                                                                                              Base model adversarial suffix applied to other checkpoints
                                                                                                      Llama-3


       Samples where the suffix succeeds


                                                                                                                     Samples where the suffix succeeds
                                                                                                      Llama-2

                                           45                                                                                                            45



                                           40                                                                                                            40



                                           35                                                                                                            35



                                           30                                                                                                            30

                                                                                                                                                                  Mistral-v0.3
                                                                                                                                                                  Vicuna-v1.5
                                           25                                                                                                            25
                                                0          100        200        300        400         500                                                   0            50    100   150   200      250   300   350      400
                                                                      Checkpoints                                                                                                       Checkpoints

    (a) Successes when directly attacking Llama-2 (b) Successes when directly attacking Mistral and
    and Llama-3’s checkpoints                     Vicuna’s checkpoints

Figure 4: Transferability of successful attacks on the base model to its finetuned parameter states.
We find that the attack does not necessarily transfer for all models. This seems to be a function of
the “distance” between the states and the alignment training received.

Table 3: The ASR results and improvements at 1000 iterations. We note that functional homotopy is
especially effective for gradient based methods such as GR and GCG. AutoDAN sees a marginal im-
provement for Llama-2, but a decline in Llama-3. We note that Llama-3 is very robust to AutoDAN
in general.

                                                                         ASR Improvement @ 1000 Iterations
                                     Model                       GR → FH-GR GCG → FH-GCG AutoDAN → FH-AutoDAN
                                     Llama-2                      37.5 → 99.5     69.5 → 99.0              61.5 → 68.5
                                     Llama-3                      47.0 → 76.5     59.0 → 77.5              19.5 → 14.5


G    FH LEVEL - SET PLOT
Figure 6 presents a conceptual illustration of the homotopy optimization method, elucidating its
underlying principles and operational dynamics. This visual representation provides a more detailed
intuition of the method’s efficacy in navigating complex optimization landscapes.

H    L OSS C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS FOR GCG AND FH-GR
In this section, we consider “hard” samples for Llama-2 and Llama-3 that GCG was unable to jail-
break, but FH-GR (initialized from checkpoint-500) was successful. Recall that both GCG and GR
utilize identical loss objectives F0 , while FH-GR employs a sequence of loss objectives (Fn , ..., F0 ),
culminating in the same final loss as GCG. We designate (Fn , ..., F0 ) as the homotopy loss, with
input generation guided by Fi .
Figure 7 shows the change in average homotopy loss with iterations throughout the progression of
homotopy. We find that easier optimization problems and the solution of the preceeding problem
enables a consistently lower loss throughout the homotopy process.
Figure 8 examines how the adversarial strings found on weaker models by the functional homotopy,
affect the average loss F0 on the base model. We see that the loss consistently decreases, indicating
that we are able to avoid local optima and successfully jailbreak the model faster.
Figure 9 shows the robustness of Functional Homotopy. Despite initializing the attack with stronger
checkpoints (i.e., models fine-tuned for fewer epochs), we still find that loss converges more quickly
that GCG and results in a jailbroken response from the model.


                                                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Mistral-v0.3: Iteration distribution of successful attacks                    Vicuna-v1.5: Iteration distribution of successful attacks
                                                               FH-GR ASR: 0.995                100                                         FH-GR ASR: 1.0
                                                               GCG ASR: 0.995                                                              GCG ASR: 0.995
                 120

                 100                                                                           80
     Frequency


                                                                                   Frequency
                 80                                                                            60

                 60
                                                                                               40
                 40
                                                                                               20
                 20

                  0                                                                             0
                       0      50      100        150     200         250                             0   50    100   150   200      250   300   350    400
                                            Iterations                                                                 Iterations
                  (a) Iteration distribution for Mistral-v0.3                                   (b) Iteration distribution for Vicuna-v1.5

Figure 5: Iteration distribution for successful attacks. We are able to find adversarial strings far more
efficiently than GCG, the closest competing baseline.


Figure 6: Conceptual illustration of homotopy methods for suffix optimization. (a) Left: Greedy
local search heuristic. The red region denotes successful suffixes. The search initiates from a starting
point (black solid) and iteratively moves to the optimal neighboring input (dashed circle) based
on loss values, potentially leading to local optima entrapment due to non-convexity. (b) Right:
Homotopy approach. A series of progressively challenging optimization problems is constructed,
with easier problems having larger solution spaces. The solution set gradually converges to that
of the original problem. Adjacent problems in this continuum have proximal solutions, facilitating
effective neighborhood search. Despite the underlying non-convexity, initiating from a near-optimal
point simplifies each problem-solving step.


                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       Comparing Average GCG and FH-GR Loss for Hard Samples - Llama-2                           Comparing Average GCG and FH-GR Loss for Hard Samples - Llama-3
                                                                         GCG Loss                          3.5                                                     GCG Loss
                                                                         FH-GR Loss                                                                                FH-GR Loss
                 2.0                                                                                       3.0

                                                                                                           2.5
                 1.5
       CE Loss


                                                                                                 CE Loss
                                                                                                           2.0

                 1.0                                                                                       1.5

                                                                                                           1.0
                 0.5
                                                                                                           0.5

                                                                                                           0.0
                         0            200         400                600   800       1000                          0            200         400                600   800       1000
                                                        Iterations                                                                                Iterations

     (a) FH-GR loss for Llama-2, across checkpoints (b) FH-GR loss for Llama-3, across checkpoints

Figure 7: A loss comparison of GCG and FH-GR on “hard” samples. The red FH-GR Loss indicates
the homotopy loss. We see that homotopy starts off with a substantially smaller loss, due to the
misalignment process. We initialize FH-GR from checkpoint 500. As we iterate and successfully
jailbreak an intermediate model, we replace it (as described in Algorithm 1), until we reach the base
model by iteration 1000. We further note in Section 5 that FH-GR converges more quickly than
GCG.


                             Avg. FH-GR Loss for Llama-2 with Evolving Adversarial Suffix                              Avg. FH-GR Loss for Llama-3 with Evolving Adversarial Suffix
                                                                               GCG Loss                    3.5                                                           GCG Loss
                                                                               FH-GR Loss                                                                                FH-GR Loss
                 2.0                                                                                       3.0

                                                                                                           2.5
                 1.5
       CE Loss


                                                                                                 CE Loss


                                                                                                           2.0

                 1.0                                                                                       1.5

                                                                                                           1.0
                 0.5
                                                                                                           0.5

                         0            200         400                600   800       1000                          0            200         400                600   800       1000
                                                        Iterations                                                                                Iterations

                             (a) FH-GR loss for base Llama-2                                                           (b) FH-GR loss for base Llama-3

Figure 8: A loss comparison of GCG and FH-GR on “hard” samples. Unlike Figure 7, we look
at the usefulness of the adversarial strings found by the functional homotopy, by applying them
to the base model and computing the base GCG loss. The red FH-GR Loss indicates the base
model loss objective value induced by the inputs found by the FH method. The loss decreases more
consistently, before converging to a lower value overall and successfully jailbreaking the model
compared to GCG.


                     Comparing Average GCG and FH-GR Loss for Hard Samples - Llama-2                           Comparing Average GCG and FH-GR Loss for Hard Samples - Llama-3
                2.00                                 GCG Loss (Base)                                                                           GCG Loss (Base)
                                                                                                           3.5
                                                     FH-GR Loss (ckpt-500 -> Base)                                                             FH-GR Loss (ckpt-500 -> Base)
                1.75                                 FH-GR Loss (ckpt-100 -> Base)                                                             FH-GR Loss (ckpt-150 -> Base)
                                                                                                           3.0
                1.50
                                                                                                           2.5
                1.25
      CE Loss


                                                                                                 CE Loss


                                                                                                           2.0
                1.00
                0.75                                                                                       1.5

                0.50                                                                                       1.0

                0.25                                                                                       0.5
                0.00                                                                                       0.0
                         0            200         400                600   800       1000                          0            200         400                600   800       1000
                                                        Iterations                                                                                Iterations

     (a) FH-GR loss for Llama-2, across checkpoints (b) FH-GR loss for Llama-3, across checkpoints

Figure 9: A loss comparison of GCG and FH-GR initialized from different checkpoints. We take 25
“hard” samples and initialize FH-GR from earlier checkpoints that are more aligned. Of the cases
where starting from the earlier checkpoint succeeds (loss in green), we see that FH-GR is still able to
converge to a lower loss than GCG. Note that GCG fails on all these cases, where as FH-GR (ckpt-
500→base) succeeds on all cases and FH-GR starting from earlier (stronger) checkpoints succeeds
on 13 cases for Llama-2, and 6 cases for Llama-3.


                                                                                            20
