Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E FFICIENTLY PARAMETERIZED N EURAL M ETRIPLEC -
TIC S YSTEMS

 Anthony Gruber∗                                     Kookjin Lee
 Center for Computing Research                       School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
 Sandia National Laboratories                        Arizona State University
 Albuquerque, NM. USA                                Tempe, AZ. USA
 adgrube@sandia.gov                                  kookjin.lee@asu.edu

 Haksoo Lim                                       Noseong Park
 Big Data Analytics Laboratory                    Big Data Analytics Laboratory
 Yonsei University                                Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
 Seoul, Korea                                     Daejeon, Korea
 limhaksoo96@naver.com                            noseong.kaist.cs@gmail.com

 Nathaniel Trask
 School of Engineering and Applied Science
 University of Pennsylvania
 Philadelphia, PA. USA
 ntrask@seas.upenn.edu



                                                A BSTRACT
             Metriplectic systems are learned from data in a way that scales quadratically in both
             the size of the state and the rank of the metriplectic operators. In addition to being
             provably energy-conserving and entropy-stable, the proposed neural metriplectic
             systems (NMS) approach includes approximation results that demonstrate its
             ability to accurately learn metriplectic dynamics from data, along with an error
             estimate that indicates its potential for generalization to unseen timescales when
             the approximation error is low. Examples are provided to illustrate performance
             both with full state information available and when entropic variables are unknown,
             confirming that the NMS approach exhibits superior accuracy and scalability
             without compromising on model expressivity.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The theory of metriplectic, also called GENERIC, systems Morrison (1986); Grmela and Öttinger
(1997) provides a principled formalism for encoding dissipative dynamics in terms of complete
thermodynamical systems that conserve energy and produce entropy. By formally expressing the
reversible and irreversible parts of state evolution with separate algebraic brackets, the metriplectic
formalism provides a general mechanism for maintaining essential conservation laws while simulta-
neously respecting dissipative effects. Thermodynamic completeness implies that any dissipation
is caught within a metriplectic system through the generation of entropy, allowing for a holistic
treatment which has already found use in modeling fluids Morrison (1984; 2009), plasmas Kaufman
and Morrison (1982); Materassi (2012), and kinetic theories Kaufman (1984); Holm et al. (2008).
From a machine learning point of view, the formal separation of conservative and dissipative effects
makes metriplectic systems highly appealing for the development of phenomenological models. Given
data which is physics-constrained or exhibits some believed properties, a metriplectic system can be
learned to exhibit the same properties with clearly identifiable conservative and dissipative parts. This
allows for a more nuanced understanding of the governing dynamics via an evolution equation which
reduces to an idealized Hamiltonian system as the dissipation is taken to zero. Moreover, elements
    ∗
        corresponding author


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in the kernel of the learned conservative part are immediately understood as Casimir invariants,
which are special conservation laws inherent to the phase space of solutions, and are often useful
for understanding and exerting control on low-dimensional structure in the system. On the other
hand, the same benefit of metriplectic structure as a “direct sum” of reversible and irreversible parts
makes it challenging to parameterize in an efficient way, since delicate degeneracy conditions must
be enforced in the system for all time. In fact, there are no methods at present for learning general
metriplectic systems which scale optimally with both dimension and the rank of metriplectic data—an
issue which this work directly addresses.
Precisely, metriplectic dynamics on the finite or infinite dimensional phase space P are generated by a
free energy function(al) F : P → R, F = E+S defined in terms of a pair E, S : P → R representing
energy and entropy, respectively, along with two algebraic brackets {·, ·}, [·, ·] : C ∞ (P)×C ∞ (P) →
C ∞ (P) which are bilinear derivations on C ∞ (P) with prescribed symmetries and degeneracies
{S, ·} = [E, ·] = 0. Here {·, ·} is an antisymmetric Poisson bracket, which is a Lie algebra
realization on functions, and [·, ·] is a degenerate metric bracket which is symmetric and positive
semi-definite. When P ⊂ Rn for some n > 0, these brackets can be identified with symmetric
matrix fields L : P → Skewn (R), M : P → Symn (R) satisfying {F, G} = ∇F · L∇G and
[F, G] = ∇F · M ∇G for all functions F, G ∈ C ∞ (P) and all states x ∈ P. Using the degeneracy
conditions along with ∇x = I and abusing notation slightly then leads the standard equations for
metriplectic dynamics,
                    ẋ = {x, F } + [x, F ] = {x, E} + [x, S] = L∇E + M ∇S,
which are provably energy conserving and entropy producing. To see why this is the case, recall that
L⊺ = −L. It follows that the infinitesimal change in energy satisfies
         Ė = ẋ · ∇E = L∇E · ∇E + M ∇S · ∇E = −L∇E · ∇E + ∇S · M ∇E = 0,
and therefore energy is conserved along the trajectory of x. Similarly, the fact that M ⊺ = M is
positive semi-definite implies that
                                                                                          2
     Ṡ = ẋ · ∇S = L∇E · ∇S + M ∇S · ∇S = −∇E · L∇S + M ∇S · ∇S = |∇S|M ≥ 0,
so that entropy is nondecreasing along x as well. Geometrically, this means that the motion of a
trajectory x is everywhere tangent to the level sets of energy and transverse to those of entropy,
reflecting the fact that metriplectic dynamics are a combination of noncanonical Hamiltonian (M =
0) and generalized gradient (L = 0) motions. Note that these considerations also imply the
Lyapunov stability of metriplectic trajectories, as can be seen by taking E as a Lyapunov function.
Importantly, this also implies that metriplectic trajectories which start in the (often compact) set
K = {x | E(x) ≤ E(x0 )} remain there for all time.
In phenomenological modeling, the entropy S is typically chosen from Casimirs of the Poisson
bracket generated by L, i.e. those quantities C ∈ C ∞ (P) such that L∇C = 0. On the other hand,
the method which will be presented here, termed neural metriplectic systems (NMS), allows for all of
the metriplectic data L, M , E, S to be approximated simultaneously, removing the need for Casimir
invariants to be known or assumed ahead of time. The only restriction inherent to NMS is that the
metriplectic system being approximated is nondegenerate (c.f. Definition 3.1), a mild condition
meaning that the gradients of energy and entropy cannot vanish at any point x ∈ P in the phase space.
It will be shown that NMS alleviates known issues with previous methods for metriplectic learning,
leading to easier training, superior parametric efficiency, and better generalization performance.

Contributions. The proposed NMS method for learning metriplectic models offers the following
advantages over previous state-of-the-art: (1) It approximates arbitrary nondegenerate metriplectic
dynamics with optimal quadratic scaling in both the problem dimension n and the rank r of the
irreversible dynamics. (2) It produces realistic, thermodynamically consistent entropic dynamics
from unobserved entropy data. (3) It admits universal approximation and error accumulation results
given in Proposition 3.7 and Theorem 3.9. (4) It yields exact energy conservation and entropy stability
by construction, allowing for effective generalization to unseen timescales.

2   P REVIOUS AND R ELATED W ORK
Previous attempts to learn metriplectic systems from data separate into “hard” and “soft” constrained
methods. Hard constrained methods enforce metriplectic structure by construction, so that the


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


defining properties of metriplecticity cannot be violated. Conversely, methods with soft constraints
relax some aspects of metriplectic structure in order to produce a wider model class which is easier to
parameterize. While hard constraints are the only way to truly guarantee appropriate generalization
in the learned surrogate, the hope of soft constrained methods is that the resulting model is “close
enough” to metriplectic that it will exhibit some of the favorable characteristics of metriplectic
systems, such as energy and entropy stability. Some properties of the methods compared in this work
are summarized in Table 1.

Soft constrained methods. Attempts to learn metriplectic systems using soft constraints rely on
relaxing the degeneracy conditions L∇S = M ∇E = 0. This is the approach taken in Hernández
et al. (2021b), termed SPNN, which learns an almost-metriplectic model parameterized with generic
                                                                                          2            2
neural networks through a simple L2 penalty term in the training loss, Lpen = |L∇E| + |M ∇S| .
This widens the space of allowable network parameterizations for the approximate operators L, M .
While the resulting model violates the first and second laws of thermodynamics, the authors show that
reasonable trajectories are still obtained, at least when applied within the range of timescales used for
training. A similar approach is taken in Hernández et al. (2021a), which targets larger problems and
develops an almost-metriplectic model reduction strategy based on the same core idea.
Hard constrained methods. Perhaps the first example of learning metriplectic systems from data
was given in González et al. (2019) in the context of system identification. Here, training data is
assumed to come from a finite element simulation, so that the discrete gradients of energy and entropy
can be approximated as ∇E(x) = Ax, ∇S(x) = Bx. Assuming a fixed form for L produces a
constrained learning problem for the constant matrices M , A, B which is solved to yield a provably
metriplectic surrogate model. Similarly, the work Ruiz et al. (2021) learns M , E given L, S by
considering a fixed block-wise decoupled form which trivializes the degeneracy conditions, i.e.
L = [⋆ 0; 0 0] and M = [0 0; 0 ⋆]. This line of thought is continued in Xu et al. (2022) and Xu
et al. (2023), both of which learn metriplectic systems with neural network parameterizations by
assuming this decoupled block structure along with specialized forms for the metriplectic data. A
somewhat broader class of metriplectic systems are considered in Gruber et al. (2023b) using tools
from exterior calculus, with the goal of learning metriplectic dynamics on graph data. This leads to a
structure-preserving network surrogate which scales linearly in the size of the graph domain, but also
cannot express arbitrary metriplectic dynamics due to the specific modeling choices for L, M .
A particularly inspirational method for learning general metriplectic systems was given in Lee et al.
(2021) and termed GNODE, building on parameterizations of metriplectic operators developed in Öt-
tinger (2014). GNODE parameterizes learnable reversible and irreversible bracket generating matrices
                                                       ⊗3                  ⊗4
L, M in terms of state-independentP   tensors ξ ∈ (Rn ) and ζ ∈ (RnP     ) : for 1 ≤ α, β, γ, µ, ν ≤ n,
                                                γ                                       µ    ν
the authors choose Lαβ (x) =            γ ξαβγ ∂ S and Mαβ (x) =            µ,ν ζαµ,βν ∂ E∂ E, where
  α
∂ F = ∂F/∂xα , ξ is totally antisymmetric, and ζ is symmetric between the pairs (α, µ) and
(β, ν) but antisymmetric within each of these pairs. The key idea here is to exchange the prob-
lem of enforcing degeneracy conditions L∇E = M ∇S = 0 in matrix fields L, M with the
problem of enforcing symmetry conditions in tensor fields ξ, ζ, which is comparatively easier
but comes at the expense of underdetermining the problem. In GNODE, enforcement of these
                                                                     ⊗3
symmetries is handled by a generic learnable 3-tensor ξ̃ ∈ (Rn ) along with learnable matrices
                        s
D ∈ Sym     r (R) and Λ ∈ Skewn (R) for 1 ≤ s ≤ r ≤ n, leading to the final parameterizations
ξαβγ = 3! ξαβγ − ξ˜αγβ + ξ˜βγα − ξ˜βαγ + ξ˜γαβ − ξ˜γβα and ζαµ,βν = s,t Λsαµ Dst Λtβν . Along
           1 ˜
                                                                              P

with learnable energy and entropy functions E, S parameterized by multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs),
the data L, M learned by GNODE guarantees metriplectic structure in the surrogate model and leads
to successful learning of metriplectic systems in some
                                                       simple  cases of interest. However, note that this
is a highly redundant parameterization requiring n3 + r n2 + r+1    2    + 2 learnable scalar functions,
                     3      2
which exhibits   O(n   +  rn  ) scaling in the problem size because   of  the necessity to compute and
store n3 entries of ξ and r n2 entries of Λ. Additionally, the assumption of state-independence in

the bracket generating tensors ξ, ζ is somewhat restrictive, limiting the class of problems to which
GNODE can be applied.
A related approach to learning metriplectic dynamics with hard constraints was seen in Zhang
et al. (2022), which proposed a series of GFINN architectures depending on how much of the
information L, M , E, S is assumed to be known. In the case that L, M are known, the GFINN
energy and entropy are parameterized with scalar-valued functions f ◦ PkerA where f : Rn → R


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(E or S) is learnable and PkerA : Rn → Rn is orthogonal projection onto the kernel of the
(known) operator A (L or M ). It follows that the gradient ∇(f ◦ PkerA ) = PkerA ∇f (PkerA )
lies in the kernel of A, so that the degeneracy conditions are guaranteed at the expense of con-
straining the model class of potential energies/entropies. Alternatively, in the case that all of
L, M , E, S are unknown, GFINNs use learnable scalar functions f for E, S parameterized
                                                                                      ⊺     by MLPs
as well as two matrix fields QE , QS ∈ Rr×n with rows given by qsf = Ssf ∇f for learnable
skew-symmetric matrices Ssf , 1 ≤ s ≤ r, f = E, S. Along with two triangular (r × r) ma-
trix fields TL , TM , this yields the parameterizations L(x) = QS (x)⊺ (TL (x)⊺ − TL (x))QS (x)
and M (x) = QE (x)⊺ (TM (x)⊺ TM (x))QE (x), which necessarily satisfy the symmetries and
degeneracy conditions required for metriplectic structure. GFINNs are shown to both increase ex-
pressivity over the GNODE method as well as decrease redundancy, since the need for an explicit
order-3 tensor field is removed and the reversible and irreversible brackets are allowed to depend
explicitly on the state x. However,
                                      GFINNs still exhibit cubic scaling through the requirement of
rn(n − 1) + r2 + 2 = O rn2 learnable functions, which is well above the theoretical minimum
required to express a general metriplectic system and leads to difficulties in training the resulting
models.

Model reduction. Finally, it is worth mentioning the closely related line of work involving model
reduction for metriplectic systems, which began with Öttinger (2015). As remarked there, preserving
metriplecticity in reduced-order models (ROMs) exhibits many challenges due to its delicate require-
ments on the kernels of the involved operators. There are also hard and soft constrained approaches:
the already mentioned Hernández et al. (2021a) aims to learn a close-to-metriplectic data-driven
ROM by enforcing degeneracies by penalty, while Gruber et al. (2023a) directly enforces metriplectic
structure in projection-based ROMs using exterior algebraic factorizations. The parameterizations of
metriplectic data presented here are related to those presented in Gruber et al. (2023a), although NMS
does not require access to nonzero components of the gradients ∇E, ∇S. It is also worth mentioning
the influential monograph Dorst et al. (2007) which contains many examples of exterior algebraic
methods for computer scientific applications.

3     F ORMULATION AND A NALYSIS
The proposed formulation of the metriplectic bracket-generating operators L, M used by NMS is
based on the idea of exploiting structure in the tensor fields ξ, ζ to reduce the necessary number
of degrees of freedom. In particular, it will be shown that the degeneracy conditions L∇S =
M ∇E = 0 imply more than just symmetry constraints on these fields, and that taking these additional
constraints into account allows for a more compact representation of metriplectic data. Following
this, results are presented which show that the proposed formulation is universally approximating on
nondegenerate systems (c.f. Definition 3.1) and admits a generalization error bound in time.

3.1   E XTERIOR ALGEBRA

Developing these metriplectic expressions will require some basic facts from exterior algebra, of
which more
        V details can be found in, e.g., Tu (2017, Chapter 19). The basic objects in the exterior
algebra V over the vector space V are multivectors, which are formal linear combinations of totally
antisymmetric tensors on V . More precisely, if I(V ) denotes the two-sided ideal of the free tensor
algebra T (V ) generated
                V          by elements of the form v ⊗ v (v ∈ V ), then the exterior algebra is the
quotient space V ≃ T (V )/I(V ) equipped with the antisymmetric wedge       V product V operation ∧.
This graded algebra is equipped with natural projection operators P k : VV→ k V which map
between the full exterior algebra and the k th exterior power of V , denoted k V , whose elements
are homogeneousVk-vectors. More generally, given an n-manifold M with tangent bundle T M , the
exterior
V        algebra (T M ) is the algebra of multivector fields whose fiber over x ∈ M is given by
  Tx M .
For the present purposes, it will be useful to develop a correspondence between bivectors B ∈ 2 (Rn )
                                                                                                V
and skew-symmetric matrices B ∈ Skewn (R), which follows directly from Riesz representation in
terms of the usual Euclidean dot product. V More precisely, supposing that e1P, ..., en are the standard
basis vectors for Rn , any bivector B ∈ 2 T Rn can be represented as B = i<j B ij ei ∧ ej where
B ij ∈ R denote the components of B. Define a grade-lowering action of bivectors on vectors through


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


right contraction (see e.g. Section 3.4 of Dorst et al. (2007)), expressed for any vector v and basis
bivector ei ∧ ej as (ei ∧ ej ) · v = (ej · v)ei − (ei · v)ej . It follows that the action of B is equivalent
to
           X                                     X                  X                X
   B·v =       B ij ((ej · v)ei − (ei · v)ej ) =      B ij vj ei −      B ji vj ei =     B ij vj ei = Bv,
              i<j                                 i<j              j<i              i,j
          ⊺               n×n
where B = −B ∈ R               is a skew-symmetric matrix representing B, and we have re-indexed
under the second sum and applied that B ij = −B ji for all i, j. Since the kernel of this action is
the zero
      V bivector, it is straightforward to check that this string of equalities defines an isomorphism
M : 2 Rn → Skewn (R) from the 2nd exterior power of Rn to the space of skew-symmetric
(n × n)-matrices over R: in what follows, we will write B ≃ B rather than B = M(B) for notational
convenience. Note that a correspondence in the more general case of bivector/matrix fields follows in
the usual way via the fiber-wise extension of M.

3.2   L EARNABLE METRIPLECTIC OPERATORS

It is now possible to explain the proposed NMS formulation. First, note the following key definition
which prevents the consideration of unphysical examples.
Definition 3.1. A metriplectic system on K ⊂ Rn generated by the data L, M , E, S will be called
nondegenerate provided ∇E, ∇S ̸= 0 for all x ∈ K.

With this, the NMS parameterizations for metriplectic operators are predicated on an algebraic result
proven in Appendix A.
Lemma 3.2. Let K ⊂ Rn . For all x ∈ K, the operator L : K → Rn×n satisfies L⊺ = −L
and L∇SV= 0 for some S : K → R, ∇S ̸= 0, provided there exists a non-unique bivector field
A : U → 2 Rn and equivalent matrix field A ≃ A such that
                                         !
                                   ∇S                      1
                      L≃ A∧            2   · ∇S = A −         2 A∇S ∧ ∇S.
                                  |∇S|                   |∇S|
Similarly, for all x ∈ K a positive semi-definite operator M : K → Rn×n satisfies M ⊺ = M
and M ∇E = 0 for some E : K → R, ∇E ̸= 0, provided there exists a non-unique matrix-valued
B : K → Rn×r and symmetric matrix-valued D : K → Rr×r such that r ≤ n and
                                               !                           !
                        X
                                   s    ∇E                   t       ∇E
                   M=        Dst b ∧         2   · ∇E ⊗ b ∧              2   · ∇E
                         s,t           |∇E|                         |∇E|
                                                    !                        !⊺
                                         s                      t
                        X              b   · ∇E               b   ·  ∇E
                      =      Dst bs −          2 ∇E     bt −          2 ∇E       ,
                         s,t            |∇E|                   |∇E|

                                                                                  ∇f ⊺
where bs denotes the sth column of B. Moreover, using Pf⊥ = I − ∇f             |∇f |2    to denote the
                                          ⊥
orthogonal projector onto Span(∇f ) , these parameterizations of L, M are equivalent to the
matricized expressions L = PS⊥ APS⊥ and M = PE⊥ BDB ⊺ PE⊥ .
Remark 3.3. Observe that the projections appearing in these expressions are the minimum necessary
for guaranteeing the symmetries and degeneracy conditions necessary for a general metriplectic
structure. In particular, conjugation by Pf⊥ respects symmetry and ensures that both the input and
output to the conjugated matrix field lie in Span(∇f )⊥ . Note that this implies that the class of
nondegenerate metriplectic systems cannot be parameterized in a way that scales sub-quadratically in
the state dimension n.
Lemma 3.2 demonstrates specific parameterizations for L, M that hold for any nondegenerate
metriplectic data and are core to the NMS method for learning metriplectic dynamics. While
generally underdetermined, these expressions are in a sense maximally specific given no additional
information, since there is nothing available in the general metriplectic formalism to determine the
matrix fields A, BDB ⊺ on Span(∇S), Span(∇E), respectively. The following Theorem, also
proven in Appendix A, provides a rigorous correspondence between metriplectic systems and these
particular parameterizations.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3.4. The data L, M , E, S form a nondegenerate metriplectic system in the state variable
x ∈ K if and only if there exist a skew-symmetric A : K → Skewn (R), symmetric postive
semidefinite D : K → Symr (R), and generic B : K → Rn×r such that
                    ẋ = L∇E + M ∇S = PS⊥ APS⊥ ∇E + PE⊥ BDB ⊺ PE⊥ ∇S.
Remark 3.5. As mentioned, the proposed parameterizations for L, M are not one-to-one but properly
contain the set of valid nondegenerate metriplectic systems in E, S. This is due to both the orthogonal
projections employed, which induce non-uniqueness in the L, M matrix fields, as well as the lack of
a guaranteed Jacobi identity for L. Recall that the Jacobi identity is necessary for the matrix field
L to generate a true Poisson manifold structure, and hence for ẋ to be the velocityP    field of a truly
metriplectic system. For 1 ≤ i, j, k ≤ n, the Jacobi identity is given in components as ℓ Liℓ ∂ ℓ Ljk +
Ljℓ ∂ ℓ Lki +Lkℓ ∂ ℓ Lij = 0. However, this requirement is not often enforced in algorithms for learning
general metriplectic (or even symplectic) systems, since it is considered subordinate to energy
conservation and it is well known that both qualities cannot hold simultaneously in general Zhong
and Marsden (1988). Future work will compare the alternative choice of parameterizations which
enforce the Jacobi identity explicitly, maintaining Poisson structure while sacrificing strong-form
energy conservation.

3.3   S PECIFIC PARAMETERIZATIONS

Now that Theorem 3.4 has provided a model class which is rich enough to express any desired
metriplectic system, it remains to discuss what NMS actually learns. First, note that it is unlikely to
be the case that E, S are known a priori, so it is beneficial to allow these functions to be learnable
alongside the governing operators L, M . For simplicity, energy and entropy E, S are parameterized
as scalar-valued MLPs with tanh activation, although any desired architecture could be chosen for
this task. The skew-symmetric matrix field A = Atri − A⊺tri used to build L is parameterized
through its strictly lower-triangular part Atri using a vector-valued MLP with output dimension n2 ,

which guarantees that the mapping Atri 7→ A above is bijective. Similarly, the symmetric matrix
                      ⊺
field D = Kchol Kchol     is parameterized through its lower-triangular  Cholesky factor Kchol , which
is a vector-valued MLP with output dimension r+1

                                                     2    . While this choice does not yield a bijective
mapping Kchol 7→ D unless, e.g., D is assumed to be positive definite with diagonal entries of fixed
sign, this does not hinder the method in practice. In fact, D should not be positive definite in general,
as this is equivalent to claiming that M is positive definite on vectors tangent to the level sets of E.
Finally, the generic matrix field B is parameterized as a vector-valued MLP with output dimension
nr. Remarkably, the exterior algebraic expressions in Lemma 3.2 require less redundant operations
than the corresponding matricized expressions in Theorem 3.4, and therefore the expressions from
Lemma 3.2 are used when implementing NMS. This can be seen from the proof of Lemma 3.2 in
Appendix A, where matricization of these expressions requires computing a term which is identically
zero due to symmetry considerations. Figure 1 summarizes the proposed NMS architecture.
Remark 3.6. With these choices,     the NMS parameterization of metriplectic    systems
                                                                                       requires  only
(1/2) (n + r)2 − (n − r) + 2 learnable scalar functions, in contrast to n3 + r n2 + r+1

                                                                                             2   + 2 for
the GNODE approach in Lee et al. (2021) and rn(n − 1) + r2 + 2 for the GFINN approach in Zhang
et al. (2022). In particular, NMS is quadratic in both n, r with no decrease in model expressivity, in
contrast to the cubic scaling of previous methods.
                                                                       Input/Output   Learnable   Calculated


Table 1: Properties of the metriplectic
architectures compared.                                                                                        Integrate


  Name Physics Bias Restrictive     Scale
  NODE      None        No         Linear
  SPNN      Soft        No        Quadratic
 GNODE      Hard        Yes        Cubic
 GFINN      Hard        No         Cubic
  NMS       Hard        No        Quadratic


                                              Figure 1: A visual depiction of the NMS architecture.

                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4   A PPROXIMATION AND ERROR

Besides offering a compact parameterization of metriplectic dynamics, the expressions used in NMS
also exhibit desirable approximation properties which guarantee a reasonable bound on state error
over time. To state this precisely, first note the following universal approximation result proven in
Appendix A.
Proposition 3.7. Let K ⊂ Rn be compact and E, S : K → R be continuous such that L∇S =
M ∇E = 0 and ∇E, ∇S ̸= 0 for all x ∈ K. For any ε > 0, there exist two-layer neural network
functions Ẽ, S̃ : K → R, L̃ : K → Skewn (R) and M̃ : K → Symn (R) such that ∇Ẽ, ∇S̃ ̸= 0 on
K, M̃ is positive semi-definite, L̃∇S̃ = M̃ ∇Ẽ = 0 for all x ∈ K, and each approximate function
is ε-close to its given counterpart on K. Moreover, if L, M have k ≥ 0 continuous derivatives on K
then so do L̃, M̃ .
Remark 3.8. The assumption x ∈ K of the state remaining in a compact set V is not restrictive when
at least one of E, −S : Rn → R, say E, has bounded sublevel sets. In this case, letting x0 = x(0) it
                                              Rt
follows from Ė ≤ 0 that E(x(t)) = E(x0 ) + 0 Ė(x(τ )) dτ ≤ E(x0 ), so that the entire trajectory
x(t) lies in the (closed and bounded) compact set K = {x | E(x) ≤ E(x0 )} ⊂ Rn .
Leaning on Proposition 3.7 and classical universal approximation results in Li (1996), it is further
possible to establish the following error estimate also proven in Appendix A which gives an idea of
the error accumulation rate that can be expected from this method.
Theorem 3.9. Suppose L, M , E, S are nondegenerate metriplectic data such that L, M have at
least one continuous derivative, E, S have Lipschitz continuous gradients, and at least one of E, −S
have bounded sublevel sets. For any ε > 0, there exist nondegenerate metriplectic data L̃, M̃ , Ẽ, S̃
defined by two-layer neural networks such that, for all T > 0,
                        Z T             ! 12
                                     2           b p 2aT
                             |x − x̃| dt     ≤ε        e    − 2eaT + T + 1,
                          0                      a

where a, b ∈ R are constants depending on both sets of metriplectic data and x̃˙ = L̃(x̃)∇Ẽ(x̃) +
M̃ (x̃)∇S̃(x̃).
Remark 3.10. Theorem 3.9 provides a bound on state error over time under the assumption that the
approximation error in the metriplectic networks can be controlled. On the other hand, notice that
Theorem 3.9 can also be understood as a generic error bound on any trained metriplectic networks
L̃, M̃ , Ẽ, S̃ provided universal approximation results are not invoked in the estimation leading to εb.
This result confirms that the error in the state x for a fixed final time T tends to zero with the
approximation error in the networks L̃, M̃ , Ẽ, S̃, as one would hope based on the approximation
capabilities of neural networks. More importantly, Theorem 3.9 also bounds the generalization error
of any trained metriplectic network for an appropriate (and possibly large) ε equal to the maximum
approximation error on K, where the learned metriplectic trajectories are confined for all time.
With this theoretical guidance, the remaining goal of this work is to demonstrate that NMS is also
practically effective at learning metriplectic systems from data and exhibits reasonable generalization
to unseen timescales.

4     A LGORITHM
Similar to previous approaches in Lee et al. (2021) and Zhang et al. (2022), the learnable parameters
in NMS are calibrated using data along solution trajectories to a given dynamical system. This brings
up an important question regarding how much information about the system in question is realistically
present in the training data. While many systems have a known metriplectic form, it is not always the
case that one will know metriplectic governing equations for a given set of training data. Therefore,
two approaches are considered in the experiments below corresponding to whether full or partial
state information is assumed available during NMS training. More precisely, the state x = (xo , xu )
will be partitioned into “observable” and “unobservable” variables, where xu may be empty in the
case that full state information is available. In a partially observable system xo typically contains
positions and momenta while xu contains entropy or other configuration variables which are more


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Training neural metriplectic systems
 1: Input: snapshot data X ∈ Rn×ns , each column xs = x(ts , µs ), target rank r ≥ 1, batch size
    nb ≥ 1.
 2: Initialize networks Atri , B, Kchol , E, S, and loss L = 0
 3: for step in Nsteps do
 4:    Randomly draw batch P = {(tsk , xsk )}nk=1     b

 5:    for (t, x) in P do
 6:       Evaluate Atri (x), B(x), Kchol (x), E(x), S(x)
 7:       Automatically differentiate E, S to obtain ∇E(x), ∇S(x)
                                                  ⊺                        ⊺
 8:       Form A(x) = Atri (x) − Atri (x) and D(x) = Kchol (x)Kchol (x)
 9:       Build L(x), M (x) according to Lemma 3.2
10:       Evaluate ẋ = L(x)∇E(x) + M (x)∇S(x)
11:       Randomly draw n1 , ..., nl and form tj = t + nj ∆t for all j
12:       x̃1 , ..., x̃l =
                         PODEsolve(ẋ, t1 , ..., tl )
13:       L += l−1 j Loss(xj , x̃j )
14:    end for
15:    Rescale L = |P |−1 L
16:    Update Atri , B, Kchol , E, S through gradient descent on L.
17: end for



difficult to observe during physical experiments. In both cases, NMS will learn a metriplectic system
in x according to the procedure described in Algorithm 1.
Note that the batch-wise training strategy in Algorithm 1 requires initial conditions for xu in the
partially observed case. There are several options for this, and two specific strategies will be
considered here. Suppose the data are drawn from the training interval [0, T ] with initial state x0 and
final state xT . The first strategy sets xu0 = 0, xuT = 1 (where 1 is the all ones vector), and xus = 1/s,
0 < s < T , so that the unobserved states are initially assumed to lie on a straight line. In the
absence of other information, this ensures that the entropy will be satisfy the monotonicity constraint
necessary for metriplectic structure. The second strategy is more sophisticated, and involves training
a diffusion model to predict the distribution of xu given xo . Specific details of this procedure are
given in Appendix H. Note that other strategies are also possible, such as allowing the unobserved
initial states to be trainable as in Chen et al. (2020).


5     E XAMPLES

The goal of the following experiments is to show that NMS is effective even when entropic information
cannot be observed during training, yielding superior performance when compared to previous
methods including GNODE, GFINN, and SPNN discussed in Section 2. The metrics considered
for this purpose will be mean absolute error (MAE) and mean squared error (MSE) defined in the
usual way as the average ℓ1 (resp. squared ℓ2 ) error between the discrete states x, x̃ ∈ Rn×ns . For
brevity, many implementation details have been omitted here and can be found in Appendix B. An
additional experiment showing the effectiveness of NMS in the presence of both full and partial state
information can be found in Appendix D.
Remark 5.1. To facilitate a more equal parameter count between the compared metriplectic meth-
ods, the results of the experiments below were generated using the alternative parameterization
                                         ′
D = KK ⊺ where K : K → Rr×r is full and r′ ≥ r. Of course, this change does not affect
metriplecticity since D is still positive semi-definite for each x ∈ K.


5.1   T WO GAS CONTAINERS

The first test of NMS involves two ideal gas containers separated by movable wall which is removed
at time t0 , allowing for the exchange of heat and volume. In this example, the motion of the state


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         ⊺
x = (q     p   S1  S2 ) is governed by the metriplectic equations:

             p                                            2 E1 (x)       E2 (x)
         q̇ = ,                                      ṗ =             −          ,
             m                                            3      q       2L − q
             9N 2 kB
                   2
                                                              9N 2 kB
                                                                    2

                     α      1        1                                α      1     1
       Ṡ1 =                    −          ,         Ṡ2 = −                     −     ,
              4E1 (x) E1 (x) E2 (x)                            4E1 (x) E1 (x) E2 (x)

where (q, p) are the position and momentum of the separating wall, S1 , S2 are the entropies of the
two subsystems, and the internal  energies E1 , E2 are determined from the Sackur-Tetrode equation
                                      3/2
for ideal gases, Si /N kB = ln ĉVi Ei     , 1 ≤ i ≤ 2. Here, m denotes the mass of the wall, 2L
is the total length of the system, and Vi is the volume of the ith container. As in Lee et al. (2021;
2022) N kB = 1 and α = 0.5 fix the characteristic macroscopic unit of entropy while ĉ = 102.25
ensures the argument of the logarithm defining Ei is dimensionless. This leads to the total entropy
S(x) = S1 + S2 and the total energy E(x) = (1/2m)p2 + E1 (x) + E2 (x), which are guaranteed
to be nondecreasing and constant, respectively.
The primary goal here is to verify that NMS can accurately and stably predict gas container dynamics
without the need to observe the entropic variables S1 , S2 . To that end, NMS has been compared to
GNODE, SPNN, and GFINN on the task of predicting the trajectories of this metriplectic system
over time, with results displayed in Table 2. More precisely, given an intial condition x0 and an
interval 0 < ttrain < tvalid < ttest , each method is trained on partial state information (in the case of
NMS) or full state information (in the case of the others) from the interval [0, ttrain ] and validated on
(ttrain , tvalid ] before state errors in q, p only are calculated on the whole interval [0, ttest ]. As can be
seen from Table 2 and Figure 2, NMS is remarkably accurate over unseen timescales even in this
unfair comparison, avoiding the unphysical behavior which often hinders soft-constrained methods
like SPNN. The energy and instantaneous entropy plots in Figure 2 further confirm that the strong
enforcement of metriplectic structure guaranteed by NMS leads to correct energetic and entropic
dynamics for all time.


                                               2
                                           p
                       (a) Hamiltonian H = 2m                                        (b) Position q


                                                               P
         (c) Momentum p                 (d) Energy E = H +         i Ei       (e) Instantaneous Entropy Ṡ


Figure 2: The ground-truth and predicted position, momentum, instantaneous entropy, and energies
for the two gas containers example in the training (white), validation (yellow), and testing (red)
regimes.


5.2    T HERMOELASTIC DOUBLE PENDULUM

Next, consider the thermoelastic double pendulum from Romero (2009) with 10-dimensional state
                                          ⊺
variable x = (q1 q2 p1 p2 S1 S2 ) , which represents a highly challenging benchmark for


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Prediction errors for xo measured in MSE and MAE on the interval [0, ttest ] in the two gas
containers example (left) and on the test set in the thermoelastic double pendulum example (right).
        NODE        SPNN       GNODE       GFINN        NMS                    NODE        SPNN       GNODE       GFINN        NMS
 MSE   .12 ± .04   .13 ± .10   .16 ± .10   .07 ± .03   .01 ± .02        MSE   .41 ± .01   .42 ± .01   .42 ± .01   .40 ± .03   .38 ± .03
 MAE   .25 ± .10   .26 ± .14   .25 ± .13   .13 ±.03    .08 ± .06        MAE   .48 ± .04   .47 ± .03   .46 ± .04   .43 ± .07   .42 ± .07



metriplectic methods. The equations of motion in this case are given for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2 as
          pi
             , ṗi = −∂qi (E1 (x) + E2 (x)), Ṡ1 = κ T1−1 T2 − 1 , Ṡ2 = κ T1 T2−1 − 1 ,

   q̇i =
         mi
where κ > 0 is a thermal conductivity constant (set to 1), mi is the mass of the ith spring (also set to
1) and Ti = ∂Si Ei is its absolute temperature. In this case, qi , pi ∈ R2 represent the position and
momentum of the ith mass, while Si represents the entropy of the ith pendulum. As before, the total
entropy S(x) = S1 + S2 is the sum of the entropies of the two springs, while defining the internal
                                2
energies Ei (x) = (1/2)(ln λi ) + ln λi + eSi −ln λi − 1, λ1 = |qi |, λ2 = |q2 − q1 |, leads to the total
                              2                2
energy E(x) = (1/2m1 )|p1 | + (1/2m2 )|p2 | + E1 (x) + E2 (x).
The task in this case is prediction across initial conditions. As in Zhang et al. (2022), 100 trajectories
are drawn from the ranges in Appendix B and integrated over the interval [0, 40] with ∆t = 0.1, with
an 80/10/10 split for training/validation/testing. Here all compared models are trained using full state
information. As seen in Table 2, NMS is again the most performant, although all models struggle to
approximate the dynamics over the entire training interval. It is also notable that the training time of
NMS is greatly decreased relative to GNODE and GFINN due to its improved quadratic scaling; a
representative study to this effect is given in Appendix G.

6    C ONCLUSION
Neural metriplectic systems (NMS) have been considered for learning finite-dimensional metriplectic
dynamics from data. Making use of novel non-redundant parameterizations for metriplectic operators,
NMS provably approximates arbitrary nondegenerate metriplectic systems with generalization error
bounded in terms of the operator approximation quality. Benchmark examples have shown that
NMS is both more scalable and more accurate than previous methods, including when only partial
state information is observed. Future work will consider extensions of NMS to infinite-dimensional
metriplectic systems with the aim of addressing its main limitation: the difficulty of scaling NMS
(among all present methods for metriplectic learning) to realistic, 3-D problems of the size that would
be considered in practice. A promising direction is to consider the use of NMS in model reduction,
where sparse, large-scale systems are converted to small, dense systems through a clever choice of
encoding/decoding.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technol-
ogy & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International
Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract
DE-NA0003525. This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views
or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Department of Energy or the United States Government. This article has been co-authored by an
employee of National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC under Contract No.
DE-NA0003525 with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The employee owns all right, title and
interest in and to the article and is solely responsible for its contents. The United States Government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce
the published form of this article or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes.
The DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance
with the DOE Public Access Plan https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan. The
work of A. Gruber and N. Trask is supported by the John von Neumann fellowship at Sandia, the U.S.


                                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Department of Energy, Office of Advanced Computing Research under the “Scalable and Efficient
Algorithms - Causal Reasoning, Operators, Graphs and Spikes" (SEA-CROGS) project, and the
DoE Early Career Research Program. K. Lee acknowledges support from the U.S. National Science
Foundation under grant IIS 2338909. N. Park and H. Lim acknowledge support from the Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIT) (No. G04240001, Physics-inspired Deep Learning), as well as the Institute for Information &
Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grants funded by the Korea government
(MSIT) (No. 2020-0-01361, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Yonsei University)).
The authors thank Jonas Actor for careful proofreading and suggestions regarding the presentation of
Appendix A.

R EFERENCES
Z. Chen, J. Zhang, M. Arjovsky, and L. Bottou. Symplectic recurrent neural networks. In International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
   BkgYPREtPr.
J. R. Dormand and P. J. Prince. A family of embedded runge-kutta formulae. Journal of computational and
   applied mathematics, 6(1):19–26, 1980.
L. Dorst, D. Fontijne, and S. Mann. Geometric Algebra for Computer Science: An Object-oriented Approach to
   Geometry. Morgan Kaufmann, Amsterdam, 2007.
D. González, F. Chinesta, and E. Cueto. Thermodynamically consistent data-driven computational mechanics.
  Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics, 31(1):239–253, 2019.
M. Grmela and H. C. Öttinger. Dynamics and thermodynamics of complex fluids. i. development of a general
  formalism. Phys. Rev. E, 56:6620–6632, Dec 1997. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.56.6620. URL https:
  //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.56.6620.
A. Gruber, M. Gunzburger, L. Ju, and Z. Wang. Energetically consistent model reduction for metriplectic systems.
   Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 404:115709, 2023a. ISSN 0045-7825. doi:
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.115709. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
   article/pii/S0045782522006648.
A. Gruber, K. Lee, and N. Trask. Reversible and irreversible bracket-based dynamics for deep graph neural
  networks. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Q. Hernández, A. Badías, D. González, F. Chinesta, and E. Cueto. Deep learning of thermodynamics-aware
  reduced-order models from data. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 379:113763,
  2021a.
Q. Hernández, A. Badías, D. González, F. Chinesta, and E. Cueto. Structure-preserving neural networks. Journal
   of Computational Physics, 426:109950, 2021b.
D. D. Holm, V. Putkaradze, and C. Tronci. Kinetic models of oriented self-assembly. Journal of Physics A:
  Mathematical and Theoretical, 41(34):344010, aug 2008. doi: 10.1088/1751-8113/41/34/344010. URL
  https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1751-8113/41/34/344010.
A. N. Kaufman. Dissipative hamiltonian systems: A unifying principle. Physics Letters A, 100(8):419–
  422, 1984. ISSN 0375-9601. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(84)90634-0. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375960184906340.
A. N. Kaufman and P. J. Morrison. Algebraic structure of the plasma quasilinear equations. Physics Letters
  A, 88(8):405–406, 1982. ISSN 0375-9601. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(82)90664-8. URL
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375960182906648.
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
K. Lee, N. Trask, and P. Stinis. Machine learning structure preserving brackets for forecasting irreversible
  processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5696–5707, 2021.
K. Lee, N. Trask, and P. Stinis. Structure-preserving sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics for data-driven
   modeling. In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning, pages 65–80. PMLR, 2022.
X. Li. Simultaneous approximations of multivariate functions and their derivatives by neural networks with one
   hidden layer. Neurocomputing, 12(4):327–343, 1996.


                                                      11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H. Lim, M. Kim, S. Park, and N. Park.          Regular time-series generation using sgm.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.08518, 2023.

E. Materassi, M.; Tassi. Metriplectic framework for dissipative magneto-hydrodynamics. Physica D: Nonlinear
   Phenomena, 2012.

P. Morrison. Thoughts on brackets and dissipation: old and new. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
   volume 169, page 012006. IOP Publishing, 2009.

P. J. Morrison. Some observations regarding brackets and dissipation. Technical Report PAM-228, Center for
   Pure and Applied Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, 1984.

P. J. Morrison. A paradigm for joined hamiltonian and dissipative systems. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,
   18(1):410–419, 1986. ISSN 0167-2789. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(86)90209-5. URL https:
   //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0167278986902095.

H. C. Öttinger. Irreversible dynamics, onsager-casimir symmetry, and an application to turbulence. Phys. Rev. E,
   90:042121, Oct 2014.

H. C. Öttinger. Preservation of thermodynamic structure in model reduction. Phys. Rev. E, 91:032147, Mar
  2015.

I. Romero. Thermodynamically consistent time-stepping algorithms for non-linear thermomechanical systems.
   International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 79(6):706–732, 2023/05/14 2009.

D. Ruiz, D. Portillo, and I. Romero. A data-driven method for dissipative thermomechanics. IFAC-PapersOnLine,
   54(19):315–320, 2021.

X. Shang and H. C. Öttinger. Structure-preserving integrators for dissipative systems based on reversible–
  irreversible splitting. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 476(2234):20190446, 2020.

Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative modeling
   through stochastic differential equations. CoRR, abs/2011.13456, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
   abs/2011.13456.

S. Särkkä and A. Solin, editors. Applied stochastic differential equations, volume 10. Cambridge University
   Press, 2019.

L. W. Tu. Differential Geometry: Connections, Curvature, and Characteristic Classes. Springer International
   Publishing, 2017.

P. Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Computation, 23(7):
   1661–1674, 2011.

B. Xu, Y. Chen, T. Matsubara, and T. Yaguchi. Learning generic systems using neural symplectic forms. In
   International Symposium on Nonlinear Theory and Its Applications, number A2L-D-03 in IEICE Proceeding
   Series, pages 29–32. The Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communication Engineers (IEICE), 2022.

B. Xu, Y. Chen, T. Matsubara, and T. Yaguchi. Equivalence class learning for GENERIC systems. In ICML
  Workshop on New Frontiers in Learning, Control, and Dynamical Systems, 2023.

Z. Zhang, Y. Shin, and G. Em Karniadakis. Gfinns: Generic formalism informed neural networks for deterministic
   and stochastic dynamical systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical
   and Engineering Sciences, 380(2229):20210207, 2022.

G. Zhong and J. E. Marsden. Lie-poisson hamilton-jacobi theory and lie-poisson integrators. Physics Letters A,
  133(3):134–139, 1988.



A     P ROOF OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

This Appendix provides proof of the analytical results in Section 3 of the body. First, the parameteri-
zations of L, M in terms of exterior algebra are established.


                                                      12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof of Lemma 3.2. First, it is necessary to check that the operators L, M parameterized this way
satisfy the symmetries and degeneracy conditions claimed in the statement. To that end, recall that
                                                ⊺
a ∧ b ≃ ab⊺ − ba⊺ , meaning that (ab⊺ − ba⊺ ) ≃ b ∧ a = −a ∧ b. It follows that A⊺ ≃ Ã = −A
where Ã denotes the reversion of A, i.e., Ã = i<j Aij ej ∧ ei . Therefore, we may write
                                               P

                                1        :                                  1
                  L⊺ ≃ Ã −          2 A∇S ∧ ∇S = −A +                              2 A∇S ∧ ∇S ≃ −L,
                              |∇S|                                      |∇S|
showing that L⊺ = −L. Moreover, using that
                           (b ∧ c) · a = −a · (b ∧ c) = (a · c)b − (a · b)c,
it follows that
                                           1
                  L∇S = A · ∇S −               2 (A∇S ∧ ∇S) · ∇S = A∇S − A∇S = 0,
                                         |∇S|
since ∇S · A∇S = −∇S · A∇S = 0. Moving to the case of M , notice that M = Dst v s ⊗ v t for
a particular choice of v, meaning that
            X                 ⊺ X                      X                 X
    M⊺ =        Dst v s ⊗ v t =        Dst v t ⊗ v s =   Dts v s ⊗ v t =   Dst v s ⊗ v t = M ,
            s,t                          s,t                      t,s                            s,t

since D is a symmetric matrix. Additionally, it is straightforward to check that, for any 1 ≤ s ≤ r,
                                                !
                                   s
                                 b   · ∇E
               v s · ∇E = bs −          2 ∇E       · ∇E = bs · ∇E − bs · ∇E = 0.
                                  |∇E|
So, it follows immediately that
                            X                        X
                                Dst v s ⊗ v t · ∇E =   Dst v t · ∇E v s = 0.

                 M ∇E =
                               s,t                                  s,t

Now, observe that
                                     1                     ⊺                            ⊺
                     L=A−                2 (A∇S(∇S)             − ∇S(A∇S) )
                                |∇S|
                                  1                        ⊺                        ⊺
                       =A−               2 (A∇S(∇S             ) + ∇S(∇S) A)
                                |∇S|
                                                       !                                !
                                                   ⊺                                ⊺
                                     ∇S(∇S)                      ∇S(∇S)
                       =    I−                 2       A I−                     2           = PS⊥ APS⊥ ,
                                      |∇S|                         |∇S|
since A⊺ = −A and hence v ⊺ Av = 0 for all v ∈ Rn . Similarly, it follows that for every 1 ≤ s ≤ r,
                                                               bs · ∇E
                                         PE⊥ bs = bs −                  2   ∇E,
                                                                |∇E|
and therefore M is expressible as
                           X                      ⊺
                                Dst PE⊥ bs PE⊥ bt = PE⊥ BDB ⊺ PE⊥ .

                     M=
                               s,t


With Lemma 3.2 established, the proof of Theorem 3.4 is straightforward.

Proof of Theorem 3.4. The “if” direction follows immediately from Lemma 3.2. Now, suppose that
L and M define a metriplectic system, meaning that the mentioned symmetries and degeneracy
conditions hold. Then, it follows from L∇S = 0 that the projection PS⊥ LPS⊥ = L leaves L
invariant, so that choosing A = L yields PS⊥ APS⊥ = L. Similarly, from positive semi-definiteness
and M ∇E = 0 it follows that M = U ΛU ⊺ = PE⊥ U ΛU ⊺ PE⊥ for some column-orthonormal
U ∈ RN ×r and positive diagonal Λ ∈ Rr×r . Therefore, choosing B = U and D = Λ yields
M = PE⊥ BDB ⊺ P ⊥ , as desired.


                                                           13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Looking toward the proof of Proposition 3.7, we also need to establish the following Lemmata which
give control over the orthogonal projectors PẼ⊥ , PS̃⊥ . First, we recall how control over the L∞ norm
|·|∞ of a matrix field gives control over its spectral norm |·|.
Lemma A.1. Let A : K → Rn×n be a matrix field defined on the compact set K ⊂ Rn with m
continuous derivatives. Then, for any ε > 0 there exists a two-layer neural network Ã : K → Rn×n
such that supx∈K A − Ã < ε and supx∈K ∇k A − ∇k Ã < ε for 1 ≤ k ≤ m where ∇k is the
                                                                  ∞
(total) derivative operator of order k.

Proof. This will be a direct consequence of Corollary 2.2 in Li (1996) provided we show that
|A| ≤ c|A|∞ for some c > 0. To that end, if σ1 ≥ ... ≥ σr > 0 (r ≤ n) denote the nonzero singular
values of A − Ã, it follows that for each x ∈ K,
                                                  s
                                 q                   X             2
                                      2
              A − Ã = σ1 ≤ σ1 + ... + σr =    2         Aij − Ãij = A − Ã .
                                                                                      F
                                                          i,j

On the other hand, it also follows that
              s                       sX                   r
                X                2
A − Ã =              Aij − Ãij ≤       max Aij − Ãij = n max Aij − Ãij = n A − Ã                     ,
         F                                     i,j                         i,j                        ∞
                  i,j                    i,j

and therefore the desired inequality holds with c = n. Now, for any ε > 0 it follows from Li (1996)
that there exists a two layer network Ã with m continuous derivatives such that supx∈K A − Ã <
                                                                                                  ∞
ε/n and supx∈K ∇k A − ∇k Ã           < ε/n < ε for all 1 ≤ k ≤ m. Therefore, it follows that
                                  ∞
                                                                          ε
                           sup A − Ã ≤ n sup A − Ã                 <n     = ε,
                           x∈K                  x∈K              ∞        n
completing the argument.

Next, we bound the deviation in the orthogonal projectors PẼ⊥ , PS̃⊥ .
Lemma A.2. Let f : Rn → R be such that ∇f ̸= 0 on the compact set K ⊂ Rn . For any ε > 0,
there exists a two-layer neural network f˜ : K → R such that ∇f˜ ̸= 0 on K, supx∈K f − f˜ <
ε, supx∈K ∇f − ∇f˜ < ε, and supx∈K Pf⊥ − Pf⊥
                                           ˜ < ε.


Proof. Denote ∇f = v and consider any ṽ : K → R. Since |v| ≤ |ṽ| + |v − ṽ|, it follows for all
x ∈ K that whenever |v − ṽ| < (1/2) inf x∈K |v|,
                                                                1
                            |ṽ| ≥ |v| − |v − ṽ| > |v| −          inf |v| > 0,
                                                                2 x∈K
so that ṽ ̸= 0 in K, and since the square function is monotonic,
                                                            2
                                  2               1               1     2
                          inf |ṽ| ≥ inf |v| − inf |v| = inf |v| .
                         x∈K          x∈K         2 x∈K           4 x∈K
On the other hand, we also have |ṽ| ≤ |v| + |ṽ − v| < |v| + (1/2) inf x∈K |v|, so that, adding and
subtracting ṽv ⊺ and applying Cauchy-Schwarz, it follows that for all x ∈ K,

 |vv ⊺ − ṽ ṽ ⊺ | ≤ |v − ṽ||v| + |ṽ||v − ṽ| ≤ 2 max{|v|, |ṽ|}|v − ṽ| < 2|v| + inf |v| |v − ṽ|.
                                                                                   x∈K

Now, by Corollary 2.2 in Li (1996), for any ε > 0 there exists a two-layer neural network f˜ : K → R
such that
                                   (                                               )
                                                                    2
                          ˜           1                  inf x∈K |v|          ε
            sup v − ∇f < min             inf |v|,                               , ε ≤ ε,
            x∈K                       2 x∈K       2 supx∈K |v| + inf x∈K |v| 4


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and also supx∈K f − f˜ < ε. Letting ṽ = ∇f˜, it follows that for all x ∈ K,

                            vv ⊺     ṽ ṽ ⊺         |vv ⊺ − ṽ ṽ ⊺ |    2|v| + inf x∈K |v|
          Pf⊥ − Pf⊥
                  ˜ =          2 −          2   ≤      n               o≤      n           o |v − ṽ|,
                            |v|      |ṽ|                   2       2              2     2
                                                    min |v| , |ṽ|        min |v| , |ṽ|
and therefore, taking the supremum of both sides and applying the previous work yields the desired
estimate,
                                     2 supx∈K |v| + inf x∈K |v|
                 sup Pf⊥ − Pf⊥ ˜ ≤4                      2       sup |v − ṽ| < ε.
                 x∈K                         inf x∈K |v|        x∈K

With these intermediate results established, the proof of the approximation result Proposition 3.7
proceeds as follows.

Proof of Proposition 3.7. Recall from Theorem 3.4 that we can write L = PS⊥ (Atri − A⊺tri )PS⊥
and similarly for L̃. Notice that, by adding and subtracting PS̃⊥ Atri PS⊥ and PS̃⊥ Ãtri PS⊥ , it follows
that for all x ∈ K,
          PS⊥ Atri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ Ãtri PS̃⊥

                    PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ Atri PS⊥ + PS̃⊥ Atri − Ãtri PS⊥ + PS̃⊥ Ãtri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥

               =

               ≤ PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ |Atri | + Atri − Ãtri + Ãtri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥
                      n              o
               ≤ 2 max |Atri |, Ãtri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ + Atri − Ãtri

where we have used that PS⊥ , PS̃⊥ have unit spectral norm. By Lemma A.1, for any ε > 0 there exists
a two layer neural network Ãtri such that supx∈K Atri − Ãtri < 4ε , and by Lemma A.2 there exists
a two-layer network S̃ with ∇S̃ ̸= 0 on K such that
                                        (                         −1 )
                        ⊥     ⊥                                     ε
                sup PS − PS̃ < min ε, max sup |Atri |, sup Ãtri      .
                x∈K                                x∈K x∈K          8

It follows that S̃, ∇S̃ are ε-close to S, ∇S on K and
                                         n           o           ε
                            sup 2 max |Atri |, Ãtri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ < .
                            x∈K                                  4
Therefore, the estimate
                                                                    ε ε
              sup L − L̃ ≤ 2 sup PS⊥ Atri PS⊥ − PS̃⊥ Ãtri PS̃⊥ < 2  +   = ε,
              x∈K            x∈K                                    4 4
implies that L̃ is ε-close to L on K as well.
                                                                                           ⊺
Moving to the case of M , we see that for all x ∈ K, by writing M = U ΛU ⊺ = Kchol Kchol       for
            1/2                                                                      ⊥
Kchol = U Λ     and repeating the first calculation with Kchol in place of Atri and PE in place of
PS⊥ ,
                      ⊺                        ⊺
           PE⊥ Kchol Kchol PE⊥ − PẼ⊥ K̃chol K̃chol PẼ⊥
                        n                  o
                                                            ⊺               ⊺
               ≤ 2 max |Kchol |, K̃chol PE⊥ − PẼ⊥ + Kchol Kchol − K̃chol K̃chol .

Moreover, if Kchol − K̃chol < (1/2) inf x∈K |Kchol | for all x ∈ K then similar arguments as used
in the proof of Lemma A.2 yield the following estimate for all x ∈ K,
                                                 n                 o
                    ⊺              ⊺
            Kchol Kchol − K̃chol K̃chol ≤ 2 max |Kchol |, K̃chol Kchol − K̃chol

                                        ≤ 2|Kchol | + inf |Kchol | Kchol − K̃chol .
                                                                  x∈K



                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As before, we now invoke Lemma A.1 to construct a two-layer lower-triangular network K̃chol such
that
                                                                                   −1
                                  1                                                   ε
       sup Kchol − K̃chol < min       inf |Kchol |, 2 sup |Kchol | + inf |Kchol |        ,
      x∈K                         2  x ∈K             x∈K             x ∈K            2
as well as (using Lemma A.2) a network Ẽ satisfying ∇Ẽ ̸= 0 on K and
                                     (                                  −1 )
                                                                          ε
                sup PE⊥ − PẼ⊥ < min ε, max sup |Kchol |, sup K̃chol         .
                x∈K                              x∈K         x∈K          4

Again, it follows that Ẽ, ∇Ẽ are ε-close to E, ∇E on K, and by the work above we conclude
                                               ⊺                      ⊺          ε ε
         sup M − M̃ = sup PE⊥ Kchol Kchol         PE⊥ − PẼ⊥ K̃chol K̃chol PẼ⊥ < + = ε,
        x∈K                 x∈K                                                  2 2
as desired.

It is now possible to give a proof of the error bound in Theorem 3.9. Recall the L2 ([0, T ]) error
metric ∥x∥ and Lipschitz constant Lf , defined for all x, y ∈ Rn and Lipschitz continuous functions
f as
                                Z T
                            2           2
                        ∥x∥ =       |x| dt, |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ Lf |x − y|.
                                  0

Proof of Theorem 3.9. First, note that the assumption that one of E, −S (without loss of generality,
say E) has bounded sublevel sets implies bounded trajectories for the state x as in Remark 3.8,
so we may assume x ∈ K for some compact K ⊂ Rn . Moreover, for any ε > 0 it follows
from Proposition 3.7 that there are approximate networks Ẽ, S̃ which are ε-close to E, S on K.
Additionally, it follows that Ẽ, S̃ have nonzero gradients ∇Ẽ, ∇S̃ which are also ε-close to the true
gradients ∇E, ∇S on K. This implies that for each x ∈ K, E = Ẽ + (E − Ẽ) ≤ Ẽ + ε, so it
follows that the sublevel sets {x | Ẽ(x) ≤ m} ⊆ {x | E(x) ≤ m + ε} are also bounded. Therefore,
we may assume (by potentially enlarging K) that both x, x̃ ∈ K lie in the compact set K for all time.
Now, let y = x − x̃. The next goal is to bound the following quantity:

   |ẏ| = L(x)∇E(x) + M (x)∇S(x) − L̃(x̃)∇Ẽ(x̃) − M̃ (x̃)∇S̃(x̃)

       =       L(x)∇E(x) − L̃(x̃)∇E(x̃) + M (x)∇S(x) − M̃ (x̃)∇S(x̃) =: |ẏE + ẏS |.

To that end, notice that by adding and subtracting L(x)∇E(x̃), L̃(x)∇E(x̃), L̃(x̃)∇E(x̃), it fol-
lows that

                 ẏE = L(x)(∇E(x) − ∇E(x̃)) + L(x) − L̃(x) ∇E(x̃)

                          + L̃(x) − L̃(x̃) ∇E(x̃) + L̃(x̃) ∇E(x̃) − ∇Ẽ(x̃) .

By Proposition 3.7 there exists a two-layer neural network L̃ with one continuous derivative such
that supx∈K L − L̃ < ε, which implies that L̃ is Lipschitz continuous with (uniformly well-
approximated) Lipschitz constant. Using this fact along with the assumed Lipschitz continuity of
∇E and the approximation properties of the network Ẽ already constructed then yields

    |ẏE | ≤ L∇E sup |L| + LL̃ sup |∇E| |y| + ε sup L̃ + sup |∇E| =: aE |y| + ε bE .
                    x∈K           x∈K                   x∈K        x∈K

Similarly, by adding and subtracting M (x)∇S(x̃), M̃ (x)∇S(x̃), M̃ (x̃)∇S(x̃), it follows that

               ẏS = M (x)(∇S(x) − ∇S(x̃)) + M (x) − M̃ (x) ∇S(x̃)

                       + M̃ (x) − M̃ (x̃) ∇S(x̃) + M̃ (x̃) ∇S(x̃) − ∇S̃(x̃) .


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By Proposition 3.7, there exists a two-layer network M̃ with one continuous derivative such that
supx∈K M − M̃ < ε, with M̃ Lipschitz continuous for the same reason as before. It follows from
this and supx∈K ∇S − ∇S̃ < ε that

   |ẏS | ≤ L∇S sup |M | + LM̃ sup |∇S| |y| + ε sup M̃ + sup |∇S| =: aS |y| + ε bS .
                  x∈K                x∈K                      x∈K       x∈K
                            −1
Now, recall that ∂t |y| = |y|    (ẏ · y) ≤ |ẏ| by Cauchy-Schwarz, and therefore the time derivative of
|y| is bounded by
                  ∂t |y| ≤ |ẏE | + |ẏS | = (aE + aS )|y| + ε(bE + bS ) =: a|y| + b.
This implies that ∂t |y| − a|y| ≤ b, so multiplying by the integrating factor e−at and integrating in
time yields
                                         Z t
                                                            b
                                             ea(t−τ ) dτ = ε eat − 1 ,

                             |y(t)| ≤ εb
                                          0                 a
where we used that y(0) = 0 since the initial condition of the trajectories is shared. Therefore, the
L2 error in time can be approximated by
                               Z T
                           2          2         b2
                                   |y| dt ≤ ε2 2 e2aT − 2eaT + T + 1 ,

                       ∥y∥ =
                                0               a
establishing the conclusion.

B    E XPERIMENTAL AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
This Appendix records additional details related to the numerical experiments in Section 5. For
each benchmark problem, a set of trajectories is manufactured given initial conditions by simulating
ODEs with known metriplectic structure. The metriplectic forms of these systems are given in the
subsections below. For the experiments in Table 2, only the observable variables are used to construct
datasets, since entropic information is assumed to be unknown. Algorithm 2 summarizes the training
of the dynamics models used for comparison with NMS.

Algorithm 2 Training dynamics models
 1: Input: snapshot data X ∈ Rn×ns , each column xs = x(ts , µs ), target rank r ≥ 1
 2: Initialize loss L = 0 and networks with parameters Θ
 3: for step in Nsteps do
 4:    Randomly draw an initial condition (t0k , x0k ) where k ∈ ns
 5:    x̃1 , ..., x̃l = ODEsolve(x0k , ẋ, t1 , ..., tl )
 6:    Compute the loss L((xo1 , . . . , xol ), (x̃o0 , . . . , x̃ol ))
 7:    Update the model parameters Θ via SGD
 8: end for

For each compared method, integrating the ODEs is done via the Dormand–Prince method (do-
pri5) Dormand and Prince (1980) with relative tolerance 10−7 and absolute tolerance 10−9 . The loss
is evaluated by measuring the discrepancy between the ground truth observable states xo and the
approximate observable states x̃o in the mean absolute error (MAE) and mean squared error (MSE)
metrics, which are defined in the usual way via the ℓ1 , ℓ2 norms respectively for true data x(ti ) and
approximate data x̃(ti ):
                            nt                                                  nt
                        1 X                                                 1 X
       M AE(x̃, x) =           |x̃(ti ) − x(ti )|1 ,        M SE(x̃, x) =          |x̃(ti ) − x(ti )|2 .
                        nt i=1                                              nt i=1
 The model parameters Θ (i.e., the weights and biases) are updated by using Adamax Kingma and
Ba (2014) with an initial learning rate of 0.01. The number of training steps is set as 30,000, and
the model parameters resulting in the best performance for the validation set are chosen for testing.
Specific information related to the experiments in Section 5 is given in the subsections below.


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For generating the results reported in Table 2, we implemented the proposed algorithm in Python
3.9.12 and PyTorch 2.0.0. Other required information is provided with the accompanying code. All
experiments are conducted on Apple M2 Max chips with 96 GB memory. To provide the mean
and the standard deviation, experiments are repeated three times with varying random seeds for all
considered methods.

B.1    T WO GAS CONTAINERS

The metriplectic equations of motion in the two gas containers example are given in terms of
                               ⊺
the state x = (q p S1 S2 ) . With the energy E(x) = (1/2m)p2 + E1 (x) + E2 (x) and
entropy S(x) = S1 + S2 defined in Section 5, it follows that ẋ = L∇E(x) + M (x)∇S where
                    ⊺
∇S = (0 0 1 1) and

             0 1 0 0                                            0 0                 0              0
                                                                                                        
           −1 0 0 0                                          0 0                 0              0
      L=                   ,                          M (x) =                                             ,
                                                                                                           
             0 0 0 0                                           0 0             T1−2           −(T1 T2 )−1 
                                                                                                   −2
             0 0 0 0                                            0 0           −(T1 T2 )−1        T2
                     1   2S   13 
               e2S1 3        e 2
           −   q 5    + (2−q)   5 
                       3
   ∇E(x) =              p         ,                  Ti (x) = ∂Si Ei (x).
                                  
                       2
                    T1 (x)        
                     T2 (x)


As mentioned in the body, the two gas container (TGC) problem tests models’ predictive capability
(i.e., extrapolation in time). To this end, one simulated trajectory is obtained by solving an IVP with
a known TGC system and an initial condition, and the trajectory of the observable variables is split
into three subsequences, [0, ttrain ], (ttrain , tval ], and (tval , ttest ] for training, validation, and test with
0 < ttrain < tval < ttest .
In the experiment, a sequence of 100,000 timesteps is generated using the Runge–Kutta 4th-
order (RK4) time integrator with a step size 0.001. The initial condition is given as x =
(1, 2, 103.2874, 103.2874) following Shang and Öttinger (2020). The training/validation/test split
is defined by ttrain = 20, tval = 30, and ttest = 100. For a fair comparison, all considered models
are set to have a similar number of model parameters, ∼2,000. The specifications of the network
architectures are:

        • NMS: The total number of model parameters is 1959. The functions Atri , B, Kchol , E, S
          are parameterized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activation function. The MLPs pa-
          rameterizing Atri , B, Kchol , E are specified as 1 hidden layer with 10 neurons, and the on
          parameterizing S is specified as 3 hidden layers with 25 neurons.
        • NODE: The total number of model parameters is 2179. The black-box NODE is param-
          eterized as an MLP with the Tanh nonlinear activation function, 4 hidden layers and 25
          neurons.
        • SPNN: The total number of model parameters is 1954. The functions E and S are parame-
          terized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activation function; each MLP is specified as 3
          hidden layers and 20 neurons. The two 2-tensors defining L and M are defined as learnable
          3 × 3 matrices.
        • GNODE: The total number of model parameters is 2343. The functions E and S are
          parameterized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activaton function; each MLP is specified
          as 2 hidden layers and 30 neurons. The matrices and 3-tensors required to learn L and M
          are defined as learnable 3 × 3 matrices and 3 × 3 × 3 tensor.
        • GFINN: The total number of model parameters is 2065. The functions E and S are
          parameterized as MLPs with Tanh nonlinear activation function; each MLP is specified as 2
          hidden layers and 20 neurons. The matrices to required to learn L and M are defined as K
          learnable 3 × 3 matrices, where K is set to 2.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    T HERMOELASTIC DOUBLE PENDULUM

The equations of motion in this case are given for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2 as
         pi
            , ṗi = −∂qi (E1 (x) + E2 (x)), Ṡ1 = κ T1−1 T2 − 1 ,              Ṡ2 = κ T1 T2−1 − 1 ,

   q̇i =
         mi
where κ > 0 is a thermal conductivity constant (set to 1), mi is the mass of the ith spring (also set to
1) and Ti = ∂Si Ei is its absolute temperature. In this case, qi , pi ∈ R2 represent the position and
momentum of the ith mass, while Si represents the entropy of the ith pendulum. As before, the total
entropy S(x) = S1 + S2 is the sum of the entropies of the two springs, while defining the internal
energies
                      1       2
           Ei (x) = (ln λi ) + ln λi + eSi −ln λi − 1, λ1 = |qi |, λ2 = |q2 − q1 |,
                      2
                                                 2                  2
leads to the total energy E(x) = (1/2m1 )|p1 | + (1/2m2 )|p2 | + E1 (x) + E2 (x). This system is
metriplectic with matrix fields L, M , given by
                                                     0 0 0 0            0            0
                                                                                          
                                  
               0      0 I 0 0                      0 0 0 0             0            0
            0        0 0 I 0
                                                                                           
                                                   0 0 0 0             0            0     
  L(x) = −I 0 0 0 0,                     M (x) = 0 0 0 0                                ,
                                                                                        
             0 −I 0 0 0                                              0            0     
                                                    0 0 0 0 T −1 T2 (x)            −1 
               0      0 0 0 0                                        1
                                                     0 0 0 0           −1       T1 T2−1 (x)
where Ti = ∂Si Ei .
The thermoelastic double pendulum experiment tests model prediction across initial conditions. In
this case, 100 trajectories are generated by varying initial conditions that are randomly sampled from
[0.1,1.1] × [-0.1,0.1] × [2.1, 2.3] × [-0.1,0.1] × [-1.9,2.1] × [0.9,1.1] × [-0.1, 0.1] × [0.9,1.1] ×
[0.1,0.3] ⊂ R10 . Each trajectory is obtained from the numerical integration of the ODEs using an
RK4 time integrator with step size 0.02 and the final time T = 40, resulting in the trajectories of
length 2,000. The resulting 100 trajectories are split into 80/10/10 for training/validation/test sets. For
a fair comparison, all considered models are again set to have similar number of model parameters,
∼2,000. The specifications of the network architectures are:

       • NMS: The total number of model parameters is 2201. The functions A, B, K, E, S are pa-
         rameterized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activation function. The MLPs parameterizing
         are specified as 1 hidden layer with 15 neurons.
       • NODE: The total number of model parameters is 2005. The black-box NODE is param-
         eterized as an MLP with the Tanh nonlinear activation function, 2 hidden layers and 35
         neurons.
       • SPNN: The total number of model parameters is 2362. The functions E and S are parame-
         terized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activation function; each MLP is specified as 3
         hidden layers and 20 neurons. The two 2-tensors defining L and M are defined as learnable
         3 × 3 matrices.
       • GNODE: The total number of model parameters is 2151. The functions E and S are
         parameterized as MLPs with the Tanh nonlinear activaton function; each MLP is specified
         as 2 hidden layers and 15 neurons. The matrices and 3-tensors required to learn L and M
         are defined as learnable 3 × 3 matrices and 3 × 3 × 3 tensor.
       • GFINN: The total number of model parameters is 2180. The functions E and S are
         parameterized as MLPs with Tanh nonlinear activation function; each MLP is specified as 2
         hidden layers and 15 neurons. The matrices to required to learn L and M are defined as K
         learnable 3 × 3 matrices, where K is set to 2.

C     A DDITIONAL FIGURES : T WO GAS CONTAINERS AND THERMOELASTIC
      DOUBLE PENDULUM

Figure 3 presents the ground-truth and predicted trajectories of q̇ and ṗ for the two gas containers
example, providing confirmation that the learned metriplectic vector field ẋ closely approximates the


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


true metriplectic vector field. The values pictured are obtained by evaluating the different dynamics
functions (either the ground truth or those learned by the different parameterization) along the
trajectories of q and p. Figure 3 shows that the proposed NMS method produces the most accurate
learned velocities q̇, ṗ. The MAE between the ground-truth metriplectic vector field and the predicted
ones computes to [0.2652, 0.1355, 0.2285, 0.0546] for [SPNN, GNODE, GFINN, NMS], confirming
that NMS yields the lowest error in this quantity. Note that only the observed state variables are
included in this computation as no access to the unobserved variables is assumed during training.


                         (a) q̇                                          (b) ṗ

Figure 3: The ground-truth and predicted trajectories of q̇ and ṗ obtained via evaluating the (learned)
dynamics functions.

Figure 4 depicts trajectories of the ground-truth and the predicted position (q), momentum (p),
entropy (S), and energy (E) for the thermoelastic double pendulum example. Figures show that the
trajectories produced by NMS follow the ground-truth trajectories closer than those produced by the
baseline methods. Figures 4(g) and 4(h) demonstrate that the trajectories of entropy S and energy E
produced by GNODE, GFINN, and NMS are thermodynamically consistent (i.e., non-decreasing
entropy and conserved energy).


         (a) q1x                    (b) q1y                  (c) q2x                   (d) q2y


         (e) p1x                    (f) p1y                  (g) p2x                   (h) p2y


                            (i) S                                      (j) E

Figure 4: The ground-truth and predicted position, momentum, entropy, and energy for the ther-
moelastic double pendulum. Figures illustrate that the trajectories generated by NMS follow the
ground-truth ones closer than those of other methods do.



                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT: DAMPED NONLINEAR OSCILLATOR
                                                                                               ⊺
Consider a damped nonlinear oscillator of variable dimension with state x = (q          p   S) , whose
motion is governed by the metriplectic system
                                                                         2
                                  p                               γ|q|
                             q̇ =   , ṗ = k sin q − γp, Ṡ =           .
                                 m                                mT
Here q, p ∈ Rn denote the position and momentum of the oscillator, S is the entropy of a surround-
ing thermal bath, and the constant parameters m, γ, T are the mass, damping rate, and (constant)
                                                                2
temperature. This leads to the total energy E(x) = (1/2m)|p| − k cos q + T S, which is readily
seen to be constant along solutions x(t). This system has a metriplectic expression in terms of E, S
and the matrix fields
                                                                                
                                0 −I 0
                                            !                   0 0        0
                    L(x) = −I 0 0 ,                 M (x) = 0 0           0 
                                                                           q |2
                                0     0 0                       0 0 γ|mT        .

It is now verified that NMS can accurately and stably predict the dynamics of a nonlinear oscillator
                   ⊺
x = (q p S) in the case that n = 1, 2, both when the entropy S is observable as well as when it
is not. As before, the task considered is prediction in time, although all compared methods NODE,
GNODE, and NMSknown are now trained on full state information from the training interval, and test
errors are computed over the full state x on the extrapolation interval (tvalid , ttest ], which is 150%
longer than the training interval. In addition, another NMS model, NMSdiff , was trained using only
                                          ⊺
the partial state information xo = (q, p) and tested under the same conditions, with the initial guess
       u
for x generated as in Appendix H. As can be seen in Table 3, NMS is more accurate than GNODE
or NODE in both the 1-D and 2-D nonlinear oscillator experiments, improving on previous results by
up to two orders of magnitude. Remarkably, NMS produces more accurate entropic dynamics even
in the case where the entropic variable S is unobserved during NMS training and observed during
the training of other methods. This illustrates another advantage of the NMS approach: because of
the reasonable initial data for S produced by the diffusion model, the learned metriplectic system
produced by NMS remains performant even when metriplectic governing equations are unknown and
only partial state information is observed.


Table 3: Experimental results for the benchmark problems with respect to MSE and MAE. The best
scores are in boldface.
                                    1-D D.N.O.         T.G.C.         2-D D.N.O.
                                    MSE MAE          MSE MAE          MSE MAE
                    NMSdiff         .0170   .1132    .0045   .0548    .0275    .1456
                   NMSknown         .0239   .1011    .0012   .0276    .0018    .0357
                     NODE           .0631   .2236    .0860   .2551    .0661    .2096
                    GNODE           .0607   .1976    .0071   .0732    .2272    .4267

To describe the experimental setup precisely, data is collected from a single trajectory with initial
condition as x = (2, 0, 0) following Lee et al. (2021). The path is calculated at 180,000 steps with a
time interval of 0.001, and is then split into training/validation/test sets as before using ttrain = 60,
tval = 90 and ttest = 180. Specifications of the networks used for the experiments in Table 3 are:

       • NMS: The total number of parameters is 154. The number of layers for Atri , B, Kchol , E, S
         is selected from {1,2,3} and the number of neurons per layer from {5,10,15}. The best
         hyperparameters are 1 hidden layer with 5 neurons for each network function.
       • GNODE: The total number of model parameters is 203. The number of layers and num-
         ber of neurons for each network is chosen from the same ranges as for NMS. The best
         hyperparameters are 1 layer with 10 neurons for each network function.
       • NODE: The total number of model paramters is 3003. The NODE architecture is formed by
         stacking MLPs with Tanh activation functions. The number of blocks is chosen from {3,4,5}


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         and the number of neurons of each MLP from {30,40,50}. The best hyperparameters are 4
         and 30 for the number of blocks and number of neurons, respectively.


E    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT: H AMILTONIAN NEURAL NETWORK FOR TWO
     GAS CONTAINERS

As briefly mentioned in the main body, from the definition of metriplectic dynamics, restricting
M = 0 leads to Hamiltonian systems. In this section, we present the results of training Hamiltonian
systems only on the observable variables (q, p) from the two gas container example problems. We
use the same dataset used in Section 5.1 and the same experimental setup described in Section B.1.
For parameterization
                   of the
                          Hamiltonian dynamics, we explicitly consider the canonical Poisson
                   0 1
matrix L = J =            as is standard in Hamiltonian neural networks (HNNs), along with an
                  −1 0
MLP to parameterize the Hamiltonian function H = HΘ (q, p), resulting in the dynamics

                                   q̇      0 1 ∂q H
                            ẋ =      =                  = L∇H.                           (1)
                                   ṗ     −1 0 ∂p H

Figure 5 presents the trajectories of position and momentum predicted by the trained HNN. It
essentially shows that imposing an inductive bias (i.e., energy conservation), which does not match
with the underlying physical system (i.e., dissipation), results in catastrophic failure in prediction.
Figure 5(c) confirms that the learned Hamiltonian is kept constant over the numerical simulation.


                   (a) q                        (b) p                       (c) HΘ

Figure 5: [Hamiltonian neural networks] The ground-truth and predicted trajectories of position and
momentum for the two gas containers example, along with the learned Hamiltonian. Notice that the
incorrect inductive bias of conservation leads to catastrophic failure in network prediction.


F    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT: A DAMPED T HERMOELASTIC ROD
As an additional benchmark problem, we consider a damped thermoelastic rod, which discretizes
an infinite-dimensional metriplectic system. Consider a 1-dimensional elastic rod, with coordinate
s ∈ [0, l], which evolves following the dynamics defined as:
                                   p      
                       q̇             m    p
                      ṗ  = V ′ (q) − γ m  = L∇E(q, p, e) + M (q, p, e)∇S.                 (2)
                                      p2
                      Ṡ            γm  2


 Here, V denotes a given potential function, γ denotes a constant controlling the rate of dissipation,
m = m(s) denotes the mass density, and e = e(s) denotes the internal energy representing the
conversion of mechanical energy into heat. The energy function is given by
                                               Z ℓ                       Z ℓ
                                                     p(s)2
              E(q, p, e) = H(q, p) + S(e) =                 + V (q(s)) +        e(s),              (3)
                                                0   2m(s)                    0

where H(q, p) denotes the Hamiltonian.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        (a) q1 (first component)     (b) q50 (last component)


       (c) p1 (first component)     (d) p50 (last component)

Figure 6: The ground-truth and predicted trajectories of                     Figure 7: MSEs (in the log10 scale)
positions and momenta for the thermoelastic rod are depicted                 of predictions obtained by NMS
with N = 50.                                                                 and GFINN for varying N .

In numerical computation, this continuous system is discretized, leading to s being represented by
a vector s ∈ RN , where N is the number of discretization points. This discretization results in a
vectorized representation of q, p, denoted as q, p ∈ RN , and a discretized version of Eq. (2), where
the state variables are [q, p, S]. In particular, the resulting metriplectic system is given in terms of
∇S = (0 0 1) and
                                                                         
               0     I 0
                            !                       0    0         0                       ′ 
                                                                                            V (q)
                                                                    p
  L(x) = −I 0 0 ,                    M (x) = γ 0
                                                        I       − m ,        ∇E(x)    =  p .
                                                            ⊺
                                                                        2                     m
               0⊺ 0⊺ 0                                            |p|
                                                    0 − pm         m
                                                                                               1

In the experiments, we largely follow the setup used in the two gas container experiments, i.e., testing
models’ predictive capability through temporal extrapolation. One simulated trajectory is obtained by
solving an IVP with a known thermoelastic rod system, and the trajectory of observed variables is then
split into three subsequences, [0, ttrain ], (ttrain , tval ], and (tval , ttest ] for training, validation, and testing
with 0 < ttrain < tval < ttest . In the experiment, we set ttrain = 30, tval = 40, and ttest = 50. We train
the proposed NMS on spatial discretizations of varying size N = {50, 75, 100}, which results in
systems of dimension {101, 151, 201}, respectively. The performance of NMS is then compared to
the performance of GFINNs, which are the current state-of-the-art in metriplectic learning.
Figure 6 shows the ground truth and predicted trajectories of the first and the last components of q and
p for the case of N = 50, where it can be seen that the trajectories predicted by NMS are significantly
better aligned with the ground truth trajectories compared to those of GFINN, particularly in the
extrapolation regime (40 < t < 50). Figure 7 shows the results of training GFINN and NMS on
thermoelastic rod systems with varying N , where GFINN and NMS instances with comparable model
sizes are considered. The results suggest that the proposed NMS is parameter efficient, supporting
the theoretical conclusions in Section 3.

G     S CALING STUDY
To compare the scalability of the proposed NMS architecture design with existing architectures, dif-
ferent realizations of GNODE, GFINN, and NMS are generated by varying the dimension of the state
variables, n = {1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 50}. The specifications of these models (i.e., hyperparameters)
are set so that the number of model parameters is kept similar between each method for smaller values
of n. For example, for n = 1, 5 the number of model parameters is ∼20,000 for each architecture.
The results in Figure 8(a) confirm that GNODE scales cubically in n while both GFINN and NMS
scale quadratically. Note that only a constant scaling advantage of NMS over GFINN can be seen
from this plot, since r is fixed during this study.
It is also worthwhile to investigate the computational timings of these three models. Consider-
ing the same realizations of the models listed above, i.e., the model instances for varying n =


                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 50}, 1,000 random samples of states {x(i) }1,000
                                                                  i=1 are generated. These samples
are then fed to the dynamics function L(x )∇E(x ) + M (x(i) )∇S(x(i) ) for i = 1, . . . , 1000,
                                            (i)       (i)

and the computational wall time of the function evaluation via PyTorch’s profiler API is measured.
The results of this procedure are displayed in Figure 8(b). Again, it is seen that the proposed NMSs
require less computational resources than GNODEs and GFINNs.


             (a) State dimension n versus number         (b) Model parameters versus wall
             of model parameters                         time in microseconds

             Figure 8: A study of the scaling behavior of GNODE, GFINN, and NMS.


H    D IFFUSION MODEL FOR UNOBSERVED VARIABLES
Recent work in Lim et al. (2023) suggests the benefits of performing time-series generation using a
diffusion model. This Appendix describes how this technology is used to generate initial conditions
for the unobserved NMS variables in the experiments corresponding to Table 3. More precisely, we
describe how to train a conditional diffusion model which generates values for unobserved variables
xu given values for the observed variables xo .

Training and sampling: Recall that diffusion models add noise with the following stochastic
differential equation (SDE):
                               dx(t) = f(t, x(t))dt + g(t)dw,     t ∈ [0, 1],
               dim(x)
where w ∈ R            is a multi-dimensional Brownian motion, f(t, ·) : Rdim(x) → Rdim(x) is a
vector-valued drift term, and g : [0, 1] → R is a scalar-valued diffusion function.
For the forward SDE, there exists a corresponding reverse SDE:
                        dx(t) = [f(t, x(t)) − g 2 (t)∇x(t) log p(x(t))]dt + g(t)dw̄,
which produces samples from the initial distribution at t = 0. This formula suggests that if the score
function, ∇x(t) log p(x(t)), is known, then real samples from the prior distribution p(x) ∼ N (µ, σ 2 )
can be recovered, where µ, σ vary depending on the forward SDE type.
In order for a model Mθ to learn the score function, it has to optimize the following loss:
                                                                                 2
                    L(θ) = Et {λ(t)Ex(t) [ Mθ (t, x(t)) − ∇x(t) log p(x(t)) 2 ]},
where t is uniformly sampled over [0, 1] with an appropriate weight function λ(t) : [0, 1] → R.
However, using the above formula is computationally prohibitive. Thanks to Vincent (2011), this loss
can be substituted with the following denoising score matching loss:
                                                                                       2
            L∗ (θ) = Et {λ(t)Ex(0) Ex(t)|x(0) [ Mθ (t, x(t)) − ∇x(t) log p(x(t)|x(0)) 2 ]}.
Since score-based generative models use an affine drift term, the transition kernel p(x(t)|x(0))
follows a certain Gaussian distribution Särkkä and Solin (2019), and therefore the gradient term
∇x(t) log p(x(t)|x(0)) can be analytically calculated.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Experimental details On the other hand, the present goal is to generate unobserved variables xu
given values for the observed variables xo = (q, p), i.e., conditional generation. Therefore, our model
has to learn the conditional score function, ∇xu (t) log p(xu (t)|xo ). For example, in the damped
nonlinear oscillator case, S(t) is initialized as a perturbed t ∈ [0, 1], from which the model takes the
concatenation of q, p, S(t) as inputs and learns conditional the score function ∇S(t) log(S(t)|q, p).
For the experiments in Table 3, diffusion models are trained to generate xu variables on three
benchmark problems: the damped nonlinear oscillator, two gas containers, and thermolastic double
pendulum. On each problem, representative parameters such as mass or thermal conductivity are
varied, with the total number of cases denoted by N . Full trajectory data of length T is then generated
using a standard numerical integrator (e.g., dopri5), before it is evenly cut into ⌊T /L⌋ pieces of
length L. Let V, U denote the total number of variables and the number of unobserved variables,
respectively. It follows that the goal is to generate U unobserved variables given V − U observed
ones, i.e., the objective is to generate data of shape (N T /L, L, U ) conditioned on data of shape
(N T /L, L, V − U ). After the diffusion model has been trained for this task, the output data is
reshaped into size (N, T, U ), which is used to initialize the NMS model. Note that the NODE and
GNODE methods compared to NMS in Table 3 use full state information for their training, i.e.,
xu = ∅ in these cases, making it comparatively easier for these methods to learn system dynamics.
As in other diffusion models e.g. Song et al. (2020), a U-net architecture is used, modifying 2-D
convolutions to 1-D ones and following the detailed hyperparameters described in Song et al. (2020).
Note the following probability flow ODE seen in Song et al. (2020):

                                               1 2
                        dx(t) = f(t, x(t)) − g (t)∇x(t) log p(x(t)) dt,
                                               2
Although models trained to mimic the probability flow ODE do not match the perofrmance of the
forward SDE’s result in the image domain, the authors of Lim et al. (2023) observe that the probability
flow ODE outperforms the forward SDE in the time-series domain. Therefore, the probability flow
ODE is used with the default hyperparameters of Song et al. (2020).


                                                  25
