Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S LOW FAST-VG EN : S LOW-FAST L EARNING FOR
ACTION -D RIVEN L ONG V IDEO G ENERATION
 Yining Hong1 , Beide Liu1 †, Maxine Wu1 †, Yuanhao Zhai3 , Kai-Wei Chang1 ,
 Linjie Li2 , Kevin Lin2 , Chung-Ching Lin2 , Jianfeng Wang2 , Zhengyuan Yang2,†† ,
 Yingnian Wu1,†† , Lijuan Wang2,††
 1
   UCLA, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 State University of New York at Buffalo
 †
   Co-second Contribution, †† Equal Advising


   (a) Slow Learning – World Model                                 (b) Fast Learning – Episodic Memory
                      Move to the Right

                                                           t = 0~10s
                                                                                    Loc1                Loc2        Loc3
                                                           Go forward
                  Change to the Left Lane
                                                           t = 10~20s
                                                           Go left                   Loc4               Loc5        Loc6



         Pick Up the Apple                Close the Door   t = 20~30s
                                                           Go right                 Loc6                Loc5        Loc4


                                                           t = 30~40s
                                                           Back off                 Loc3                Loc2        Loc1
          Run Straight Ahead          Put Down the Knife

                                                           (c) Memory-Augmented Video Planning
                                                           Move both cubes to the green area.
                                                           Subsequently, return them to their original positions.
                 Descend to a Lower Altitude



                               …
Figure 1: We propose S LOW FAST-VG EN, a dual-speed action-driven video generation system that
mimics the complementary learning system in human brains. The slow learning phase (a) learns an
approximate world model that simulates general dynamics across a diverse set of scenarios. The fast
learning phase (b) stores episodic memory for consistent long video generation, e.g., generating the
same scene for “Loc1” after traveling across different locations. Slow-fast learning also facilitates
long-horizon planning tasks (c) that require the efficient storage of long-term episodic memories.

                                                       A BSTRACT
         Human beings are endowed with a complementary learning system, which bridges
         the slow learning of general world dynamics with fast storage of episodic memory
         from a new experience. Previous video generation models, however, primarily
         focus on slow learning by pre-training on vast amounts of data, overlooking the
         fast learning phase crucial for episodic memory storage. This oversight leads to
         inconsistencies across temporally distant frames when generating longer videos,
         as these frames fall beyond the model’s context window. To this end, we intro-
         duce S LOW FAST-VG EN, a novel dual-speed learning system for action-driven
         long video generation. Our approach incorporates a masked conditional video
         diffusion model for the slow learning of world dynamics, alongside an inference-
         time fast learning strategy based on a temporal LoRA module. Specifically, the
         fast learning process updates its temporal LoRA parameters based on local inputs
         and outputs, thereby efficiently storing episodic memory in its parameters. We
         further propose a slow-fast learning loop algorithm that seamlessly integrates the
         inner fast learning loop into the outer slow learning loop, enabling the recall of
         prior multi-episode experiences for context-aware skill learning. To facilitate the
         slow learning of an approximate world model, we collect a large-scale dataset of
         200k videos with language action annotations, covering a wide range of scenarios.
         Extensive experiments show that S LOW FAST-VG EN outperforms baselines across
         various metrics for action-driven video generation, achieving an FVD score of 514


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         compared to 782, and maintaining consistency in longer videos, with an average
         of 0.37 scene cuts versus 0.89. The slow-fast learning loop algorithm significantly
         enhances performances on long-horizon planning tasks as well. Project Website:
         https://slowfast-vgen.github.io


1   I NTRODUCTION
Human beings are endowed with a complementary learning system (McClelland et al., 1995). The
slow learning paradigm, facilitated by the neocortex, carves out a world model from encyclopedic
scenarios we have encountered, enabling us to make decisions by anticipating potential outcomes
of actions (Schwesinger, 1955), as shown in Figure 1 (a). Complementing this, the hippocampus
supports fast learning, allowing for rapid adaptation to new environments and efficient storage of
episodic memory (Tulving, 1983), ensuring that long-horizon simulations remain consistent (e.g., in
Figure 1 (b), when we travel across locations 1 to 6 and return, the scene remains unchanged.)
Recently, riding the wave of success in video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023a), researchers have
introduced action-driven video generation that could generate future frames conditioned on actions
(Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Hu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), mimicking the slow learning
paradigm for building the world model. However, these models often generate videos of constrained
lengths (e.g., 16 frames for 4 secs (Xiang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024)), limiting their ability to
foresee far into the future. Several works focus on long video generation, using the outputs of one
step as inputs to the next (Harvey et al., 2022; Villegas et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Guo et al.,
2023a; Henschel et al., 2024). Due to the lack of fast learning, these models often do not memorize
trajectories prior to the current context window, leading to inconsistencies in long-term videos.
In this paper, we propose S LOW FAST-VG EN, which seamlessly integrates slow and fast learning
in a dual-speed learning system for action-driven long video generation. For the slow learning
process, we introduce a masked conditional video diffusion model that conditions on language inputs
denoting actions and the preceding video chunk, to generate the subsequent chunk. In the inference
time, long video generation can be achieved in a stream-in fashion, where we consecutively input
our actions for the current context window, and the succeeding chunk can be generated. To enable
the model to memorize beyond the previous chunk, we further propose a fast learning strategy,
which rapidly adapts to new contexts and stores episodic memory, enabling the model to maintain
coherence over extended sequences. By combining slow learning and fast learning, S LOW FAST-
VG EN can generate consistent, action-responsive long videos, as shown in Figure 1 (a) and (b).
A key challenge for fast learning in long video generation resides in maintaining consistency across
long sequences, while avoiding computationally intensive or memory-inefficient strategies for stor-
ing lengthy video sequences. To address this, we propose a novel inference-time fast learning
strategy that stores episodic memory in Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) parameters. Specifically,
we draw inspiration from Temporary LoRA (Wang et al., 2024b), originally developed for long
text generation, and extend this concept for fast learning in video generation. In its original form,
T EMP -L O RA embeds contextual information in a temporary LoRA module for language model-
ing by progressively generating new text chunks based on inputs and training on these input-output
pairs. Our approach modifies the update mechanism of T EMP -L O RA parameters by discarding the
input-to-output format. At each context window, our T EMP -L O RA for fast learning operates as
follows: we generate a new video chunk conditioned on both the input chunk and the corresponding
action, then concatenate the input and output into a seamless temporal continuum. This sequence
undergoes a noise injection process, creating a temporally coherent learning signal. We then train the
denoising UNet on this noise-augmented, action-agnostic sequence. This method emphasizes mem-
orizing entire trajectories rather than focusing on immediate input-output streams or transitions. By
leveraging the forward diffusion and reverse denoising processes over the concatenated sequence,
we effectively consolidate sequential episodic memory in the T EMP -L O RA parameters of the UNet,
enabling it to maintain coherence across extended video sequences. Qualitative examples in Figure
4 and supplementary materials demonstrate that fast learning enhances the consistency, smoothness,
and quality of long videos, as well as enabling the fast adaptation to test scenes.
While our fast learning module excels at rapidly adapting to new contexts and storing episodic
memory, there exist specific context-aware tasks that require learning from all previous long-term
episodes rather than just memorizing individual ones. For instance, in the planning section of Figure
1 (c), the task requires not only recalling the long-term trajectory within each episode, but also


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


leveraging prior experiences across multiple episodes to develop the general skill of returning the
cubes. Therefore, we introduce the slow-fast learning loop by integrating T EMP -L O RA into the
slow learning process. The inner fast learning loop uses T EMP -L O RA to swiftly adapt to each
episode, preparing a dataset of inputs, outputs, and corresponding T EMP -L O RA parameters for the
slow learning process. The outer slow learning loop then leverages the multi-episode data to update
the model’s core weights with frozen T EMP -L O RA parameters.
To further boost slow learning and enable action-driven generation with massive data about world
knowledge, we collect a large-scale video dataset comprising 200k videos paired with language ac-
tion annotations. This dataset covers a myriad of tasks, including Games, Unreal Simulations, Hu-
man Activities, Driving, and Robotics. Experiments show that our S LOW FAST-VG EN outperforms
baseline models on a series of metrics with regard to both slow learning and fast learning, including
FVD, PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, Scene Cuts, and our newly-proposed Scene Return Consistency (SRC).
Furthermore, results on two carefully-designed long-horizon video planning tasks demonstrate that
the slow-fast learning loop enables both efficient episodic memory storage and skill learning.
To sum up, our contributions are listed as below:
 • We introduce S LOW FAST-VG EN, a dual-speed learning system for action-driven long video
   generation, which incorporates episodic memory from fast learning into an approximate world
   model, enabling consistent and coherent action-responsive long video generation.
 • We develop an inference-time fast learning strategy that enables the storage of long-term episodic
   memory within LoRA parameters for long video generation. We also introduce a slow-fast learn-
   ing loop that integrates the fast learning module into the slow learning process for context-aware
   skill learning on multi-episode data.
 • We develop a masked conditional video diffusion model for slow learning and create a large-scale
   dataset with 200k videos paired with language action annotations, covering diverse categories.
 • Experiments show that S LOW FAST-VG EN outperforms various baselines, achieving an FVD
   score of 514 versus 782, and averaging 0.37 scene cuts compared with 0.89. Qualitative results
   highlight the enhanced consistency, smoothness and quality in generated long videos. Addition-
   ally, results on long-horizon planning tasks prove that the slow-fast learning loop can effectively
   store episodic memory for skill learning.
2 R ELATED W ORKS
Text-to-Video Generation Nowadays, research on text-conditioned video generation has been
evolving fast (Ho et al., 2022b;a; Singer et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023; Esser et al., 2023; Blattmann
et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2023; Khachatryan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023), enabling the generation
of short videos based on text inputs. Recently, several studies have introduced world models capable
of generating videos conditioned on free-text actions (Wang et al., 2024a; Xiang et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2024). While these papers claim that a general world model is pretrained, they often struggle
to simulate dynamics beyond the context window, thus unable to generate consistent long videos.
There are also several works that formulate robot planning as a text-to-video generation problem
(Du et al., 2023; Ko et al., 2023). Specifically, Du et al. (2023) trains a video diffusion model to
predict future frames and gets actions with inverse dynamic policy, which is followed by this paper.
Long Video Generation A primary challenge in long video generation lies in the limited number of
frames that can be processed simultaneously due to memory constraints. Existing techniques often
condition on the last chunk to generate the next chunk(Harvey et al., 2022; Villegas et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023a; Henschel et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024),
which hinders the model’s ability to retain information beyond the most recent chunk, leading to
inconsistencies when revisiting earlier scenes. Some approaches use an anchor frame (Yang et al.,
2023; Henschel et al., 2024) to capture global context, but this is often insufficient for memorizing
the whole trajectory. Other methods generate key frames and interpolate between them (He et al.,
2023; Ge et al., 2022; Harvey et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023), diverging from how world models simu-
late future states through sequential actions, limiting their suitability for real-time action streaming,
such as in gaming contexts. Additionally, these methods require long training videos, which are hard
to obtain due to frequent shot changes in online content. In this paper, we propose storing episodic
memory of the entire generated sequence in LoRA parameters during inference-time fast learning,
enabling rapid adaptation to new scenes while retaining consistency with a limited set of parameters.
Low-Rank Adaptation LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) addresses the computational challenges of fine-
tuning large pretrained language models by using low-rank matrices to approximate weight changes,


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reducing parameter training and hardware demands. It enables efficient task-switching and personal-
ization without additional inference costs, as the trainable matrices integrate seamlessly with frozen
weights. In this work, we develop a T EMP -L O RA module, which adapts quickly to new scenes
during inference and stores long-context memory in its parameters.

3 S LOW FAST-VG EN
In this section, we introduce our S LOW FAST-VG EN framework. We first present the masked dif-
fusion model for slow learning and the dataset we collected (Sec 3.1). Slow learning enables the
generation of new chunks based on previous ones and input actions, while lacking memory reten-
tion beyond the most recent chunk. To address this, we introduce a fast learning strategy, which
can store episodic memory in LoRA parameters (Sec 3.2). Moving forward, we propose a slow-fast
learning loop algorithm (Sec 3.3) that integrates T EMP -L O RA into the slow learning process for
context-aware tasks that require knowledge from multiple episodes, such as long-horizon planning.
We also illustrate how to apply this framework for video planning (Sec 4.2) and conduct a thorough
investigation and comparison between our model and complementary learning system in cognitive
science, highlighting parallels between artificial and biological learning mechanisms (Sec 3.5).
  Slow Learning: Pretraining on All Data Fast Learning: Storing Episodic Memory in TEMP-LORA
                                                       Chunk 1
      Conditioned
                                         𝑧!                TEMP-                     Noise 𝑛#$           𝑧!$   Input Chunk 𝑖
      Video Chunk                                                      Action 1
                      Diffusion       𝑧" + 𝑛               LORA Θ"
                                                           Generate
                                                       Chunk 2                         Denoising
                    Denoising Unet                                                       Unet
                          𝛟                                TEMP-                                               Action: Back off
   Ground-Truth                                                        Action 2         𝛟 + 𝚯𝐢       𝑧"$′
                                                     Train LORA Θ!                                               Generated 𝑖
      Output
                                                            Generate
                                                       Chunk 3                          Inference-Time
                                                                                            Training
                                                           TEMP-        Action 3
                      Prompt: Back Off               Train LORA Θ#                    🔥 TEMP-LORA
                                                                                                                   Iteration 𝒊
                                                            Generate
                                                       …
                      Inner Fast Learning Loop: Provide frozen 𝚯𝐢 for slow learning -> 𝛟 = 𝛟 + 𝚯𝐢.
                              Outer Slow Learning Loop: Provide frozen 𝛟 for Fast learning

Figure 2: S LOW FAST-VG EN Architecture. The left side illustrates the slow learning process,
pretraining on all data with a masked conditional video diffusion model. The right side depicts
the fast learning process, where T EMP -L O RA stores episodic memory during inference. Stream-                                   Input
                                                                                                                                  for
in actions guide the generation of video chunks, with T EMP -L O RA parameters updated after each                                         𝑖+1
chunk. In our slow-fast learning loop algorithm, the inner loop performs fast learning, supplying
T EMP -L O RA parameters from multiple episodes to the slow learning process, which updates slow
learning parameters Φ based on frozen fast learning parameters.                  Train

3.1     S LOW L EARNING

3.1.1 M ASKED C ONDITIONAL V IDEO D IFFUSION
We develop our slow learning model based on the pre-trained ModelScopeT2V model (Wang et al.,
2023), which generates videos from text prompts using a latent video diffusion approach. It en-
codes √
      training videos
                 √     into a latent space z, gradually adding Gaussian noise to the latent via
zt = ᾱt z0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ. A Unet architecture, augmented with spatial-temporal blocks, is re-
sponsible for denoising. Text prompts are encoded by the CLIP encoder (Radford et al., 2021).
To better condition on the previous chunk, we follow Voleti et al. (2022) for masked conditional
video diffusion, conditioning on past frames in the last video chunk to generate frames for the
subsequent chunk, while applying masks on past frames for loss calculation. Given fp past frames
and fg frames to be generated, we revise the Gaussian diffusion process to:
                                   zt,:fp = z0,:fp
                                            √                      √
                          zt,fp :(fp +fg ) = ᾱt z0,fp :(fp +fg ) + 1 − ᾱt ϵ                 (1)
                                               zt = zt,:fp ⊕ zt,fp :(fp +fg )
where zt,:fp is the latent of the first fp frames at diffusion step t, which is clean as we do not add
noise to the conditional frames. zt,fp :(fp +fg ) corresponds to the latent of the ground-truth output
frames, which we add noise to for conditional generation of the diffusion process. We concatenate
(⊕) them together and send them all into the UNet. We then get the noise predictions out of the


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


UNet, and apply masks to the losses corresponding to the first fp frames. Thus, only the last fg
frames are used for calculating loss. The final loss is:
       −0.7emL(Φ) = Et,z0 ∼pdata ,ϵ∼N (0,1),c ||ϵ − ϵΦ (zt [fp : (fp + fg )], t, c)||22 −0.7em

                                                                                               (2)

Here, c represents the conditioning (e.g., text), and Φ denotes the UNet parameters. Our model is
able to handle videos of arbitrary lengths smaller than the context window size (i.e., arbitrary fp and
fg ). For the first frame image input, fp equals 1.
3.1.2 DATASET C OLLECTION
Our slow learning dataset consists of 200k data, with each data point in the format of ⟨input video
chunk, input free-text action, output video chunk⟩. The dataset can be categorized into 4 domains :
 • Unreal. We utilize the Unreal Game Engine (Epic Games) for data collection, incorporating
   environments such as Google 3D Tiles, Unreal City Sample, and various assets purchased online.
   We introduce different agent types (e.g., human agents and droids) and use a Python script to
   automate action control. We record videos from both first-person and third-person perspectives,
   capturing keyboard and mouse inputs as actions and translating them into text (e.g., “go left”).
 • Game. We manually play Minecraft, recording keyboard and mouse inputs and capturing videos.
 • Human Activities. We include the EPIC-KITCHENS (Damen et al., 2018; 2022) dataset, which
   comprises extensive first-person (egocentric) vision recordings of daily activities in the kitchen.
 • Robot. We use several datasets from OpenX-Embodiment (Collaboration et al., 2024), as well
   as tasks from Metaworld (Yu et al., 2021) and RLBench (James et al., 2019). As most robot
   datasets consist of short episodes (where each episode is linked with one language instruction)
   rather than long videos with sequential language inputs, we set fp to 1 for these datasets.
 • Driving. We utilize the HRI Driving Dataset (HDD) (Ramanishka et al., 2018), which includes
   104 hours of real human driving. We also include driving videos generated in the Unreal Engine.

3.2 FAST L EARNING
The slow learning process enables the generation of new video chunks based on action descrip-
tions. A complete episode can thus be generated by sequentially conditioning on previous outputs.
However, this method does not ensure the retention of memory beyond the most recent chunk, po-
tentially leading to inconsistencies among temporally distant segments. In this section, we introduce
the novel fast learning strategy, which can store episodic memory of all generated chunks. We begin
by briefly outlining the generation process of our video diffusion model. Subsequently, we introduce
a temporary LoRA module, T EMP -L O RA, for storing episodic memory.
Generation Each iteration i consists of T denoising steps (t = T . . . 1). We initialize new chunks
with random noise at zTi . During each step, we combine the previous iteration’s clean output z0i−1
with the current noisy latent zti . This combined input is fed into a UNet to predict and remove noise,
producing a less noisy version for the next step. We focus only on the newly generated frames,
masking out previous-iteration outputs. This process repeats until the iteration’s final step, yielding
a clean latent z0i . The resulting z0i becomes input for the next iteration. The generation process
works directly with the latent representation, progressively extending the video without decoding
and re-encoding from pixel space between iterations.
T EMP -L O RA Inspired by Wang et al. (2024b), we utilize a temporary LoRA module that embeds
the episodic memory in its parameters. T EMP -L O RA was initially designed for long text generation,
progressively generating new text chunks based on inputs, and use the generated chunk as ground-
truth to train the model conditioned on the input chunk. We improve T EMP -L O RA for video gen-
eration to focus on memorizing entire trajectories rather than focusing on immediate input-output
streams. Specifically, after the generation process of iteration i, we use the concatenation of the
input latent and output latent at this iteration to update the T EMP -L O RA parameters.
                               ′                    ′  √       ′  √
                            z0i = z0i−1 ⊕ z0i ; zti = ᾱt z0i + 1 − ᾱt ϵ
                                                       h                ′
                                                                                  i               (3)
                         L(Θi |Φ) = Et,z0i ′ ,ϵ∼N (0,1) ||ϵ − ϵΦ+Θi (zti , t)||22
Specifically, we concatenate the clean output from the last iteration z0i−1 (which is also the input
of the current iteration) and the clean output from the current iteration z0i to construct a temporal
              ′                                    ′                               ′
continuum z0i . Then, we add noise to the whole z0i sequence, which results in zti at noise diffusion
step t. Note that here we do not condition on clean z0i−1 anymore, and exclude text conditioning to


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 S LOW FAST-VG EN Algorithm
(a) Fast Learning
     Input:        First frame of video sequence X0 , total generating iterations I, video diffusion model with
    frozen pretrained weights Φ and LoRA parameters Θ0 , fast learning learning rate α
     Output:         Long Video Sequence Y
 1: X0 = VAE ENCODE(X0 ); Y ← X0                                                             {Encode into latents}
 2: for i in 0 to I − 1 do
 3:            // Generate the sequence in the current context window
 4:     if i ̸= 0 then
 5:         Xi ← Yi−1
 6:     end if
 7:     Ci ← User Input(i)                            {Action conditioning acquired through user interface input}
 8:     Yi = (Φ + Θi )(Xi , Ci )
 9:     Y = Y ⊕ Yi                                   {Concatenate the output latents to the final sequence latents}
10:            // Use the input and output in the context window to train T EMP -L O RA
11:     Xi = Xi ⊕ Y i                        {Concatenate input and output to prepare T EMP -L O RA training data}
12:     Sample Noise N on the whole Xi sequence
13:     Calculate Loss on the whole Xi sequence
14:     Θi+1 ← Θi − α · ∇θ Loss
15: end for
16: Y = VAE DECODE(Y)                                                                         {Decode into video}
17: return Y
(b) Slow-Fast Learning Loop
     Definition:        task-specific slow learning weights Φ, task-specific dataset D, LoRA parameters of all
    episodes Θ, slow learning learning rate β, slow-learning dataset Ds
    // Slow Learning Loop
 1: while not converged do
 2:     Ds ← ∅ //prepare dataset for slow learning
 3:     for each sample (x, episode) in D do
 4:         // Fast Learning Loop
 5:         Suppose episode could be divided into I short sequences: Xie for i in 0 to I − 1
 6:         Initialize T EMP -L O RA parameters for this episode Θe0
 7:         for i in 0 to I − 1 do
 8:             Ds = Ds ∪ {Xie , Xi+1  e
                                          , Θei }                      e
                                                                   {Xi+1   is the ground-truth output of input Xie }
 9:             Fix Φ and update Θei using fast learning algorithm
10:         end for
11:     end for
12:     // Use the Ds dataset for slow learning update
13:     for {Xie , Xi+1e
                           , Θei } in Ds do
14:         Φi = Φ + Θei
               e

15:         Calculate Loss based on the model output of input Xie , and ground-truth output Xi+1  e
                   e
16:         Fix Θi and update Φ only: Φ ← Φ − β · ∇Φ Loss
17:     end for
18: end while


focus on remembering full trajectories rather than conditions. Then, we update the T EMP -L O RA
                                                                                         ′
parameters of the UNet Θi using the concatenated noise-augmented, action-agnostic z0i . Through
forward diffusion and reverse denoising, we effectively consolidate sequential episodic memory in
the T EMP -L O RA parameters. The fast learning algorithm is illustrated in Algorithm 1 (a).
3.3 S LOW-FAST L EARNING L OOP WITH T EMP -L O RA
Previously, we develop T EMP -L O RA for inference-time training, allowing for rapid adaptation to
new contexts and the storage of per-episode memory in the LoRA parameters. However, some
specific context-aware tasks require learning from all collected long-term episodes rather than just
memorizing individual ones. For instance, solving a maze involves not only recalling the long-
term trajectory within each maze, but also leveraging prior experiences to generalize the ability to
navigate and solve different mazes effectively. Therefore, to enhance our framework’s ability to
solve various tasks that require learning over long-term episodes, we propose the slow-fast learning
loop algorithm, which integrates the T EMP -L O RA modules into a dual-speed learning process.
We detail our slow-fast learning loop algorithm in Algorithm 1 (b). Our slow-fast learning loop
consists of two primary loops: an inner loop for fast learning and an outer loop for slow learning.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The inner loop, representing the fast learning component, utilizes T EMP -L O RA for quick adaptation
to each episode. It inherits the fast learning algorithm in Algorithm 1 (a) and updates the memory in
the T EMP -L O RA throughout the long video generation process. Crucially, the inner loop not only
generates long video outputs and updates the T EMP -L O RA parameters, but also prepares training
data for the slow learning process. It aggregates inputs, ground-truth outputs, and corresponding
T EMP -L O RA parameters in individual episodes into a dataset Ds . The outer loop implements the
slow learning process. It leverages the learned frozen T EMP -L O RA parameters in different episodes
to capture the long-term information of the input data. Specifically, it utilizes the data collected from
multiple episodes by the inner loop, which consists of the inputs and ground-truth outputs of each
iteration in the episodes, together with the memory saved in T EMP -L O RA up to this iteration.
While the slow-fast learning loop may be intensive for full pre-training of the approximate world
model, it can be effectively used in finetuning for specific domains or tasks requiring long-horizon
planning or experience consolidation. A key application is in robot planning, where slow accumu-
lation of task-solving strategies across environments can enhance the robot’s ability to generalize to
complex, multi-step challenges in new settings, as illustrated in our experiment (Sec 4.2).
3.4   V IDEO P LANNING
We follow Du et al. (2023), formulating task planning as a text-conditioned video generation prob-
lem using Unified Predictive Decision Process (UPDP). We define a UPDP as G = ⟨X, C, H, ϕ⟩,
where X is the space of image observations, C denotes textual task descriptions, H ∈ T is a finite
horizon length, and ϕ(·|x0 , c) : X × C → ∆(X T −1 ) is our proposed conditional video gener-
ator. ϕ synthesizes a video sequence given an initial observation x0 and text description c. To
transform synthesized videos into executable actions, we use a trajectory-task conditioned policy
         −1
π(·|xt Tt=0 , c) : X T × C → ∆(AT −1 ). Decision-making is reduced to learning ϕ, which gener-
ates future image states based on language instructions. Action execution translates the synthesized
video plan [x1 , ..., xT ] to actions. We employ an inverse dynamics model to infer necessary actions
for realizing the video plan. This policy determines appropriate actions by taking two consecutive
image observations from the synthesized video. For long-horizon planning, ChatGPT decomposes
tasks into subgoals, each realized as a UPDP process. After generating a video chunk for a subgoal,
we use the inverse dynamics model to execute actions. We sequentially generate video chunks for
subgoals, updating T EMP -L O RA throughout the long-horizon video generation process.

3.5   R ETHINKING S LOW-FAST L EARNING IN THE C ONTEXT OF C OMPLEMENTARY
      L EARNING S YSTEMS

Slow-Fast Learning as in Brain Structures
In neuroscience, the neocortex is associated with slow learning, while the hippocampus facilitates
fast learning and memory formation, thus forming a complementary learning system where the
two learning mechanisms complement each other. While slow learning involves gradual knowledge
acquisition, fast learning enables rapid formation of new memories from single experiences for quick
adaptation to new situations through one-shot contextual learning. However, current pre-training
paradigms (e.g., LLMs or diffusion models) primarily emulate slow learning, akin to procedural
memory in cognitive science. In our setting, T EMP -L O RA serves as an analogy to the hippocampus.
T EMP -L O RA as Local Learning Rule
It’s long believed that fast learning is achieved by local learning rule (Palm, 2013). Specifically,
given pairs of patterns (xµ , y µ ) to be stored in the matrix C, the process of storage could be formu-
lated by the following equation:                     X
                                               c=       xµ y µ                                        (4)
                                                   µ
Consider a sequential memory storage process where learning steps involve adding input-output
pairs (xµ , y µ ) to memory, the change ∆cij in each memory entry depends only on local input-output
interactions (Palm, 2013):
                                         ∆c(t) = xµ (t) · y µ (t)                                (5)
This local learning rule bears a striking resemblance to LoRA’s update mechanism.
                            W ′ = W + ∆W = Wslow + Wfast = Φ + Θ                                     (6)


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Where Wfast is achieved by the matrix change, updated based on the current-iteration input and
output locally as in Equation 3 (∆W ← z0,i−1 ⊕ z0,i ).
Slow-Fast Learning Loop as a Computational Analogue to Hippocampus-Neocortex Interplay
The relationship between T EMP -L O RA and slow learning weights mirrors the interplay between
hippocampus and neocortex in complementary learning systems. This involves rapid encoding of
new experiences by the hippocampus, followed by gradual integration into neocortical networks
(McClelland et al., 1995). As in Klinzing et al. (2019), memory consolidation is the process where
hippocampal memories are abstracted and integrated into neocortical structures, forming general
knowledge via offline phases, particularly during sleep. This bidirectional interaction allows for
both quick adaptation and long-term retention (Kumaran et al., 2016). Our slow-fast learning loop
emulates this process, where W ′ = W + ∆W = Wslow + Wfast . Here, Wfast (T EMP -L O RA) rapidly
adapts to new experiences, analogous to hippocampal encoding, while Wslow gradually incorporates
this information, mirroring neocortical consolidation.

4     E XPERIMENT
For our experimental evaluation, we will focus on assessing the capabilities of our proposed ap-
proach with regard to two perspectives: video generation and video planning. We will detail our
baseline models, datasets, evaluation metrics, results, and qualitative examples for each component.
Please refer to the supplementary material for experimental setup, implementation details, human
evaluation details, computational costs, more ablative studies and more qualitative examples.
4.1   E VALUATION ON V IDEO G ENERATION
Baseline Models and Evaluation Metrics We compare our S LOW FAST VG EN with several base-
lines. AVDC (Ko et al., 2023) is a video generation model that uses action descriptions for training
video policies in image space. Streaming-T2V (Henschel et al., 2024) is a state-of-the-art text-to-
long-video generation model featuring a conditional attention module and video enhancer. We also
evaluate Runway (Runway) in an off-the-shelf manner to assess commercial text-to-video generation
models. Additionally, AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2023b) animates personalized T2I models. SEINE
(Chen et al., 2023) is a short-to-long video generation method that generates transitions based on text
descriptions. iVideoGPT (Wu et al., 2024) is an interactive autoregressive transformer framework.
We tune these models (except for Runway) on our proposed dataset for a fair comparison.
We first evaluate the slow learning process, which takes in a previous video together with an input ac-
tion, and outputs the new video chunk. We include a series of evaluation metrics, including: Fréchet
Video Distance (FVD), Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) and
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS). We reserved a portion of our collected dataset
as the test set, ensuring no scene overlap with the training set. We evaluate the model’s ability to
generate consistent long videos through an iterative process. Starting with an initial image and ac-
tion sequence, the model sequentially generates video chunks by conditioning on the previous chunk
and the next action. To assess the consistency of the generated sequence, we use Short-term Content
Consistency (SCuts) Henschel et al. (2024), which measures temporal coherence between adjacent
frames. We utilize PySceneDetect (PySceneDetect) to detect scene cuts and report their number.
We also introduce Scene Revisit Consistency (SRC), a new metric that quantifies how consistently
a video represents the same location when revisited via reverse actions (e.g., moving forward and
then back). SRC is computed by measuring the cosine similarities between visual features (using
ResNet-18 (He et al., 2015)) of the first visit and subsequent visits. We construct an SRC bench-
mark in Minecraft and Unreal, automating a script to generate specific navigation paths that involve
revisiting the same locations multiple times during the course of a long video sequence. Finally, we
conduct Human Evaluation, where human raters assess video quality, coherence, and adherence to
actions, with each sample rated by at least three individuals on a scale from 0 to 1.
Result Analysis In Table 4, we include the experimental results of video generation, where the
left part focuses on slow learning for action-conditioned video generation, and the right part eval-
uates the ability to generate consistent long videos. From the table, we can see that our model
outperforms others with regard to both slow learning and long video generation. Specifically, our
method achieves a notable FVD score of 514, significantly lower than those of other methods, such
as AVDC (1408) and Runway Gen-3 Turbo (1763), demonstrating its capability to capture the un-
derlying dynamics of video content. The high PSNR and SSIM scores also indicate that our model
achieves high visual fidelity and similarity with ground-truth videos. Runway produces less satis-


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         FVD ↓   PSNR ↑    SSIM ↑           LPIPS ↓      SCuts ↓    SRC ↑      Human
  AVDC                                   1408    16.96     52.63            20.65        3.13       83.89      0.478
  Streaming-T2V                          990     14.87     48.33            33.00        0.89       91.02      0.814
  Runway Gen-3 Turbo                     1763    11.15     47.29            52.71        2.46       80.26      0.205
  AnimateDiff                            782     17.89     52.34            33.41        2.94       90.12      0.872
  SEINE                                  919     18.04     54.15            35.72        1.03       88.95      0.843
  iVideoGPT                              1303    13.08     31.37            27.22        1.32       82.19      0.536
  Ours (wo/ Temp-LoRA)                   /       /         /                /            1.88       89.04      0.869
  Ours S LOW FAST-VG EN                  514     19.21     60.53            25.06        0.37       93.71      0.897
Table 1: Video Generation Results. S LOW FAST-VG EN outperforms baselines both in slow learn-
ing and long video generation, while achieving good scores in human evaluation.
factory results and could not comprehend text inputs, suggesting that state-of-the-art commercial
models still struggle to serve as action-conditioned world models. From the long video generation
perspective, we can see that our model and Streaming-T2V outperform other models by a large mar-
gin, with fewer scene changes (indicated by SCuts) and better scene revisit consistency. We attribute
the notable improvement in performance to the mechanisms of the two models specially designed
to handle short- and long-term memory. However, Streaming-T2V is still inferior to our model,
since the appearance preservation module it uses only takes in one anchor frame, neglecting the full
episode memory along the generation process. On the other hand, our T EMP -LORA module takes
into account the full trajectory, therefore achieving better consistency. We also observe that AVDC
suffers from incoherence and ambiguity in output videos, which might be blamed to the image-space
diffusion, which results in instability and low quality compared with latent-space diffusion models.
Qualitative Study Figure 3 shows the results of slow learning. Our model is able to encompass
a variety of scenarios in action-conditioned video generation, including driving scenes, robotics,
human avatars, droid scenes etc. The model is able to condition on and conform to various actions
(e.g., in the third row, it manages to go in different directions given different prompts). We also
observe that our model adheres to physical constraints. For instance, in the last action for row three,
it knows to come to a halt and bring the hands to a resting position. In Figure 4, we compare our
model’s results with and without the T EMP -LORA module. The T EMP -LORA improves quality
and consistency in long video generation, demonstrating more smoothness across frames. In the first
example, the scene generated without T EMP -L O RA begins to morph at t = 96, and becomes com-
pletely distorted and irrelevant at t = 864. The scene generated with T EMP -L O RA almost remains
unchanged for the first 400 frames, exhibiting only minor inconsistencies by t = 896. Our model
is able to generate up to 1000 frames without significant distortion and degradation. Additionally,
the model lacking T EMP -LORA suffers from severe hallucinations for the second example, such as
generating an extra bread at t = 48, changing the apple’s color at t = 144, and adding a yellow cup at
t = 168. Although the robotics data does not involve long-term videos with sequential instructions,
but rather short episodes of single executions, our model still performs well by conditioning on pre-
vious frames. With T EMP -LORA, our model also produces less noise in later frames (e.g., t = 216).
As the scene is unseen in training, our model also demonstrates strong adaptation ability.
              Change to the Right Lane                    Turn on the Faucet                       Reverse the Car


                    Take the Knife                            Turn right at the intersection             Push the Button


    Initial                  Go Forward                          Back Off                              Go Right


Figure 3: Qualitative Examples of Video Generation with Regard to Slow Learning. Our
S LOW FAST-VG EN is able to conduct action-conditioned video generation in diverse scenarios.
4.2 E VALUATION ON L ONG -H ORIZON P LANNING
In this section, we show how S LOW FAST-VG EN could benefit long-horizon planning. We carefully
design two tasks which emphasize the memorization of previous trajectories, in the domains of
robot manipulation and game navigation respectively. We follow the steps in Section 4.2 for task
execution and employ the slow-fast learning loop for these two specific tasks separately. We report
the distance to pre-defined waypoints as well as the FVD of the generated long videos.


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      t = 0~32                   t = 96~128                   t = 320~352             t = 352~384                  t = 864~896             t =896~928
      Go Forward                 Go Forward                   Back Off                Back Off                     Go right                Go leff



    wo/ Temp-LoRA
                          …                              …                                               …



    w/ Temp-LoRA

    t = 0~24      t = 24~48     t = 48~72    t = 72~96           t = 96~120   t = 120~144 t = 144~168         t = 168~192 t = 192~216 t = 216~240
    Pick up the   Put the green Pick up the Place the            Pick up the Place square Pick up             Move the      Put the apple Move the
    green cup     cup in the    square bread bread in the        square bread bread back to the apple         apple towards in the gray   gray bowl to
                  white bowl                 white bowl          again        the table                       the gray bowl bowl          the oven


    wo/ Temp-LoRA


    w/ Temp-LoRA
Figure 4: Qualitative Examples of Fast Learning for Video Generation. t means frame number.
Red boxes denote
            AVDC objects inconsistent with before.
                             StreamingT2V     Ours Two
                                                     EMP -L O RA boosts
                                                       Temp-LORA        consistency
                                                                     Ours wo Loop inOurs
                                                                                     long videos.
                    Dist          FVD          Dist          FVD           Dist        FVD                     Dist         FVD            Dist          FVD
 RLBench            0.078         81.4         0.022         68.2          0.080       70.3                    0.055        69.8           0.013         65.9
 Minecraft          5.57          526          2.18          497           6.31        513                     2.23         501            1.51          446
       Table 2: Long-horizon Planning Results. Our model outperforms baselines in both tasks.

Robot Manipulation We build a new task from scratch in the RLBench (James et al., 2019) envi-
ronment. The task focuses on moving objects and then returning them to previous locations. We
record the distance to the previous locations of the cubes. Table 4.2 shows that our model and
Streaming-T2V outperform models without memories. Streaming-T2V has satisfying results since
the appearance preservation module takes an anchor image as input, yet is still inferior to our model.
Ablative results of “Ours wo Loop” also demonstrate the importance of the slow-fast learning loop.
                                                                          Go to the pool                                  Go to the tree


                                Proceed to the pool,
                                then navigate to the
                                tree. Subsequently,
                                return to the origin          Go back to the pool via the same path            Go back to the origin via the same path
                                point by retracing the
                                initial path.


                      Move both cubes to the             Move the black      Move the pink     Move the black       Move the pink      Move the pink cube
                      green area. Subsequently,           cube to the         cube to the         cube to the         cube to the        to black cube’s
                      return them to their original       green area          green area       original location   original location    previous location
                      positions. Then, put the
                      second cube where the first
                      cube was in the green area.

    Figure 5: Qualitative Example of Planning. S LOW FAST-VG EN can retain long-term memory.
Game Navigation We develop a task in Minecraft that requires the gamer to retrace the initial path
to return to a point. We define a set of waypoints along the way, and measure the closest distance to
these waypoints. From Table 4.2 and Figure 5, we can see that our model achieves superior results.


5      C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this paper, we present S LOW FAST-VG EN, a dual-speed learning system for action-driven long
video generation. Our approach combines slow learning for building comprehensive world knowl-
edge with fast learning for rapid adaptation and maintaining consistency in extended videos.
Through experiments, we demonstrate S LOW FAST-VG EN’s capability to generate coherent, action-
responsive videos and perform long-horizon planning. One limitation is that our model could not
suffice as an almighty world model as many scenarios are not covered in the dataset. Our method
also introduces additional computation during inference as specified in the Supplementary Material.


                                                                              10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The work was done when Yining Hong was an intern at Microsoft Research. The work was also
partially supported by NSF DMS-2015577, NSF DMS-2415226, and a gift fund from Amazon. We
would like to thank Yan Wang and Dongyang Ma for insights into T EMP -L O RA for text generation.
We would also like to thank Siyuan Zhou, Xiaowen Qiu, Xingcheng Yao and Johnson Lin for in-
sights into video diffusion models. We would like to thank PLUSLab paper clinic for proofreading.

R EFERENCES
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, and et al. Stable video diffusion:
  Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a.

Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion
  models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08818.

Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Lingjun Zhang, Shaobin Zhuang, Xin Ma, Jiashuo Yu, Yali Wang,
  Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Seine: Short-to-long video diffusion model for generative
  transition and prediction, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.20700.

Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Maddukuri,
  Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Man-
  dlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khaz-
  atsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg,
  Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh
  Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim,
  Bernhard Schölkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea
  Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher
  Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne
  Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
  Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao,
  Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan,
  Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang, Hao
  Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki
  Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Ra-
  dosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters,
  Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen
  Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon
  Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, João Silvério, Joey Hejna, Jonathan
  Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Junhyek Han, Kaiyuan
  Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken
  Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin
  Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Kuan
  Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yun-
  liang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca
  Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina,
  Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, Mingtong
  Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki
  Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Nor-
  man Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani,
  Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick ”Tree” Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David
  Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan
  Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart’in-Mart’in, Rohan Baijal, Rosario
  Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah,
  Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry
  Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani, Shubham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun
  Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany,


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel
  Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya
  Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev,
  Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vin-
  cent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong
  Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao
  Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying
  Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen
  Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang
  Li, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen
  Zhang, Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x
  models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864.

Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. Scal-
  ing egocentric vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2018.

Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Jian Ma, Evange-
  los Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray.
  Rescaling egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and challenges for epic-kitchens-100. Interna-
  tional Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 130:33–55, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1007/s11263-021-01531-2.

Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00111.

Epic Games. Unreal engine. URL https://www.unrealengine.com.

Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03011.

Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03638.

Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Sparsectrl:
  Adding sparse controls to text-to-video diffusion models, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2311.16933.

Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
  Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffu-
  sion models without specific tuning, 2023b.

William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 diffusion modeling of long videos, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11495.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.

Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion mod-
  els for high-fidelity long video generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
  13221.

Roberto Henschel, Levon Khachatryan, Daniil Hayrapetyan, Hayk Poghosyan, Vahram Tadevosyan,
  Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Streamingt2v: Consistent, dynamic,
  and extendable long video generation from text, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2403.14773.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2210.02303.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J.
  Fleet. Video diffusion models, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03458.
Anthony Hu, Lloyd Russell, Hudson Yeo, Zak Murez, George Fedoseev, Alex Kendall, Jamie Shot-
  ton, and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-1: A generative world model for autonomous driving, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17080.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark and learning environment, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1909.12271.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13439.
J. G. Klinzing, N. Niethard, and J. Born. Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during
   sleep. Nature Neuroscience, 22:1598–1610, October 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0467-3.
   Received 18 February 2019; Accepted 12 July 2019; Published 26 August 2019.
Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Learning to act
  from actionless videos through dense correspondences, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.08576.
Dharshan Kumaran, Demis Hassabis, and James L. McClelland. What learning systems do intelli-
  gent agents need? complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
  20(7):512–534, July 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.004.
Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08320.
James L. McClelland, Bruce L. McNaughton, and Randall C. O’Reilly. Why there are complemen-
  tary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures
  of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3):419–457, July
  1995. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419.
Günther Palm. Neural associative memories and sparse coding. Neural Networks, 37:165–171,
  2013.
PySceneDetect. Pyscenedetect. URL https://www.scenedetect.com/. Accessed: 2024-
  03-03.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Vasili Ramanishka, Yi-Ting Chen, Teruhisa Misu, and Kate Saenko. Toward driving scene under-
  standing: A dataset for learning driver behavior and causal reasoning. In Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Weiming Ren, Huan Yang, Ge Zhang, Cong Wei, Xinrun Du, Wenhao Huang, and Wenhu Chen.
 Consisti2v: Enhancing visual consistency for image-to-video generation, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2402.04324.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
Runway. Runway. URL https://runwayml.com/. Accessed: 2024-03-03.
Gladys C. Schwesinger. Review of ”psychological development” by norman l. munn. Pedagogical
  Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology, 55:xxx–xxx, 1955.
Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-video:
  Text-to-video generation without text-video data, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2209.14792.
Endel Tulving. Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford University Press, 1983.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2210.02399.
Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. Mcvd: Masked conditional video
  diffusion for prediction, generation, and interpolation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.09853.
Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang.
   Modelscope text-to-video technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
   06571.
Xiaofeng Wang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Boyuan Wang, Xinze Chen, and Jiwen Lu. World-
  dreamer: Towards general world models for video generation via predicting masked tokens,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.09985.
Y. Wang, D. Ma, and D. Cai. With greater text comes greater necessity: Inference-time training
  helps long text generation, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.11504.
Jialong Wu, Shaofeng Yin, Ningya Feng, Xu He, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, and Mingsheng Long.
   ivideogpt: Interactive videogpts are scalable world models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2405.15223.
Jiannan Xiang, Guangyi Liu, Yi Gu, Qiyue Gao, Yuting Ning, Yuheng Zha, Zeyu Feng, Tianhua
   Tao, Shibo Hao, Yemin Shi, Zhengzhong Liu, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Pandora: Towards
   general world model with natural language actions and video states, 2024. URL https://
   arxiv.org/abs/2406.09455.
Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Kaelbling, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06114.
Shuai Yang, Yifan Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Chen Change Loy. Rerender a video: Zero-shot text-guided
  video-to-video translation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07954.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan
  Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Gong Ming, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu,
  Houqiang Li, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-xl: Diffusion over diffusion for extremely long video gener-
  ation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12346.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Avnish Narayan, Hayden Shively, Adithya
  Bellathur, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and
  evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1910.10897.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yan Zeng, Guoqiang Wei, Jiani Zheng, Jiaxin Zou, Yang Wei, Yuchen Zhang, and Hang Li. Make
  pixels dance: High-dynamic video generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.10982.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2211.11018.
article iclr2025c onf erence, times
amsmath,amsfonts,bm
OT1phvmsl
boldOT1phvbxn
*arg max arg max ∗ arg minarg min
sign signTrT r
hyperref url algorithm algorithmic graphicx wrapfig xcolor enumitem colortbl

C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                     2

2   Related Works                                                                                    3

3   SlowFast-VGen                                                                                    4
    3.1   Slow Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
          3.1.1    Masked Conditional Video Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
          3.1.2    Dataset Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
    3.2   Fast Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
    3.3   Slow-Fast Learning Loop with Temp-LoRA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6

    3.4   Video Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
    3.5   Rethinking Slow-Fast Learning in the Context of Complementary Learning Systems             7

4   Experiment                                                                                       8
    4.1   Evaluation on Video Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
    4.2   Evaluation on Long-Horizon Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9

5   Conclusion and Limitations                                                                      10

A Contribution Statement                                                                            17

B More Details about the Method                                                                     17

C Dataset Statistics                                                                                18

D More Experimental Details                                                                         18

E Experiments on Ablations and Variations of S LOW FAST-VG EN                                       19


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F More Qualitative Examples                         20


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     C ONTRIBUTION S TATEMENT

Yining Hong was responsible for all of the code development, paper writing, and experiments. She
also collected the data for Minecraft.
Beide Liu contributed to most of the data collection with regard to Unreal data. He was in charge
of setting up the Unreal Engine, purchasing assets online, writing the Python scripts for automate
agent control, and recording first-person and third-person videos of Unreal data.
Maxine Wu collected the data of Google 3D Tiles. She was also responsible for the task setup of
RLBench and the data collection of RLBench. She also curated part of the driving data.
Yuanhao Zhai wrote the codes for AnimateDiff, which was one of the baseline models.
The other people took on the advising roles, contributing extensively to the project by offering in-
novative ideas, providing detailed technical recommendations, assisting with troubleshooting code
issues, and conducting multiple rounds of thorough paper reviews. They provided valuable exper-
tise on video diffusion models. Zhengyuan Yang, Yingnian Wu and Lijuan Wang were involved
in brainstorming and critical review throughout the project. Specifically, Zhengyuan Yang pro-
vided much technical support. Yingnian Wu came up with the idea of T EMP -L O RA for modelling
episodic memory as well as the masked video diffusion model. Lijuan Wang provided valuable
insights throughout the project.

B     M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT THE M ETHOD

B.1   P RELIMINARIES ON L ATENT D IFFUSION M ODELS

Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), operates in the compressed latent space of an autoencoder
obtained by a pre-trained VAE . Given an input x0 , the process begins by encoding it into a latent
representation: z0 = E(x0 ) where E is the VAE encoder function. Noise is then progressively
added to the latent codes through a Gaussian diffusion process:
                                                    p
                              q(zt |zt−1 ) = N (zt ; 1 − βt zt−1 , βt I)                        (7)
for t = 1, . . . , T , where T is the total number of diffusion steps and βt are noise schedule parameters.
This iterative process can be expressed in a simpler form:
                                                  √         √
                                            zt = ᾱt z0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ                                     (8)
                                 Qt
where ϵ ∼ N (0, I), ᾱt = i=1 αi , and αi = 1 − βi . Stable Diffusion employs an ϵ-prediction
approach, training a neural network ϵθ to predict the noise added to the latent representation. The
loss function is defined as:
                               L = Et,z0 ∼pdata ,ϵ∼N (0,1),c ||ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, c)||22

                                                                                                        (9)
Here, c represents the conditioning (e.g., text), and θ denotes the neural network parameters, typi-
cally implemented as a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015).
During inference, the model iteratively denoises random Gaussian noise, guided by the learned ϵθ ,
to generate latent representations. These are then decoded to produce high-quality images consistent
with the given textual descriptions.
Video diffusion models (Ho et al., 2022b) typically build upon LDMs by utilizing a 3D U-Net
architecture, which enhances the standard 2D structure by adding temporal convolutions after each
spatial convolution and temporal attention blocks following spatial attention blocks.

B.2   P RELIMINARIES ON L OW-R ANK A DAPTATION (L O RA)

LoRA Hu et al. (2021) transforms the fine-tuning process for large-scale models by avoiding the
need to adjust all parameters. Instead, it utilizes compact, low-rank matrices to modify only a subset
of the model’s weights. This approach keeps the original model parameters fixed, addressing the
problem of catastrophic forgetting, where new learning can overwrite existing knowledge. LoRA


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


utilizes compact, low-rank matrices to modify only a subset of the model’s weights, therefore avoid-
ing the need to adjust all parameters. In LoRA, the weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n is updated by adding
a learnable residual. The modified weight matrix W ′ is:
                                   W ′ = W + ∆W = W + AB T
where A ∈ Rm×r and B ∈ Rn×r are low-rank matrices, and r is the rank parameter that determines
their size. In this paper, we denote the LoRA finetuning as the fast learning process and the pre-
training as slow learning process. The equation then becomes:
                            W ′ = W + ∆W = Wslow + Wfast = Φ + Θ                                 (10)
where Φ corresponds to the pre-trained slow-learning weights, and Θ corresponds to the LoRA
paraemters in the fast learning phase.

B.3   M ODELSCOPE T2V D ETAILS

We base our slow learning model on ModelscopeT2V (Wang et al., 2023). Here, we introduce the
details of this model.
Given a text prompt p, the model generates a video vpr through a latent video diffusion model
that aligns with the semantic meaning of the prompt. The architecture is composed of a visual
space where the training video vgt and generated video vpr reside, while the diffusion process and
denoising UNet ϵθ operate in a latent space. Utilizing VQGAN, which facilitates data conversion
between visual and latent spaces, the model encodes a training video vgt = [f1 , . . . , fF ] into its
latent representation Zgt = [E(f1 ), . . . , E(fF )]. During the training phase, the diffusion process
introduces Gaussian noise to the latent variable, ultimately allowing the model to predict and denoise
these latent representations during inference.
To ensure that ModelScopeT2V generates videos that adhere to given text prompts, it incorporates a
text conditioning mechanism that effectively injects textual information into the generative process.
Inspired by Stable Diffusion, the model augments the UNet structure with a cross-attention mech-
anism that allows for conditioning of visual content based on textual input. The text embedding c
derived from the prompt p is utilized as the key and value in the multi-head attention layer, enabling
the intermediate UNet features to integrate text features. The text encoder from the pre-trained CLIP
ViT-H/14 converts the prompt into a text embedding, ensuring a strong alignment between language
and vision embeddings.
The core of the latent video diffusion model lies in the denoising UNet, which encompasses vari-
ous blocks, including the initial block, downsampling block, spatio-temporal block, and upsampling
block. Most of the model’s parameters are concentrated in the denoising UNet ϵθ , which is tasked
with the diffusion process in the latent space. The model aims to minimize the discrepancy between
the predicted noise and the ground-truth noise, thereby achieving effective video synthesis through
denoising. ModelScopeT2V’s architecture also includes a spatio-temporal block, which captures
complex spatial and temporal dependencies to enhance video synthesis quality. The spatio-temporal
block is comprised of spatial convolutions, temporal convolutions, and attention mechanisms. By ef-
fectively synthesizing videos through this structure, ModelScopeT2V learns comprehensive spatio-
temporal representations, allowing it to generate high-quality videos. The model implements a com-
bination of self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms, facilitating both cross-modal interactions
and spatial modeling to capture correlations across frames effectively.

C     DATASET S TATISTICS
We provide the dataset statistics in Figure 6.

D     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
D.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We utilize approximately 64 V100 GPUs for the pre-training of S LOW FAST-VG EN, with a batch
size of 128. The slow learning rate is set to 5e-6, while the fast learning rate is 1e-4. Training


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                               Game: Minecraft
                                                               Unreal-FPV
                                                               Unreal-TPV
                                                               Unreal-Google 3D
                                                               Tiles
                                                               Unreal-Car
                                                               EPIC-KITCHEN
                                                               Open-X Embodiment
                                                               Other Robotics
                                                               Dataset
                                                               HDD


                            Figure 6: Statistics of our Training Dataset.


videos of mixed lengths are used, all within the context window of 32 frames. During training, we
freeze the VAE and CLIP Encoder, allowing only the UNet to be trained. For inference and fast
learning, we employ a single V100 GPU. For T EMP -L O RA, a LoRA rank of 32 is used, and the
Adam optimizer is employed in both learning phases.

D.2    C OMPUTATION C OSTS

In Table 3, we show the computation costs with and without T EMP -L O RA. While the inclusion of
T EMP -L O RA does introduce some additional computation during the inference process, the differ-
ence is relatively minor and remains within acceptable limit.

                                                     Ours wo T EMP -L O RA       Ours w T EMP -L O RA
      Average Inference Time per Sample (seconds)    12.9305                     13.8066
      Inference Memory Usage (MB)                    9579                        9931

          Table 3: Comparison of Computation Costs with and without T EMP -L O RA


D.3    H UMAN E VALUATION D ETAILS

In our human evaluation session for action-conditioned long video generation, 30 participants as-
sessed the generated video samples (50 videos per person) based on three criteria:

       • Video Quality (0 to 1): Participants evaluated the overall visual quality, considering aspects
         such as resolution, clarity, and aesthetic appeal.
       • Coherence (0 to 1): They examined the logical flow of actions and whether the events
         progressed seamlessly throughout the video, ensuring there were no abrupt changes or
         disconnections.
       • Adherence to Actions (0 to 1): Participants judged how accurately the generated videos
         reflected the specified action prompts, assessing whether the actions were effectively de-
         picted.

Each video was rated by at least three different individuals to ensure reliability. The collected ratings
were then compiled for analysis, with average scores calculated to assess performance across the
different criteria.


E     E XPERIMENTS ON A BLATIONS AND VARIATIONS OF S LOW FAST-VG EN

We introduce several variations of S LOW FAST-VG EN, including:


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          SCuts ↓   SRC ↑
                         Our (w original T EMP -L O RA)   0.55      92.24
                         Ours (wo Local Learning Rule)    0.36      90.27
                         Ours (wo Chunk Input)            1.24      90.01
                         Ours (wo/ Temp-LoRA)             1.88      89.04
                         Ours S LOW FAST-VG EN            0.37      93.71
Table 4: Scene Cuts and SRC Scores. Comparison of scene cuts and SRC scores for our method
with and without Temp-LoRA.
       • Ours wo Chunk Input that only conditions on single-frame images instead of previous
         chunk
       • Ours wo Local Learning Rule that samples over the whole generated sequence for training
         T EMP -L O RA, instead of using local inputs and outputs to train.
       • Ours w original T EMP -L O RA that uses the original T EMP -L O RA structure that were
         designed for long text generation.

We show the results below. From the table, we can see that S LOW FAST-VG EN trained over sampled
full sequence also shows good performances. However, our observation indicates that this method
tends to over-smooth the generated sequences, leading to blurry videos for later frames.

F     M ORE Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
F.1   M ORE Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF S LOW L EARNING

In Figure 7 and Figure 8, we include more qualitative examples with regard to slow learning.

F.2   M ORE Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF FAST L EARNING

In Figure 9 and Figure 10, we include more qualitative examples with regard to fast learning.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Switch to the Right Lane                                Move to the Left              Put the Green Bowl in the Dish Rack



                                Right lane branch                                               Wash Plate



      Pick Up the Apple                                Back Off                              Place the BLue Cube in the Shelf


                                Rinse Knife                                                Pass the intersection



      Initial            Ascend to a Higher Altitude              Descend to a Lower Altitude        Adjust Lateral Position to the Left


                        Turn right                        Pick Up the Milk Dairy                             Back Off


                                     Go Forward                                      Change to the RIght Lane


                       Open Fridge                                 Hit the nail with a hammer              Place the long bread in the sink


                             Pass the Intersection                                                 Go Forward


                           Pass the Intersection                                               Go Right


   Place the apple fruit on the table              Open Cupboard                                          Back Off


                             Figure 7: Qualitative Examples on Slow Learning. Part 1.


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Pass the Intersection                                       Wash Hands



  Pick up the orange fruit                            Turn right                                        Run Straight Forward



      Initial                 Descend to a lower Altitude                        Fly Forward                 Adjust Lateral Position to the Left



                       Go Forward                     Place the apple fruit in the blue bowl                 Turn right



                                Open the Drawer                                                   Wash Spoon



                        Turn left                                                        Move to the Right


 Place the yellow cup in the oven                             Turn on Tap                                        Shooting the Basketball


                                    Pass the Crosswalk                                         Open the Drawer


                Press the Button                                     Turn Left                             Put the square bread in the plate


                                Turn Right                                                            Reverse the Car



                        Rinse Hands                                                                          Turn Left



                                    Turn Right                                                       Go Right


                              Figure 8: Qualitative Examples on Slow Learning. Part 2.


                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    t = 0~32       t = 32~64       t = 64~96       t = 96~128          t = 128~160          t = 160~192
    Go right       Run forward     Run forward     Go left             Back off             Go left



  wo / Temp-LoRA
   t = 192~224      t = 224~256     t = 256~288      t = 288~320        t = 320~352
   Run forward      Back off        Go left          Go right           Run Forward


    t = 0~32       t = 32~64      t = 64~96        t = 96~128          t = 128~160          t = 160~192
    Go right       Run forward    Run forward      Go left             Back off             Go left



  w/ Temp-LoRA
   t = 192~224      t = 224~256     t = 256~288      t = 288~320        t = 320~352
   Run forward      Back off        Go left          Go right           Run Forward


                    t = 0~32          t = 32-64           t = 64~96            t = 96~128         t = 128~160
                    Back Off          Go forward          Move Right           Move Left          Back Off



 wo/ Temp-LoRA



w/ Temp-LoRA

    t = 0~32      t = 32~64       t = 64~96        t = 96~128           t = 128-160         t = 160-192
    Go forward    Go forward      Back off         Go forward           Go forward          Back off



 wo / Temp-LoRA



 w / Temp-LoRA



Figure 9: Qualitative Examples on Fast Learning. Part 1. We mark consistent objects / frames in
green bounding boxes and inconsistent ones in red.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  t = 0~32      t = 32~64         t = 64~96           t = 96~128        t = 128~160       t = 160~192       t = 192~224       t = 224~256
  Move right    Move right        Move left           Move right        Move left         Move right        Move right        Move left



  wo/ Temp-LoRA


  w/ Temp-LoRA
    t = 0~32         t = 32~64            t = 64~96           t = 96~128             t = 128~160        t = 160~192          t = 192~224
    Back Off         Back Off             Back Off            Run Forward            Run Forward        Back Off             Back Off



  wo/ Temp-LoRA


  w/ Temp-LoRA
                                                t = 24~48          t = 48~72           t = 72~96         t = 72~96
                                 t = 0~24       Put the apple      Put the apple       Pick up the       Place the
                                 Pick up the    In the black       To the original     Dairy milk        Dairy milk
                                 Apple          bowl               location                              In the sink



                                 wo/ Temp-LoRA



                                 w/ Temp-LoRA
   Go Forward          Go Forward               Back Off                 Back Off                  Go Forward             Back Off



  wo/ Temp-LoRA



 w/ Temp-LoRA



Figure 10: Qualitative Examples on Fast Learning. Part 2. We mark consistent objects / frames in
green bounding boxes and inconsistent ones in red.


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, and et al. Stable video diffusion:
  Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a.

Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion
  models, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08818.

Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Lingjun Zhang, Shaobin Zhuang, Xin Ma, Jiashuo Yu, Yali Wang,
  Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Seine: Short-to-long video diffusion model for generative
  transition and prediction, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.20700.

Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Maddukuri,
  Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Man-
  dlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khaz-
  atsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg,
  Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh
  Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim,
  Bernhard Schölkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea
  Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher
  Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne
  Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov,
  Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao,
  Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan,
  Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang, Hao
  Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki
  Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Ra-
  dosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters,
  Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen
  Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon
  Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, João Silvério, Joey Hejna, Jonathan
  Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Junhyek Han, Kaiyuan
  Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken
  Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin
  Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Kuan
  Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yun-
  liang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi ”Jim” Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca
  Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina,
  Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, Mingtong
  Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki
  Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Nor-
  man Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani,
  Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick ”Tree” Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David
  Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan
  Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart’in-Mart’in, Rohan Baijal, Rosario
  Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah,
  Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry
  Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani, Shubham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun
  Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany,
  Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel
  Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya
  Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev,
  Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vin-
  cent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong
  Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao
  Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying
  Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen
  Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang

                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Li, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen
  Zhang, Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x
  models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864.
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos
  Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. Scal-
  ing egocentric vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2018.
Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Jian Ma, Evange-
  los Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray.
  Rescaling egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and challenges for epic-kitchens-100. Interna-
  tional Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 130:33–55, 2022. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1007/s11263-021-01531-2.
Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00111.
Epic Games. Unreal engine. URL https://www.unrealengine.com.
Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and Anastasis Ger-
  manidis. Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03011.
Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, and
  Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive transformer,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03638.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Sparsectrl:
  Adding sparse controls to text-to-video diffusion models, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2311.16933.
Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh
  Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffu-
  sion models without specific tuning, 2023b.
William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 diffusion modeling of long videos, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11495.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen. Latent video diffusion mod-
  els for high-fidelity long video generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
  13221.
Roberto Henschel, Levon Khachatryan, Daniil Hayrapetyan, Hayk Poghosyan, Vahram Tadevosyan,
  Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Streamingt2v: Consistent, dynamic,
  and extendable long video generation from text, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2403.14773.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2210.02303.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J.
  Fleet. Video diffusion models, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03458.
Anthony Hu, Lloyd Russell, Hudson Yeo, Zak Murez, George Fedoseev, Alex Kendall, Jamie Shot-
  ton, and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-1: A generative world model for autonomous driving, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17080.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark and learning environment, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1909.12271.
Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang
  Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models
  are zero-shot video generators, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13439.
J. G. Klinzing, N. Niethard, and J. Born. Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during
   sleep. Nature Neuroscience, 22:1598–1610, October 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0467-3.
   Received 18 February 2019; Accepted 12 July 2019; Published 26 August 2019.
Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Learning to act
  from actionless videos through dense correspondences, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2310.08576.
Dharshan Kumaran, Demis Hassabis, and James L. McClelland. What learning systems do intelli-
  gent agents need? complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
  20(7):512–534, July 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.05.004.
Zhengxiong Luo, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao,
  Jingren Zhou, and Tieniu Tan. Videofusion: Decomposed diffusion models for high-quality video
  generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08320.
James L. McClelland, Bruce L. McNaughton, and Randall C. O’Reilly. Why there are complemen-
  tary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures
  of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3):419–457, July
  1995. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419.
Günther Palm. Neural associative memories and sparse coding. Neural Networks, 37:165–171,
  2013.
PySceneDetect. Pyscenedetect. URL https://www.scenedetect.com/. Accessed: 2024-
  03-03.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Vasili Ramanishka, Yi-Ting Chen, Teruhisa Misu, and Kate Saenko. Toward driving scene under-
  standing: A dataset for learning driver behavior and causal reasoning. In Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
Weiming Ren, Huan Yang, Ge Zhang, Cong Wei, Xinrun Du, Wenhao Huang, and Wenhu Chen.
 Consisti2v: Enhancing visual consistency for image-to-video generation, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2402.04324.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
Runway. Runway. URL https://runwayml.com/. Accessed: 2024-03-03.
Gladys C. Schwesinger. Review of ”psychological development” by norman l. munn. Pedagogical
  Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology, 55:xxx–xxx, 1955.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-video:
  Text-to-video generation without text-video data, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2209.14792.
Endel Tulving. Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford University Press, 1983.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual description, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2210.02399.
Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. Mcvd: Masked conditional video
  diffusion for prediction, generation, and interpolation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.09853.
Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang.
   Modelscope text-to-video technical report, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
   06571.
Xiaofeng Wang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Boyuan Wang, Xinze Chen, and Jiwen Lu. World-
  dreamer: Towards general world models for video generation via predicting masked tokens,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.09985.
Y. Wang, D. Ma, and D. Cai. With greater text comes greater necessity: Inference-time training
  helps long text generation, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.11504.
Jialong Wu, Shaofeng Yin, Ningya Feng, Xu He, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, and Mingsheng Long.
   ivideogpt: Interactive videogpts are scalable world models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2405.15223.
Jiannan Xiang, Guangyi Liu, Yi Gu, Qiyue Gao, Yuting Ning, Yuheng Zha, Zeyu Feng, Tianhua
   Tao, Shibo Hao, Yemin Shi, Zhengzhong Liu, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Pandora: Towards
   general world model with natural language actions and video states, 2024. URL https://
   arxiv.org/abs/2406.09455.
Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Kaelbling, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06114.
Shuai Yang, Yifan Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Chen Change Loy. Rerender a video: Zero-shot text-guided
  video-to-video translation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07954.
Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan
  Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Gong Ming, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu,
  Houqiang Li, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-xl: Diffusion over diffusion for extremely long video gener-
  ation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12346.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Avnish Narayan, Hayden Shively, Adithya
  Bellathur, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and
  evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1910.10897.
Yan Zeng, Guoqiang Wei, Jiani Zheng, Jiaxin Zou, Yang Wei, Yuchen Zhang, and Hang Li. Make
  pixels dance: High-dynamic video generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2311.10982.
Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng. Magicvideo:
  Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2211.11018.


                                               28
