Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


FAIR S UBMODULAR C OVER
 Wenjing Chen∗             Shuo Xing∗           Samson Zhou∗             Victoria G. Crawford∗



                                             A BSTRACT
         Machine learning algorithms are becoming increasing prevalent in the modern
         world, and as a result there has been significant recent study into algorithmic fair-
         ness in order to minimize the possibility of unintentional bias or discrimination in
         these algorithms. Submodular optimization problems also arise in many machine
         learning applications, including those such as data summarization and clustering
         where fairness is an important concern. In this paper, we initiate the study of
         the Fair Submodular Cover Problem (FSC). Given a ground set U , a monotone
         submodular function f : 2U → R≥0 , and a threshold τ , the goal of FSC is to
         find a balanced subset of U with minimum cardinality such that f (S) ≥ τ . We
         first introduce discrete algorithms for FSC that achieve a bicriteria approximation
         ratio of ( 1ε , 1 − O(ε)). We then present a continuous algorithm that achieves a
         (ln 1ε , 1 − O(ε))-bicriteria approximation ratio, which matches the best approxi-
         mation guarantee of submodular cover without a fairness constraint. Finally, we
         complement our theoretical results with a number of empirical evaluations that
         demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms on instances of maximum coverage.


1   I NTRODUCTION
From high-volume applications such as online advertising and smart devices to high-impact appli-
cations such as credit assessment, medical diagnosis, and self-driving vehicles, machine learning
algorithms are increasingly prevalent in technologies and decision-making processes in the modern
world. However, the amount of automated decision-making has resulted in concerns about the risk of
unintentional bias or discrimination (Chouldechova, 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Berk et al., 2021).
For example, Chierichetti et al. (2017) noted that although machine learning algorithms may not be
biased or unfair by design, they may nevertheless acquire and amplify biases already present in the
training data available to the algorithms. Consequently, there has recently been significant focus on
achieving algorithmic fairness for a number of fundamental problems, such as classification (Zafar
et al., 2017), clustering (Chierichetti et al., 2017), data summarization (Celis et al., 2018b), and
matchings (Chierichetti et al., 2019). Though various definitions have been proposed, there is no
universal notion of fairness; indeed, determining the correct notion of fairness is an ongoing active
line of research. In fact, Kleinberg et al. (2017) showed that three common desiderata of fairness
(probabilistic calibration across classes, numerical balance across classes, and statistical parity) are
inherently incompatible. Nevertheless, there has been significant focus recently (Chierichetti et al.,
2017; Celis et al., 2018a;b;c; Chierichetti et al., 2019; El Halabi et al., 2020; Halabi et al., 2024) on
the fairness notion that demands a solution to be balanced with respect to a sensitive attribute, such
as ethnicity or gender.
In this work, we focus on fairness within submodular optimization. Submodular functions infor-
mally satisfy a diminishing returns property that is exhibited by many objective functions for fun-
damental optimization problems in machine learning. In particular, a function f : 2U → R is
submodular if for every X ⊂ Y ⊂ U and for every x ∈ U \ Y , we have f (X ∪ {x}) − f (X) ≥
f (Y ∪ {x}) − f (Y ). We further assume f is monotone, i.e., f (Y ) ≥ f (X) for every X ⊂ Y .
Thus, submodular optimization naturally arises in a wide range of applications, such as clustering
and facility location (Gomes & Krause, 2010; Lindgren et al., 2016), document summarization (Lin
& Bilmes, 2011; Wei et al., 2013; Sipos et al., 2012), image processing (Iyer & Bilmes, 2019),
principal component analysis (Khanna et al., 2015), and recommendation systems (Leskovec et al.,
2007; El-Arini & Guestrin, 2011; Chen & Crawford, 2024b; Mitrović et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2018;
  ∗
    Texas A&M University, jj9754@tamu.edu, shuoxing@tamu.edu, samsonzhou@gmail.com,
vcrawford@tamu.edu


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Avdiukhin et al., 2019; Yaroslavtsev et al., 2020). While submodular maximization has received the
most attention, submodular cover is also an important problem arising in machine learning appli-
cations (Iyer & Bilmes, 2013b; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015; Soma & Yoshida, 2015; Norouzi-Fard
et al., 2016; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016; Ghuge et al., 2021; Ran et al., 2022; Chen & Crawford,
2024a). In monotone submodular cover (SC), the monotone submodular function arises in the con-
straint: Given oracle access to a monotone submodular function f : 2U → R and a threshold τ , the
goal of SC is to identify a subset S ⊂ U of minimum cardinality such that f (S) ≥ τ .
Many applications of submodular functions such as in clustering (Gomes & Krause, 2010; Lindgren
et al., 2016) and data summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Wei et al., 2013; Sipos et al., 2012), are
also applications where algorithmic fairness is important. Motivated by this, fair submodular max-
imization (FSM) has been considered under both a cardinality constraint and a fairness constraint
(Celis et al., 2018a; Halabi et al., 2020). In the fair setting, we assume that each element in U is
associated with a color c that denotes a protected attribute, which allows partitioning the ground set
U into disjoint groups U1 , . . . , UN . Then informally, the goal is to maximize the objective while
selecting a representative number of elements from each color. Surprisingly, there has been no pre-
vious work studying fairness for the submodular cover problem, to the best of our knowledge. Thus
in this work, we initiate the study of fairness for monotone submodular cover1 .
Definition 1 (Fair Submodular Cover (FSC)). Given input threshold τ , and bounds on the pro-
portion of the elements in each group pc and qc , FSC is to find argminS⊆U |S| such that pc |S| ≤
|S ∩ Uc | ≤ qc |S| for all c ∈ [N ] and f (S) ≥ τ .

This definition of fairness incorporates multiple other existing notions of fairness, such as diversity
rules (Biddle, 2017; Cohoon et al., 2013), statistical parity (Dwork et al., 2012), or proportional rep-
resentation rules (Monroe, 1995; P Brill et al., 2017). To
                                                        Pguarantee the existence of feasible subsets,
we assume that the inputs satisfy c∈[N ] pc ≤ 1 and c∈[N ] qc ≥ 12 . To further illustrate FSC, we
describe a fair data summarization application. Let U be a dataset that is split into disjoint subsets
U1 , ..., UN such that each subset represents some attribute. The function f is a monotone and sub-
modular function that measures the information contained in a subset X ⊆ U , such as a submodular
information measure (Iyer et al., 2021). The values of pc and qc for all c ∈ [N ], and τ , are input
by the user. Then FSC asks to find a minimum size summary that contains sufficient information
(f (S) ≥ τ ), while maintaining a balanced representation amongst the attributes (determined by pc
and qc ).
Our contributions. In this paper, we propose bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSC. An
(α, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSC returns a solution set X that satisfies |X| ≤
α|OP T |, pc |X| ≤ |X ∩ Uc | ≤ qc |X| for all c ∈ [N ], and f (X) ≥ βτ , where OP T is an optimal
solution to the instance of FSC. Notice that the solution of a bicriteria algorithm for FSC always
satisfies the fairness constraint. However, the constraint on the function value (f (X) ≥ τ ) might be
violated by a factor of β and therefore the solution is not necessarily feasible. But, if β to close to 1,
we can get a solution that is close to being feasible. We now describe the main contributions of the
paper:

        • In our first result, we take advantage of the dual relationship between FSM and FSC,
          and present two algorithms that convert bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSM
          into bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSC in Section 2. The first algorithm,
          convert-fair, is designed to convert discrete algorithms for FSM into ones for FSC.
          In particular, convert-fair takes a (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSM
          and converts it into a ((1 + α)β, γ)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSC. Our sec-
    1
      Notice that it is not necessarily obvious what values of input τ , and pc , qc result in an instance of FSC
having a feasible solution. In particular, because f is monotone it is easy to check whether there exists a set X
such f (X) ≥ τ by simply testing whether τ ≤ f (U ), but whether there exists such a set that also satisfies the
fairness constraint is unclear. We discuss the question of existence of a feasible solution further in Appendix
B.4, and throughout the paper assume that values of input τ , and pc , qc are chosen such that there does exist a
feasible solution to the instance.
    2                                               P                     P
      Notice that this assumption is necessary: If c∈[N ] pc > 1, then c∈[N ] pc |S| > |S|. However, by the
                                                                                                  P
definition of fairness constraint in FSC, we can get pc |S| ≤ |S ∩ Uc |. It then follows that c∈[N ] pc |S| ≤
P                                                                                                      P
   c∈[N ] |S ∩Uc | = |S|, which is a contradiction, implying there are no feasible sets. Similarly, if   c∈[N ] qc ≥
1, we can also prove that no feasible sets satisfy the constraint.


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         ond conversion algorithm, convert-continuous, takes a continuous (γ, β)-bicriteria
         approximation algorithm and converts it into a ((1 + α)β, (1−3ε)γ−2ε
                                                                    1+3ε+ 2ε
                                                                              )-bicriteria approxi-
                                                                              γ
         mation algorithm for FSC.

Using our above result, we are now able to convert existing algorithms for FSM into algorithms
for FSC. In particular, the algorithm Fair-Greedy in El Halabi et al. (2020) can be converted into
bicriteria (1 + α, 1/2) for FSC. However, a factor of 1/2 on the feasibility constraint of f (X) ≥ τ
means that our solution is relatively far from being feasible. Motivated by this, our subsequent
results focus on developing bicriteria algorithms for FSC that produce solutions arbitrarily close to
being feasible. In particular:
       • In our second result, we develop the first bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSC
         that find nearly feasible solutions. In particular, we propose three bicriteria algorithms
         for FSM that can be paired with our converting algorithms in order to find approxi-
         mate solutions for FSC that are arbitrarily close to meeting the constraint f (S) ≥ τ
         in FSC. The first two algorithms are the discrete algorithms greedy-fairness-bi
         and threshold-fairness-bi, which both achieve bicriteria approximation ratios of
         (1 − O(ε), 1ε ), but the latter makes less queries to f compared to the former. The third al-
         gorithm is a continuous one, cont-thresh-greedy-bi, which achieves an improved
         (1 − O(ε), ln 1ε + 1) bicriteria approximation ratio but requires more queries to f . The
         theoretical analysis of all these algorithms depends on Lemma 2, which is one of our cen-
         tral technical contributions and distinguishes our approach from the traditional submodular
         cover problem.

By leveraging greedy-fairness-bi and threshold-fairness-bi as subroutine
algorithms for convert-fair and cont-thresh-greedy-bi as a subroutine for
convert-continuous, we can obtain algorithms for FSC with a bicriteria approximation ra-
tio of ((1 + α) 1ε , 1 − O(ε)) and ((1 + α)(ln( 1ε ) + 1), 1 − O(ε)) respectively. In contrast, using
existing algorithms for FSM along with the converting algorithm does not yield solutions that are
very close to being feasible for FSC. Finally:

       • We perform an experimental comparison between our discrete algorithms for FSC and the
         standard greedy algorithm (which does not necessarily find a fair solution) on instances
         of fair maximum coverage in a graph and fair image summarization. We find that our
         algorithms find fair solutions while the standard greedy algorithm does not, but at a cost of
         returning solutions of higher cardinality.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Celis et al. (2018a) first gave a (1 − 1/e)-approximation algorithm for fair monotone submodular
maximization under a cardinality constraint, which is tight given a known (1 − 1/e) hardness of ap-
proximation even without fairness constraints (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978). This is accomplished
by converting their instance of FSM into monotone submodular maximization with a specific type
of matroid constraint called a fairness matroid, which we describe in more detail in Section 1.2, and
then using existing algorithms for submodular maximization with a matroid constraint. The stan-
dard greedy algorithm achieves a 1/2-approximation ratio for the submodular maximization with a
matroid constraint (Fisher et al., 1978), and in addition there exists approximation algorithms using
the multilinear extension that achieve a 1 − 1/e approximation guarantee (Calinescu et al., 2007;
Badanidiyuru & Vondrák, 2014). Halabi et al. (2024) gave a (1 − 1/e)-approximation algorithm for
fair monotone submodular maximization under general matroid constraints, though their algorithm
only achieves the fairness constraints in expectation. Fair submodular optimization has also been
under both cardinality and matroid constraints in the streaming setting (El Halabi et al., 2020; Halabi
et al., 2024).
For the classical submodular cover problem without fairness constraints and integral valued f , the
standard greedy algorithm, where the element of maximum marginal gain is selected one-by-one un-
til f has reached τ , has been shown to have an approximation ratio of O(log maxe∈U f (e)) (Wolsey,
1982). To deal with real-valued f (as in our case), a slight variant of the greedy where we stop at
(1 − ε)τ instead of τ has been shown to be a (ln(1/ε), 1 − ε)-bicriteria approximation algorithm
(Krause et al., 2008). On the other hand, set cover is a special case of fair submodular cover (FSC),


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and by the result of Feige (1998), it is not possible to achieve a (1 − o(1)) · ln(n) approximation
to FSC unless NP has “slightly superpolynomial time algorithms”. Therefore, a large part of our
motivation in considering bicriteria approximation guarantees for FSC is to develop constant factor
approximation at the price of a small reduction to feasibility. Indeed, for a fixed ε, our algorithms
achieve a constant factor approximation. If we set ε = 1/n, our continuous algorithm (Algorithm
2) for FSM with the converting algorithm (Algorithm 4) achieves a ((1 + α) ln(n) + 1), 1 − 7/n)
bicriteria approximation guarantee for an instance of FSC, and so is very close to being feasible
while having an approximation guarantee close to the lower bound.
Although submodular maximization has received relatively more attention than submodular cover,
the problems have a dual relationship and thus, a natural approach for submodular cover is to con-
vert existing algorithms for submodular maximization into ones for cover (Iyer & Bilmes, 2013a;
Chen & Crawford, 2024a). In particular, Iyer & Bilmes (2013a) showed that given a (γ, β)-bicriteria
approximation algorithm for submodular maximization with a cardinality constraint, one can pro-
duce a ((1+α)β, γ)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for submodular cover by making log1+α (n)
guesses for |OP T | in the instance of submodular cover, running the submodular maximization al-
gorithm with the cardinality constraint set to each guess, and returning the smallest solution with
f value above γτ . However, this approach does not take into account the fairness constraints and
cannot be used to convert algorithms for FSM into ones for FSC.

1.2   P RELIMINARIES

We now present preliminary definitions and notation that will be used throughout the paper. OP T
refers to the optimal solution of a submodular optimization problem. We use [N ] to denote the set
{1, 2, ..., N }. The marginal gain of adding an element s to the subset S is denoted as ∆f (S, s). In
addition, for any vector ⃗v = (v1 , v2 , ..., vN ), and any k ∈ R, we define k⃗v = (kv1 , kv2 , ..., kvN ),
and we define ⌈⃗v ⌉ = (⌈v1 ⌉, ⌈v2 ⌉, ..., ⌈vN ⌉) and ⌊⃗v ⌋ = (⌊v1 ⌋, ⌊v2 ⌋, ..., ⌊vN ⌋).
We now define the related problem of fair submodular maximization (FSM) of a monotone sub-
modular function f (El Halabi et al., 2020), as the search problem of max{f (S) : S ⊆ U, lc ≤
|S ∩ Uc | ≤ uc , ∀c ∈ [N ], |S| ≤ k} where lc and uc are the bound of cardinality
                                                                          P         within each small
group. Without loss of generality, in this problem, it is assumed that c∈[N ] uc ≥ k. This is be-
         P                            P                    P
cause if c∈[N ] uc < k, then |S| = c∈[N ] |S ∩ Uc | ≤ c∈[N ] uc ≤ k. Therefore, the problem is
                            P
equivalent to setting k = c∈[N ] uc . Since for the cover problem, the objective is to minimize the
cardinality of the solution set which means |S| is not fixed as it is in FSM, therefore we introduced
the definition of fairness for FSC as a natural modification of the above problem where the fairness
constraint is a proportion of the solution size as opposed to a fixed value.
The set of subsets satisfying fairness constraint above for FSM is not a matroid. However, it was
proven by El Halabi et al. (2020) that we can convert an instance of FSM into an instance of submod-
ular maximization problem with a matroid constraint; we state this result as Lemma 3 in Appendix
A. This matroid constraint is called P a fairness matroid, which we denote as Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u) =
{S ⊆ U : |S ∩ Uc | ≤ uc , ∀c ∈ [N ], c∈[N ] max{|S ∩ Uc |, lc } ≤ k}, where P = {U1 , ..., UN } is
the partition of the ground set U , k is the total cardinality constraint, ⃗l, ⃗u ∈ NN are the lower and
upper bound vectors respectively. Below we propose the idea of a β-extension of a fairness matroid,
which we will use in our bicriteria algorithms for FSM.
Definition 2. For any β ∈ N+ , we define the β-extension of the fairness matroid to be Mβ =
Mf air (P, βκ, β⃗l, β⃗u) = {S ⊆ U : |S ∩ Uc | ≤ βuc , ∀c ∈ [N ], c∈[N ] max{|S ∩ Uc |, βlc } ≤ βκ}.
                                                                P


Our continuous algorithms will use the multilinear extension of f , defined as follows.
Definition 3. For any submodular      objective f : 2U → R+ with |U | = n, the multi-linear extension
                                                                                     n
                              P       Q         Q
of f is defined as F(x) =         S⊆U    i∈S xi     / (1 − xj )f (S) where x ∈ [0, 1] , and xi is the
                                                  j ∈S
i-th coordinate of x. If we define S(x) to be a random set that contains each element i ∈ U with
probability xi , then by definition, we have that F(x) = Ef (S(x)).

We now present the definitions of discrete and continuous algorithms with an (α, β)-bicriteria ap-
proximation ratio for FSM, which is defined to find arg maxS∈Mf air (U,k,⃗l,⃗u) f (S).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Definition 4. A discrete algorithm for FSM with an (α, β)-bicriteria approximation ratio returns a
solution X such that
                                                             X
    f (X) ≥ αf (OP T )      ∀c ∈ [N ], |X ∩ Uc | ≤ βuc ,           max{|X ∩ Uc |, βlc } ≤ βk.
                                                                c∈[N ]

Here OP T is the optimal solution of the problem FSM, i.e., OP T = arg maxS∈Mf air (P,k,⃗l,⃗u) f (S).

By this definition, we have that an algorithm satisfies a (α, β)-bicriteria approximation ratio for
FSM i.f.f the output set S satisfies f (S) ≥ αf (OP T ) and that S ∈ Mβ .
Definition 5. A continuous algorithm with (α, β)-bicriteria approximation ratio for FSM returns a
fractional solution x such that
                               F(x) ≥ αf (OP T ),        x ∈ P(Mβ ).
Here OP T is the optimal solution of the problem FSM, i.e., OP T = arg maxS∈Mf air (P,κ,⃗l,⃗u) f (S).
Mβ is the β-extension of the fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u), and P(Mβ ) is the matroid poly-
tope of Mβ . More specifically, P(Mβ ) = conv{1S : S ∈ Mβ }.

2   C ONVERSION A LGORITHMS FOR FSC
In this section, we introduce two algorithms that make use of the dual relationship between FSC
and FSM, and convert bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSM into ones for FSC. The first
algorithm, convert-fair, is designed to convert discrete algorithms for FSM into ones for FSC.
In particular, convert-fair takes an (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSM that
runs in time T (n, κ) and converts it into a ((1 + α)β, γ)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSC
                             T |)
that runs in time O( log(|OP
                      log(α+1) T (n, (1 + α)|OP T |)). However, because of the matroid constraint,
better approximation guarantees for FSM may be achieved by a continuous algorithm that produce a
fractional solution. Motivated by this, our second converting algorithm, convert-continuous,
takes a continuous (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithm (where guarantees are with respect to
the multilinear extension as described in Section 1.2), and converts it into a ((1 + α)β, (1−3ε)γ−2ε
                                                                                           1+3ε+ 2ε
                                                                                                     )-
                                                                                                 γ
bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSC. In the next section, we will develop corresponding
bicriteria approximation algorithms for FSM that can be used along with the results in this section in
order to produce approximately optimal solutions for FSC that are arbitrarily close to being feasible.
For both algorithms, it is required that the sets Uc for c ∈ [N ] be sufficiently large so that our
method of constructing a solution does not run out of elements to pick. In particular, we assume that
                                    P                    |Uc |
the instance of FSC satisfies that c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP
                                     P                         T |) } ≥ 1. Recall from the definition
of FSC that it is already assumed c∈[N ] qc ≥ 1, so this assumption is essentially requiring that
there be enough elements within each set Uc of the partition, relative to parameters α and β, to
ensure that the rank of the β-extension of the fairness matroid Mβ (see definition in Section 1.2)
is βκ. For example, with the existing algorithm for FSM in El Halabi et al. (2020), β is 1 and
therefore the assumption is met if |Uc | ≥ qc (1 + α)|OP T | for all c ∈ [N ]. For our algorithms
greedy-fairness-bi and cont-thresh-greedy-bi in Section 3, β would be 1/ϵ and
ln(1/ϵ) respectively, and the assumption is met if |Uc | ≥ qc (1 + α)|OP T |/ϵ and |Uc | ≥ qc (1 +
α) ln(1/ϵ)|OP T | for all c ∈ [N ] respectively.
We first consider our algorithm convert-fair for converting discrete algorithms for FSM. Pseu-
docode for convert-fair is provided in Algorithm 1. convert-fair takes as input an in-
stance of FSC, a (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSM, and a parameter α > 0. Each
iteration of the while loop from Line 2 to Line 4 corresponds to a guess κ on the size of the op-
timal solution to the instance of FSC. For each guess κ, we have an instance of FSM with budget
κ, fairness vector of lower bound κ⃗  p, fairness vector of upper bound κ⃗q. We then run the algo-
rithm for FSM on this instance to get a set S. Notice that this algorithm will convert the matroid
corresponding to the instance of FSM into its β-extension. In Lines 6 to 8, convert-fair adds
additional elements so that the lower bounds are met for every one of the partitions. Next in Lines
10 to 12, convert-fair then adds elements until the size constraint βκ is met, without breaking
the fairness constraints. Finally, convert-fair checks if the set S satisfies f (S) ≥ γτ . If it does
not, the guess of optimal solution size increases by a factor of 1 + α and the process repeats itself.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 convert-fair
Input: An FSC instance with threshold τ , fairness parameters p⃗, ⃗q, partition of U P, a (γ, β)-
bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSM, α > 0
Output: S ⊆ U
 1: κ ← (1 + α), S ← ∅.
 2: while f (S) < γτ do
 3:      S       ← Run (γ, β)-approximation algorithm for FSM with fairness matroid
     Mf air (P, κ, ⌊⃗ pκ⌋, ⌈⃗qκ⌉)
 4:      κ ← ⌈(1 + α)κ⌉
 5:      //Rounding the solution
 6:      for c ∈ [N ] do
 7:           if |S ∩ Uc | < β⌊pc κ⌋ then
 8:                Add new elements from Uc /S to S until |S ∩ Uc | ≥ β⌊pc κ⌋
 9:      if |S| < βκ then
10:           for c ∈ [N ] do
11:                while |S| < βκ and |S ∩ Uc | < β⌈qc κ⌉ do
12:                   Add new elements in Uc /S to S
13: return S


We now state the theoretical results for convert-fair below in Theorem 1. We defer the proof
and analysis of the proof of Theorem 1 to Appendix C.1.

                        P                   |Uc |
Theorem 1. Suppose c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP      T |) } ≥ 1. Then any (γ, β)-bicriteria approxi-
mation algorithm for FSM that returns a solution set in time T (n, κ) can be converted into an
approximation algorithm for FSC that is a ((1 + α)β, γ)-bicriteria approximation algorithm that
                        T |)
runs in time O( log(|OP
                 log(α+1) T (n, (1 + α)|OP T |)).



We now present our algorithm convert-continuous for converting continuous algorithms. To
motivate it, notice that here we can’t directly use the converting theorem for discrete algorithms.
There are two reasons for this: (i) The output solution is fractional so we need a rounding step, and
(ii) the bicriteria approximation ratio for the continuous algorithms is on the value of the multi-linear
extension and we don’t have exact access to F , so we can’t check directly if F(x) ≥ γτ as we did on
Line 2 of convert-fair. Then we develop the converting algorithm convert-continuous
for continuous algorithms. The key idea of the converting theorem is similar to convert-fair,
so we defer the pseudocode of convert-continuous to Algorithm 4 in Section C.2 of the
appendix. Here we describe the major differences. For each guess of optimal solution size κ,
convert-continuous invokes the continuous subroutine algorithm for FSM to obtain a frac-
tional solution x. Since F can’t be queried exactly in general, we estimate F(x) by taking a sufficient
number of samples in Line 4. Once the estimate of F(x) is higher than γτ , we use the pipage round-
ing technique to convert x into a subset S, and then use the rounding procedure analogous to that in
Lines 6 to 12 in Algorithm 1 to obtain a solution set with fairness guarantee. Notice that since the
solution set obtained from the pipage rounding step is only guaranteed to satisfy that Ef (S) ≥ F(x),
the approximation guarantee on the function value in Theorem 5 holds in expectation. The corre-
sponding theoretical guarantees for convert-continuous are stated below in Theorem 2. The
proof of Theorem 2 can be found in Section C.2 of the appendix.

                        P                       |Uc |
Theorem 2. Suppose c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP          T |) } ≥ 1. Then with probability at least 1 − δ,
any (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSM that returns a solution set in time T (n, κ)
with probability at least 1 − nδ can be converted into an approximation algorithm for FSC that is a
((1 + α)β, (1−3ε)γ−2ε
            1+3ε+ 2ε
                       )-bicriteria approximation algorithm where (1−3ε)γ−2ε
                                                                       1+3ε+ 2ε
                                                                                   holds in expectation.
                    γ                                                          γ
                                      log(|OP T |)                         n log1+α |OP T |
The query complexity is at most O log(α+1) T (n, (1 + α)|OP T |) +                ε2        log nδ .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3    B ICRITERIA A LGORITHMS FOR FSM
In the last section, we propose converting algorithms to convert bicriteria algorithms for FSM into
ones for FSC. Existing algorithms for FSM can be used as the input (γ, β)-bicriteria subroutine, but
these algorithms all return feasible solutions to the instance of FSM and have guarantees of β = 1
and γ ≤ 1 − 1/e. After applying the converting algorithms in Section 2 this results in solutions for
FSC that are far from feasible. For example, the greedy algorithm for FSM proposed has γ = 1/2
and β = 1, and the continuous greedy algorithm for FSM has γ = 1 − 1/e and β = 1 (Celis et al.,
2018a).
In this section, we propose new algorithms that can be used for FSM where γ is arbitrarily close to
1 and β > 1. As a result, the algorithms proposed in this section can be paired with the converting
theorems in Section 2 to find solutions to our instance of FSC that are arbitrarily close to being
feasible. We propose three bicriteria algorithms for FSM. The first two algorithms are the discrete
algorithms greedy-fairness-bi and threshold-fairness-bi, which both achieve bi-
criteria approximation ratios of (1 − O(ε), 1ε ) where the former is in time O(nκ/ε) and the latter in
time O( nε log κε ). The third algorithm is a continuous one, cont-thresh-greedy-bi, which
                                                                                  2
achieves a (1 − O(ε), ln 1ε + 1) bicriteria approximation ratio in time O nκ

                                                                             ε4 ln (n/ε) .
In the case of submodular maximization with a cardinality constraint without fairness, one can find
a solution with f value that is a factor of 1 − ε off of that of the optimal solution by greedily
adding O(ln(1/ε))κ elements beyond the cardinality constraint κ. However, existing algorithms
for FSM transform the instance into an instance of submodular maximization subject to a fairness
matroid constraint, and it is not clear how one can take an analogous approach and produce an
infeasible solution in order to get a better approximation guarantee when dealing with a matroid
constraint while maintaining a fair solution. We propose the β-extension of a fairness matroid,
defined in Section 1.2, in order to get a (γ, β)-bicriteria algorithm for FSM with γ > 1 − 1/e.
In particular, we will return a solution that is a feasible solution to the β-extension of the fairness
matroid corresponding to our instance of FSM.
We now introduce two lemmas concerning the β-extension of a matroid that will be needed for
our algorithms and their theoretical analysis. Before we proceed to present our algorithms, we first
introduce the following general lemma that helps to build a connection between the fairness matroid
M and its β-extension Mβ . For the sake of simplicity in notation throughout this section and
its subsequent proofs, we use the notation Mβ , representing the β-extension of Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u),
which is defined in Section 1.2. Since the bicriteria algorithm for FSM is designed as a subroutine
for the converting theoremPwith input Mf airP                             P here lc = ⌊pc κ⌋
                                               (P, κ, p⃗κ, ⃗qκ), we have that              Pand uc =
⌈qc κ⌉. From the fact that c∈[N ] pc ≤ 1 ≤ c∈[N ] qc , we have that c∈[N ] lc ≤ κ ≤ c∈[N ] uc .
Since the bicriteria algorithm for FSM is used as a subroutine for the converting theorems for FSC,
                   P                     |Uc |
where we assume c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP       T |) } ≥ 1 in both Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we have
that rank(Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u)) = κ and that rank(Mβ ) = βκ. Therefore, we have the following
Lemma 1.
                                       uc and rank(Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u)) = κ, rank(Mβ ) = βκ.
            P                    P
Lemma 1.       c∈[N ] lc ≤ κ ≤     c∈[N ]

Next, we present Lemma 2, which is one of the most interesting and novel parts of our analysis in
proposing the bicriteria algorithm for FSM, and is necessary in the proof of all the bicriteria algo-
rithm for FSM. Notice that in the bicriteria algorithm for submodular maximization with cardinality
constraint, the greedy step is achieved by simply adding the element with the highest marginal gain.
However, since we need to consider the fairness constraint in our paper, we can only add the ele-
ment that makes the solution set feasible. To prove the theoretical guarantee, we have to construct
a mapping from the solution set to the optimal solution. To tackle this difficulty, we propose and
analyze Lemma 2, which guarantees the existence of such a mapping.
Lemma 2. For any β ∈ N+ and any fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u), denote Mβ as the β-
extended fairness matroid of Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u). Then for any set S ∈ Mβ with |S| = βκ, T ∈
Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u) with |T | = κ, and any permutation of S = (s1 , s2 , ..., sβκ ), there exist a sequence
E = (e1 , e2 , ..., eβκ ) such that each element in T appears β times in E and that
                              Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ Mβ ,         ∀i ∈ {0, 1, ..., βκ}


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where Si = (s1 , s2 , ..., si ) and S0 = ∅.

Notice that this mapping is not straightforward and trivial due to two reasons. First of all, the size of
the optimal solution and the solution set are different. Second, the portion of |S ∩ Uc | over |T ∩ Uc |
can be different for different subroup c ∈ [N ]. To prove Lemma 2, we construct the mapping by an
iterative proof and by dealing with different cases for each step. This lemma is of great importance
in our analysis as it guarantees the existence of a mapping from the solution set to the set containing
β copies of the OP T . The detailed proof of this lemma is deferred to the appendix.
On the other hand, we highlight that this lemma reveals an important and general fact about the
fairness matroid: For each base set T ∈ Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u), and each subset S ∈ Mβ that is a base
set, we can find a mapping from T to a sequence E that contains β copies of T such that Si ∪ {ei }
is always feasible for Mβ . Notice that since Mβ is a matroid, then for any subset S1 ⊆ S2 , if
S2 ∈ Mβ then S1 ∈ Mβ . Consequently, the above lemma holds for not only just base set of Mβ ,
but also for any subset of Mβ by adding dummy variables to the end of the sequence S if the number
of elements in S is less than βκ. Building upon this lemma, we propose three bicriteria algorithms
in the following part.

3.1   D ISCRETE B ICRITERIA A LGORITHMS FOR FSM

We now analyze two discrete bicriteria algorithms for FSM, greedy-fair-bi and
threshold-fairness-bi. Let SMMC refer to the problem of monotone submodular max-
imization with a matroid constraint. greedy-fair-bi is based on the standard greedy algorithm
which is well-known to produce a feasible solution with a 1/2 approximation guarantee in O(nk)
time for SMMC (Fisher et al., 1978), where k is the rank of the matroid. greedy-fair-bi
proceeds in a series of rounds, where at each round we select the element x ∈ U with the high-
est marginal gain to f that stays on the 1/ε-extension of the fairness matroid corresponding to the
instance of FSM, i.e. S ∪ {x} ∈ M1/ε . threshold-fairness-bi is based on the thresh-
old greedy algorithm (Badanidiyuru & Vondrák, 2014), which is also a 1/2 − ε approximation for
SMMC but requires only O(n log k) queries of f . threshold-fairness-bi iteratively makes
passes through the universe U and adds all elements into its solution with marginal gains exceeding
τ that are feasible with respect to the 1/ε-extension of the fairness matroid, and this threshold is
decreased by 1 − ε at each round until it falls below a stopping criterion. Notice that these algo-
rithms specifically use the β-extension of the fairness matroid, and therefore do not apply to the
more general setting of submodular maximization with a matroid constraint. Pseudocode for the
algorithms greedy-fair-bi and threshold-fairness-bi are included in Appendix D as
Algorithms 5 and Algorithm 6 respectively.
We     now     present      the    theoretical    guarantees     of     greedy-fair-bi     and
threshold-fairness-bi. The key benefit of these algorithms over existing ones for FSM is
that by making ε arbitrarily small and using convert-fair in Section 2, we have algorithms
for FSC that are arbitrarily close to being feasible. In particular, if we use greedy-fair-bi
as a subroutine in convert-fair, we have a ( 1ε + 1, 1 − ε)-bicriteria algorithms for FSC
in O(n log(n)κ/ε2 ) queries of f . If we use threshold-fairness-bi, we get a similar
approximation guarantee in O(n log(n) log(κ/ε)/ε2 ) queries of f . The proofs of both of these
theorems can be found in Section D of the appendix.
Theorem 3. Suppose that greedy-fairness-bi is run for an instance of FSM, then
greedy-fairness-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − ε, 1ε )-bicriteria approximation
guarantee in at most O (nκ/ε) queries of f .
Theorem 4. Suppose that threshold-fairness-bi is run for an instance of FSM with
ε ∈ (0, 1). Then threshold-fairness-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − 2ε, 1ε )-
bicriteria approximation guarantee in at most O (n/ε log(κ/ε)) queries of f .

3.2   C ONTINUOUS A LGORITHMS FOR FSM

A downside to the discrete greedy algorithms proposed in Section 3 is that we are above our budget κ
by a factor of 1/ε, which is weaker than the analogous guarantee of ln(1/ε) that the greedy algorithm
gives for submodular maximization with a cardinality constraint without fairness. We now introduce


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 cont-thresh-greedy-bi (cont-bi)
 1: Input: ε, δ, M ∈ 2U
 2: x ← 0
 3: d := maxs∈M f (s),
 4: for t = 1 to 1/ε do
 5:     B ←decreasing-threshold-procedure (x, ε, δ, d, M)
 6:     x ← x + ε · 1B
 7: return x

Algorithm 3 decreasing-threshold-procedure (DTP)
 1: Input: x, ε, δ, d, M ∈ 2U
 2: B ← ∅
 3: Denote Mf air (P, κ ln(1/ε), ⃗l ln(1/ε), ⃗
                                             u ln(1/ε)) as Mln(1/ε) .
                      εd
 4: for w = d; w > κ ; w = w(1 − ε) do
 5:     for u ∈ U do
 6:         X = ∆f (S(x + ε1B ), u)
 7:         if B ∪ {u} ∈ Mln(1/ε)+1 then
                                             4
 8:          X̂ ← average over 3κ     4n
                               ε2 log ε3 samples from DX
 9:          if X̂ ≥ w then
10:               B ← B ∪ {u}
11:     w = w(1 − ε)
12: return B


and analyze our continuous algorithm cont-thresh-greedy-bi (cont-bi), which produces
                   for FSM that achieves a (1 − O(ε), ln(1/ε) + 1)-bicriteria approximation ratio
a fractional solution
            2
in O nκ ln (n) time. cont-bi is based on the continuous threshold greedy algorithm of Badani-
diyuru & Vondrák (2014). Compared to the discrete algorithms presented in Section 3.1, cont-bi
improves the ratio on the cardinality of the solution from O(1/ε) to O(ln(1/ε)), and therefore has
as strong of guarantees as the greedy algorithm without fairness. We can achieve a discrete solution
with an arbitrarily small loss by employing rounding schemes, like swap rounding (Chekuri et al.,
2010), on the returned fractional solution x.
cont-bi iteratively takes a step of size ε in the direction 1B , where 1B is the indicator func-
tion of a set B ⊆ U , over 1/ε iterations. At each step, the set B is determined by the subroutine
decreasing-threshold-procedure (DTP). DTP builds B over a series of rounds corre-
sponding to thresholds w, where w begins as the max singleton marginal gain and the rounds exit
once w is sufficiently small. During each round, we iterate over the universe U , and if an ele-
ment u ∈ U can be added to B while staying on the ln(1/ε) + 1-extension of the fairness ma-
troid, then we approximate the multilinear extension f and add u to B if and only if the marginal
gain is above w. Pseudocode for cont-bi is provided in Algorithm 2, and pseudocode for
decreasing-threshold-procedure is provided in Algorithm 3.
Theorem 5. Suppose that Algorithm 2 is run for an instance of FSM, then with probability at least
1 − n12 , cont-thresh-greedy-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − 7ε, ln( 1ε ) + 1)-
                                                       2
bicriteria approximation guarantee in at most O nκ

                                                  ε4 ln (n/ε) queries of f .

By applying a converting theorem, we can obtain the algorithm for submodular cover that achieves
an approximation ratio of ((1 + α)(ln( 1ε ) + 1), 1 − O(ε)), which aligns with the best-known results
for bicriteria submodular cover without the fairness constraint (Chen & Crawford, 2024a; Iyer &
Bilmes, 2013b). The detailed theoretical guarantee and proof of the algorithm can be found in
Corollary 5.1 in the appendix.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate several of our algorithms for FSC on instances of fair maximum cover-
age, where the objective is to identify a set of fixed nodes that optimally maximize coverage within


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               EN                                         EN                                                           EN
                                          0.8                                        0.20                                                         0.20
                                        0.6                                        0.15                                                         0.15
             ZH                       0.4       DE          ZH                   0.10       DE                         ZH                     0.10     DE
                                    0.2                                        0.05                                                         0.05



             RU                                 FR          RU                              FR                         RU                              FR

                               ES                                         ES                                                           ES

                      (a) greedy-bi                         (b) greedy-fairness-bi                   (c) threshold-fairness-bi
                   ×103
             2.0                                            400
                                                                     GREEDY                                            0.8


                                                                                                 Fairness difference
             1.6                                                     GREEDY-Fair
                                                            300
                                                                     THRES-Fair
Value of f


                                                                                                                       0.6                   GREEDY
                                                     Cost


             1.2                                            200                                                                              GREEDY-Fair
                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                             THRES-Fair
                          GREEDY
             0.8          GREEDY-Fair                       100                                                        0.2
                          THRES-Fair
             0.4                                              0                                                        0.0
                1500 1700 1900 2100 2300 2500                  1500 1700 1900 2100 2300 2500                              1500 1700 1900 2100 2300 2500
                  Value of the given threshold                   Value of the given threshold                               Value of the given threshold

                             (d) f                                     (e) Cost                                              (f) Fairness difference

Figure 1: Performance comparison on the Twitch 5000 dataset for Maximum Coverage. 1a, 1b, 1c
illustrate the distribution of users speaking different languages in the solutions produced by various
algorithms with τ = 2400. f : the value of the objective submodular function. Cost: the size of the
returned solution. Fairness difference: (maxc |S ∩ Uc | − minc |S ∩ Uc |)/|S|.


a graph. The dataset utilized is a subset of the Twitch Gamers dataset (Rozemberczki & Sarkar,
2021), comprising 5,000 vertices (users) who speak English, German, French, Spanish, Russian, or
Chinese. We aim to develop a solution with a high f value exceeding a given threshold τ while
ensuring a fair balance between users who speak different languages. Additional discussion about
the application as well as experimental setup including parameter settings are included in Appendix
G. In addition, we include experiments on instances of fair image summarization in Appendix G.
We evaluate the performance of our discrete bicriteria algorithms greedy-fair-bi and
threshold-fairness-bi for FSM as subroutines in our algorithm convert-fair. In ad-
dition, we consider the baseline algorithm, greedy-bi, which is the standard greedy algorithm for
submodular cover without fairness. Figures 1a, 1b and 1c showcase the distribution of users speaking
different languages in the solutions produced by these algorithms with τ = 2400. Figures 1d, 1e and
1f present the performance of these algorithms (f value, cost, and fairness difference) for varying
values of τ . As shown in Figure 1a, with τ = 2400, over 80% of the users in the solution returned by
greedy-bi are English speakers, which indicates a lack of fairness in user language distribution.
While the solutions produced by greedy-fair-bi and threshold-fairness-bi exhibit
significantly fairer distributions across different languages, demonstrating the effectiveness of our
proposed algorithms. Further, as the value of given τ increases, the magnitude of this difference also
increases (see Figure 1f). Figure 1d showcases that for all these algorithms the objective function
value f (S) scales almost linearly with the threshold τ , which aligns with the theoretical guarantees
of the approximation ratio. Additionally, as shown in Figure 1e, the cost of the solutions returned by
our proposed algorithms is higher than that of the solution from greedy-bi. This is an expected
trade-off, as our algorithms have to include more elements to maintain the approximation ratio while
ensuring fairness. Overall, our proposed algorithms are efficient and effective in producing a fair
solution.


                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Samson Zhou is supported in part by NSF CCF-2335411. The work was conducted in part while
Samson Zhou was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing as part of the Sub-
linear Algorithms program. Victoria Crawford is supported in part by the Seed Program for AI,
Computing, and Data Science created by the Texas A&M Institute for Data Science.

R EFERENCES
Dmitrii Avdiukhin, Slobodan Mitrovic, Grigory Yaroslavtsev, and Samson Zhou. Adversarially
 robust submodular maximization under knapsack constraints. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
 SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD., pp. 148–156,
 2019.
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru and Jan Vondrák. Fast algorithms for maximizing submodular func-
  tions. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms,
  pp. 1497–1514. SIAM, 2014.
Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in criminal
  justice risk assessments: The state of the art. Sociological Methods & Research, 50(1):3–44,
  2021.
Dan Biddle. Adverse impact and test validation: A practitioner’s guide to valid and defensible
  employment testing. Routledge, 2017.
Markus Brill, Jean-François Laslier, and Piotr Skowron. Multiwinner approval rules as apportion-
 ment methods. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
 414–420, 2017.
Gruia Calinescu, Chandra Chekuri, Martin Pál, and Jan Vondrák. Maximizing a submodular set
  function subject to a matroid constraint. In International Conference on Integer Programming
  and Combinatorial Optimization, pp. 182–196. Springer, 2007.
L. Elisa Celis, Lingxiao Huang, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. Multiwinner voting with fairness con-
  straints. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, IJCAI, pp. 144–151, 2018a.
L. Elisa Celis, Vijay Keswani, Damian Straszak, Amit Deshpande, Tarun Kathuria, and Nisheeth K.
   Vishnoi. Fair and diverse dpp-based data summarization. In Proceedings of the 35th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 715–724, 2018b.
L. Elisa Celis, Damian Straszak, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. Ranking with fairness constraints. In 45th
   International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP, pp. 28:1–28:15,
   2018c.
Chandra Chekuri, Jan Vondrák, and Rico Zenklusen. Dependent randomized rounding via exchange
  properties of combinatorial structures. In 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on Foundations of
  Computer Science, pp. 575–584. IEEE, 2010.
Wenjing Chen and Victoria Crawford. Bicriteria approximation algorithms for the submodular cover
 problem. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024a.
Wenjing Chen and Victoria G Crawford. Linear submodular maximization with bandit feedback.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02601, 2024b.
Flavio Chierichetti, Ravi Kumar, Silvio Lattanzi, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Fair clustering through
  fairlets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 5029–5037, 2017.
Flavio Chierichetti, Ravi Kumar, Silvio Lattanzi, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Matroids, matchings, and
  fairness. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS,
  2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism
  prediction instruments. Big data, 5(2):153–163, 2017.
Joanne McGrath Cohoon, James P. Cohoon, Seth Reichelson, and Selwyn Lawrence. Effective
  recruiting for diversity. In IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, FIE, pp. 1123–1124, 2013.
Pinar Duygulu, Kobus Barnard, Joao FG de Freitas, and David A Forsyth. Object recognition as
  machine translation: Learning a lexicon for a fixed image vocabulary. In Computer Vision—ECCV
  2002: 7th European Conference on Computer Vision Copenhagen, Denmark, May 28–31, 2002
  Proceedings, Part IV 7, pp. 97–112. Springer, 2002.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard S. Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pp. 214–226, 2012.
Khalid El-Arini and Carlos Guestrin. Beyond keyword search: discovering relevant scientific litera-
  ture. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
  and data mining, pp. 439–447. ACM, 2011.
Marwa El Halabi, Slobodan Mitrović, Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, Jakab Tardos, and Jakub M Tarnawski.
 Fairness in streaming submodular maximization: Algorithms and hardness. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:13609–13622, 2020.
Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. J. ACM, 45(4):634–652, 1998.
Marshall L Fisher, George L Nemhauser, and Laurence A Wolsey. An analysis of approximations
 for maximizing submodular set functions—II. Springer, 1978.
Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. GPTQ: accurate post-training
  quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. CoRR, abs/2210.17323, 2022.
Rohan Ghuge, Anupam Gupta, and Viswanath Nagarajan. The power of adaptivity for stochastic
  submodular cover. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3702–3712. PMLR,
  2021.
Ryan Gomes and Andreas Krause. Budgeted nonparametric learning from data streams. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 391–398, 2010.
Marwa El Halabi, Slobodan Mitrovic, Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, Jakab Tardos, and Jakub Tarnawski.
 Fairness in streaming submodular maximization: Algorithms and hardness. In Advances in Neu-
 ral Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems, NeurIPS, 2020.
Marwa El Halabi, Suraj Srinivas, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Data-efficient structured pruning via
 submodular optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2022.
Marwa El Halabi, Jakub Tarnawski, Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Fairness in
 submodular maximization over a matroid constraint. In International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1027–1035, 2024.
Rishabh Iyer and Jeffrey Bilmes. Near optimal algorithms for hard submodular programs with
  discounted cooperative costs. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, volume 89, pp.
  276–285, 2019.
Rishabh Iyer, Ninad Khargonkar, Jeff Bilmes, and Himanshu Asnani. Generalized submodular in-
  formation measures: Theoretical properties, examples, optimization algorithms, and applications.
  IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 68(2):752–781, 2021.
Rishabh K. Iyer and Jeff A. Bilmes. Submodular optimization with submodular cover and submodu-
  lar knapsack constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26: 27th Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2436–2444, 2013a.
Rishabh K Iyer and Jeff A Bilmes. Submodular optimization with submodular cover and submodular
  knapsack constraints. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013b.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


David Kempe, Jon M. Kleinberg, and Éva Tardos. Maximizing the spread of influence through a
  social network. Theory Comput., 11:105–147, 2015.
Rajiv Khanna, Joydeep Ghosh, Russell Poldrack, and Oluwasanmi Koyejo. Sparse Submodular
  Probabilistic PCA. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence and Statistics, pp. 453–461, 2015.
Jon Kleinberg, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil Mullainathan. Hu-
  man decisions and machine predictions. The quarterly journal of economics, 133(1):237–293,
  2018.
Jon M. Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-offs in the fair
  determination of risk scores. In 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference,
  ITCS, pp. 43:1–43:23, 2017.
Andreas Krause, H Brendan McMahan, Carlos Guestrin, and Anupam Gupta. Robust submodular
  observation selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(12), 2008.
Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne VanBriesen, and Na-
  talie Glance. Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
  SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 420–429. ACM,
  2007.
Hui Lin and Jeff Bilmes. A class of submodular functions for document summarization. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies-Volume 1, pp. 510–520. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
Erik M. Lindgren, Shanshan Wu, and Alexandros G. Dimakis. Leveraging sparsity for efficient
  submodular data summarization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29:
  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3414–3422, 2016.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Amin Karbasi, Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru, and Andreas Krause. Dis-
  tributed submodular cover: Succinctly summarizing massive data. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Morteza Zadimoghaddam, and Amin Karbasi. Fast distributed submodular
  cover: Public-private data summarization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  29, 2016.
Slobodan Mitrović, Ilija Bogunovic, Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, Jakub Tarnawski, and Volkan Cevher.
  Streaming robust submodular maximization: A partitioned thresholding approach. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, pp. 4560–4569, 2017.
Burt L Monroe. Fully proportional representation. American Political Science Review, 89(4):925–
  940, 1995.
George L. Nemhauser and Laurence A. Wolsey. Best algorithms for approximating the maximum
  of a submodular set function. Math. Oper. Res., 3(3):177–188, 1978.
Ashkan Norouzi-Fard, Abbas Bazzi, Ilija Bogunovic, Marwa El Halabi, Ya-Ping Hsieh, and Volkan
  Cevher. An efficient streaming algorithm for the submodular cover problem. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Yingli Ran, Zhao Zhang, and Shaojie Tang. Improved parallel algorithm for minimum cost submod-
  ular cover problem. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 3490–3502. PMLR, 2022.
Benedek Rozemberczki and Rik Sarkar. Twitch gamers: a dataset for evaluating proximity preserv-
  ing and structural role-based node embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03091, 2021.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Micah Goldblum, Yucen Lily Li, C. Bayan Bruss, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
  Simplifying neural network training under class imbalance. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS,
  2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ruben Sipos, Adith Swaminathan, Pannaga Shivaswamy, and Thorsten Joachims. Temporal corpus
  summarization using submodular word coverage. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM international
  conference on Information and knowledge management, pp. 754–763. ACM, 2012.
Tasuku Soma and Yuichi Yoshida. A generalization of submodular cover via the diminishing return
  property on the integer lattice. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Kai Wei, Yuzong Liu, Katrin Kirchhoff, and Jeff Bilmes. Using document summarization techniques
  for speech data subset selection. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
  721–726, 2013.
Kai Wei, Rishabh K. Iyer, and Jeff A. Bilmes. Submodularity in data subset selection and active
  learning. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML,
  volume 37, pp. 1954–1963, 2015.
Laurence A. Wolsey. An analysis of the greedy algorithm for the submodular set covering problem.
  Comb., 2(4):385–393, 1982.
Grigory Yaroslavtsev, Samson Zhou, and Dmitrii Avdiukhin. ”bring your own greedy”+max: Near-
  optimal 1/2-approximations for submodular knapsack. In The 23rd International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS, pp. 3263–3274, 2020.
Qilian Yu, Easton Li Xu, and Shuguang Cui. Streaming algorithms for news and scientific literature
  recommendation: Monotone submodular maximization with a $d$ -knapsack constraint. IEEE
  Access, 6:53736–53747, 2018.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fair-
 ness constraints: Mechanisms for fair classification. In Proceedings of the 20th International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS, volume 54 of Proceedings of Ma-
 chine Learning Research, pp. 962–970, 2017.


A     O MITTED L EMMA OF S ECTION 1.2
Lemma 3 ((El Halabi et al., 2020)). If f is monotone, then solving FSM is equivalent to the problem
below.
                                       max f (S)
                                        S∈U
                               s.t.    |S ∩ Uc | ≤ uc  ∀c ∈ [N ]
                                        X
                                            max{|S ∩ Uc |, lc } ≤ k
                                       c∈[N ]


B     A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION
B.1   A DDITIONAL A PPLICATIONS OF FSC

We first describe an additional number of applications of the fair submodular cover (FSC) problem.

Data summarization. The goal of data summarization is to find a small subset of a dataset, such
as images, documents, etc, that summarizes the dataset. Monotone submodular functions have com-
monly been used in data summarization to quantify the performance of a particular subset (Lin &
Bilmes, 2011; Lindgren et al., 2016), and in particular SC has been used to model the data sum-
marization problem (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015). In many of these applications, the items of the
dataset can be classified into a number of categories over which a balanced representation in the
summary would be desirable. For example, images may be people of different nationalities, or
news article documents may correspond to different perspectives on an issue. The FSC formulation
emphasizes maintaining a certain information threshold via the constraint f (S) ≥ τ , balancing cat-
egories through a fairness constraint, while minimizing the summary size. One particular possibility


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for the constraint on f is that it be nearly its maximum value, i.e., we desire a summary that is as
small as possible while maintaining nearly all of the information from the original dataset. We also
note that data summarization motivates FSM (Halabi et al., 2022). In fact, for many use cases such
a formulation of FSC may be more meaningful than the alternative FSM formulation, which places
emphasis on restricting the summary to a particular budget.

Training data subset selection. A second application is training data subset selection in machine
learning, which has previously been studied from the submodular optimization perspective (Wei
et al., 2015). The fairness constraint can be used to address the problem of innacuracies introduced
by class imbalance during model training, which is a major concern (Shwartz-Ziv et al., 2023).
This problem can be modeled by FSC, where the constraint on the f value represents a requirement
that the smaller training data represent the overall dataset sufficiently well therefore promoting an
accurate learned model, that the training data be balanced over the classes, and we seek to select the
smallest amount of training data possible as training is computationally expensive.

Neural network pruning and quantization. Due to the massive size of modern neural networks,
large, highly-accurate models may require multiple GPUs to do the inference, which limits the
usability of such models. Neural network pruning and quantization address this by reducing network
size or memory while preserving performance. In this task, the goal is to select a subset of neurons
while preserving network performance. One common approach used in neural network pruning
and quantization is the reweighted input change pruning (Frantar et al., 2022), where the objective
function has been proved to preserve weak submodularity (Halabi et al., 2022). Assume that our
goal is to prune the network with the objective function to achieve 70% of the value of F on the
ground set i.e., F (S) ≥ 0.7τ , where τ is F (U ) where U is the ground set. Additionally, a fairness
constraint can ensure that neurons are proportionally selected across different layers or blocks to
maintain structural balance.

Influence maximization in social network analysis. As a final application, influence maximiza-
tion is an important problem in social network analysis. Suppose the social graph is described by
G = (V, E, w̄), where V is the set of nodes with |V | = n, E denotes the set of edges, and w̄ is
the weight vector defined on the set of edges E. The objective function is defined on subsets of the
nodes of the graph to be the expected number of nodes influenced in the graph by a chosen seed set
S, and it is well-known to be an example of a monotone and submodular function (Kempe et al.,
2015). In this application, FSC addresses the problem where we want to find the subset of minimum
size that could influence a target fraction of nodes, f (S) ≥ τ , while ensuring fairness in node selec-
tion based on associated features (e.g., demographics). This application highlights FSC’s ability to
balance influence spread across diverse subgroups in social networks.

B.2   C OMPARISON WITH E XISTING R EDUCTIONS

In this section, we briefly discuss the difference between our reduction and the existing reduction
from general submodular maximization to submodular cover.
The standard reduction from an instance of submodular cover (SC) with objective f and threshold
constraint τ to an instance of submodular maximization (SM) with objective f and budget k involves
iteratively doing the following procedure: A guess is made for the size of the optimal solution
(|OP T |) to the instance of SC, and this guess as the budget along with f are input into an algorithm
for SM. The procedure is repeated with increasingly large guesses until a solution is found with f
value sufficiently close to τ . This process is relatively straightforward since the two problems are
dual to each other, and the conversion requires only a flip between the objective and the constraint.
A clear description of the process is provided in Iyer & Bilmes (2013a).
In contrast, in our fairness setting, the conversion from fair submodular cover (FSC) to fair sub-
modular maximization (FSM) is less clear because of the more complex matroid structure of the
fairness constraints. It is important to note that there is currently no existing formulation of the Sub-
modular Cover (SC) problem that incorporates a matroid constraint, nor has any conversion process
been developed to address such constraints. To address this, we devised a method where each guess
of the size of the optimal solution for the instance of SC is used to construct an extended fairness
matroid (we propose the concept of an extension to a matroid in Section 1.2). This matroid is then


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


input as a constraint into a bicriteria FSM algorithm, such as those developed in Sections 3.1 and
3.2. Furthermore, post-processing (Lines 6–12 in Algorithm 1 and Lines 7-13 in Algorithm 4) is
required for each guess to ensure the fairness constraint is met, unlike the non-fairness setting where
no such post-processing is necessary. A final difference between our fair setting and the general
setting is that we are the first to introduce a converting process for multilinear extension algorithms
(Algorithm 4).


B.3   C OMPARISON WITH A LGORITHMS FOR SM WITH M ATROID C ONSTRAINTS

In this section, we provide a comparison between our fair submodular maximization algorithms and
existing algorithms for submodular maximization under matroid constraints.
First, we note that the fair submodular maximization (FSM) problem can be converted into an in-
stance of submodular maximization with a general matroid constraint, as shown by Lemma 3 in
Halabi et al. (2020). Therefore, existing algorithms for SM with a general matroid constraint can
also be applied to FSM. Such algorithms return a feasible solution to the instance of SM with a
matroid constraint, and achieve an approximation guarantee of at best 1 − 1/e. However, our goal
with our algorithms for FSM is to use them as subroutines in the conversion process, and so we
develop algorithms that find sets that are better approximations to the optimal solution than 1 − 1/e
but are not necessarily feasible. i.e., we propose algorithms for FSM with bicriteria approximation
ratio. To this end, we have developed the notion of an extension of the fairness matroid (see Def-
inition 2 in Section 1.2) and shown that by transferring to this “bigger” constraint we can achieve
better objective values. In the case of our continuous algorithm, this means traveling within an ex-
tended polytope of the β-extension of the fairness matroid. This approach enables the f value of the
solution set to approach arbitrarily close to the optimal objective.


B.4   O MITTED D ISCUSSION ON THE F EASIBILITY OF FSC

In Section 1.2, we present the problem definition for FSC. Notice that for some input values of τ ,
and pc , qc , there might be no feasible solution, i.e. the instance of FSC is invalid. Further, it might
not be easy to check whether there exists a feasible solution with the value of submodular objective
f to be higher than τ and also satisfy the fairness constraint. However, if we have an algorithm
that is guaranteed to produce an approximately feasible solution to FSC assuming the instance is
valid, we can use this algorithm to check whether there exists an approximately feasible solution
to the instance or not. In particular, suppose we have an algorithm for valid instances of FSC that
is guaranteed to produce a fair solution X such that f (X) ≥ γτ for some value γ that is close to
1. Then if we run this algorithm on the instance, we can check if the returned solution satisfies
f (X) ≥ γτ and is fair, in which case we know there exists a nearly feasible solution. If the solution
does not satisfy the guarantees, then the FSC instance must not have a feasible solution at all. The
algorithms proposed in this paper are examples of algorithms that provide nearly feasible solutions
to valid instances of FSC. Another approach to find a value for τ which makes the FSC problem
feasible is as follows. We can choose a value of the solution set, denoted as r, which satisfies that
qc r ≤ |Uc | for each c ∈ [N ], and run any non-bicriteria algorithm for the FSM instance with the
fairness matroid Mf air (P, r, p⃗r, ⃗qr). Since that qc r ≤ |Uc |, the rank of the fairness matroid is r.
Therefore, if we set τ to be f (S) where S is the output solution set of the algorithm for FSM, then
the FSC problem would be feasible since S would be a feasible set for the FSC instance.



C     A PPENDIX FOR S ECTION 2

In this section, we present missing discussions and proofs from Section 2 in the main pa-
per. We first present missing proofs of Theorem 1 about algorithm convert-fair in
Section C.1. Then we present the proof of Theorem 2 about the converting algorithm
convert-continuous for continuous algorithms in Section C.2. In addition, pseudocode for
the algorithm convert-continuous is presented in Algorithm 4.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In this section, we present the missing proofs of the lemmas that are used in the proof of Theorem
1. In order to prove Theorem 1, we need the following two lemmas. Lemma 4 guarantees that the
solution set S after the rounding step satisfies the fairness constraint for cover. Lemma 5 implies the
inclusion relationship of the fairness matroid with the same fairness ratios.
Lemma 4. For each guess κ such that κ ≤ (1+α)|OP T |, the solution set S in Algorithm 1 satisfies
                                pc |S|                    qc |S|
                           β⌊          ⌋ ≤ |S ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈        ⌉,        |S| = βκ.
                                  β                         β

Proof. Here we denote the solution set returned by the bicriteria algorithm for FSM as S ′ , and the
solution set after the rounding steps from Line 6 to Line 8 as S ′′ . From the definition of bicrite-
ria approximation algorithm for FSM, we can see that the solution set returned by the subroutine
algorithm for FSM satisfies that
                                     |S ′ ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈qc κ⌉
                                      X
                                            max{|S ′ ∩ Uc |, β⌊pc κ⌋} ≤ βκ
                                     c∈[N ]

After the rounding steps for each group from Line 6 to Line 8, the solution set satisfies that |S ′′ ∩
                         ′                                                         ′′
Uc | = max{β⌊p
           P c κ⌋, |S ∩ U′ c |} for any c ∈ [N ]. It then follows that β⌊pc κ⌋ ≤ |S ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈qc κ⌉.
Since that c∈[N ] max{|S ∩ Uc |, β⌊pc κ⌋} ≤ βκ, we have that
                           X                  X
                 |S ′′ | =     |S ′′ ∩ Uc | =      max{|S ′ ∩ Uc |, β⌊pc κ⌋} ≤ βκ.
                            c∈[N ]                  c∈[N ]
                             P              P                    |Uc |
From the assumption that c∈[N ] qc ≥ 1 and c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP   T |) } ≥ 1, after the second
rounding phase from Line 10 to Line 12, we have |S| = βκ and that for each group c,
                                        β⌊pc κ⌋ ≤ |S ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈qc κ⌉.
Since the solution set S is of cardinality βκ, then we have
                                           pc |S|                    qc |S|
                                      β⌊          ⌋ ≤ |S ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈        ⌉.
                                             β                         β


Lemma 5. For any positive integers κ1 , κ2 such that κ1 ≤ κ2 , we have that
                      Mf air (P, κ1 , ⌈⃗
                                       pκ1 ⌉, ⌈⃗qκ1 ⌉) ⊆ Mf air (P, κ2 , ⌊⃗
                                                                          pκ2 ⌋, ⌈⃗qκ2 ⌉)

Proof. The lemma is equivalent to prove that for any subset A ∈ Mf air (P, κ1 , ⌈⃗    pκ1 ⌉, ⌈⃗qκ1 ⌉), we
have that A is also in Mf air (P, κ2 , ⌊⃗κ2 ⌋, ⌈⃗qκ2 ⌉). Since κ1 ≤ κ2 , |A ∩ Uc | ≤ ⌈qc κ1 ⌉ ≤ ⌈qc κ2 ⌉.
                                        pP
For the second constraint, notice that c∈[N ] max{|A ∩ Uc |, ⌈pc κ1 ⌉} ≤ κ1 is equivalent to that
P                           ⌈pc κ1 ⌉
  c∈[N ] max{|A ∩ Uc |/κ1 , κ1 } ≤ 1. It then follows that

            X                                 ⌊pc κ2 ⌋    X                    ⌈pc κ1 ⌉
                    max{|A ∩ Uc |/κ2 ,                 }≤   max{|A ∩ Uc |/κ1 ,          } ≤ 1.
                                                κ2                               κ1
           c∈[N ]                                        c∈[N ]

Therefore, A ∈ Mf air (P, κ2 , ⌊⃗
                                pκ2 ⌋, ⌈⃗qκ2 ⌉).

We now prove Theorem 1.
                        P                   |Uc |
Theorem 1. Suppose c∈[N ] min{qc , β(1+α)|OP      T |) } ≥ 1. Then any (γ, β)-bicriteria approxi-
mation algorithm for FSM that returns a solution set in time T (n, κ) can be converted into an
approximation algorithm for FSC that is a ((1 + α)β, γ)-bicriteria approximation algorithm that
                        T |)
runs in time O( log(|OP
                 log(α+1) T (n, (1 + α)|OP T |)).


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Denote the optimal solution of the FSC as OP T . Since by Lemma 4, the fairness constraint
for cover is always satisfied. When the guess of OP T satisfies that |OP T | < κ ≤ (1 + α)|OP T |,
by the definition of bicriteria approximation algorithm for FSM, it follows that
                                f (S) ≥ γ              max              f (X).
                                            X∈Mf air (P,κ,⌊⃗
                                                           pκ⌋,⌈⃗
                                                                q κ⌉)

Since κ > |OP T |, by Lemma 5, we have that Mf air (P, |OP T |, ⌈⃗
                                                                 p|OP T |⌉, ⌈⃗q|OP T |⌉) ⊆
Mf air (P, κ, ⌊⃗
               pκ⌋, ⌈⃗qκ⌉). Therefore, it follows that


                        max             f (X) ≥                      max                         f (X)
            X∈Mf air (P,κ,⌊⃗
                           pκ⌋,⌈⃗
                                q κ⌉)             X∈Mf air (P,|OP T |,⌈⃗
                                                                       p|OP T |⌉,⌈⃗
                                                                                  q |OP T |⌉)

Since OP T is the optimal solution of FSC, we have that ⌈pc |OP T |⌉ ≤ |OP T ∩ Uc | ≤ ⌈qc |OP T |⌉.
It implies that OP T ∈ Mf air (P, |OP T |, ⌈⃗
                                            p|OP T |⌉, ⌈⃗q|OP T |⌉). Therefore we can get
                                        max                       f (X) ≥ f (OP T ) ≥ τ.
                    X∈Mf air (P,|OP T |,⌈⃗
                                         p|OP T |⌉,⌈⃗
                                                    q |OP T |⌉)

Then
                                                f (S) ≥ γτ.

This means that the algorithm stops by the time when κ reaches the region of (|OP T |, (1 +
α)|OP T |], which implies that the output solution set satisfies |S| = βκ ≤ β(1 + α)|OP T |.
Since by Lemma 4, the fairness constraint is always satisfied, the output solution set satisfies a
((1 + α)β, γ)-approximation ratio. The algorithm makes O(log1+α |OP T |) calls to the bicrite-
ria algorithm for FSM with κ = 1 + α, (1 + α)2 , ..., (1 + α)|OP T |, so the query complexity is
             T |)
   P log(|OP
O( i=1 log(α+1)
                  T (n, (1 + α)i )).

C.2    C ONVERTING THEOREM FOR CONTINUOUS ALGORITHMS

In this section, we present and analyze the converting algorithm for the continuous algorithms, which
is denoted as convert-continuous. The algorithm description is in Algorithm 4. The main
result of the algorithm is presented in Theorem 2, which we restate as follows.
Theorem 2.      Any continuous algorithm with a (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation ratio for FSM
that returns a solution in time T (n, κ) with probability at least 1 − nδ can be converted into
an approximation algorithm for FSC such that with probability 1 − δ, the algorithm satisfies a
((1 + α)β, (1−3ε)γ−2ε
             1+3ε+ 2ε
                      )-bicriteria approximation ratio where (1−3ε)γ−2ε
                                                              1+3ε+ 2ε
                                                                        holds in expectation. The
                    γ                                                            γ
                                                                                     n log1+α |OP T |
query complexity is at most O(log1+α |OP T |T (n, (1 + α)|OP T |)) +                        ε2        log nδ ).

Proof. Throughout the proof, we use OP T to denote the optimal solution of the FSM. In addi-
tion, we denote the optimal solution of FSM under the total cardinality κ as OP Tκ , i.e., OP Tκ =
arg maxS∈Mf air (P,κ,⃗pκ,⃗qκ) f (S). First of all, notice that there are at most min{n, log1+α |OP T | +
1} number of guesses of |OP T | before κ reaches |OP T | ≤ κ ≤ (1 + α)|OP T |. By taking a union
bound over all guess of |OP T | we would obtain with probability at least 1 − 2δ and for each guess of
|OP T |, the algorithm for FSM outputs a solution x with a bicriteria approximation ratio of (γ, β).
Since F(x) ≤ n maxs∈Mβ f (s) ≤ nf (OP Tκ ), by the Chernoff bound in Lemma 8 and taking the
union bound, it follows that with probability at least 1 − 2δ , for each guess of |OP T |, the estimate
of F(x) in Line 4 of Algorithm 4 denoted as Y , satisfies that
                                 |Y − F(x)| ≤ 2εf (OP Tκ ) + 3εF(x).
By the definition of the bicriteria approximation ratio, it follows that Y ≥ {(1−3ε)γ−2ε}f (OP Tκ ).
Similar to the proof of Theorem 1, we can see that when κ, which is the guess of the size OP T
satisfies that |OP T | ≤ κ ≤ (1 + α)|OP T |, it follows that
                                              f (OP Tκ ) ≥ τ.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 convert-continuous
Input: An FSC instance with threshold τ , fairness parameters p⃗, ⃗q, partition P , a (γ, β)-bicriteria
approximation algorithm for FSM, α > 0
Output: S ⊆ U
 1: κ ← ⌈1 + α⌉, S ← ∅.
 2: while true do
 3:     x ← (γ, β)-bicriteria approximation for FSM with fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, p⃗κ, ⃗qκ)
 4:     Y ← average over 2εn2 log( 4n  δ ) samples from F(x)
 5:     if Y ≥ {(1 − 3ε)γ − 2ε}τ then
 6:         S ← pipage rounding of x
 7:         for c ∈ [N ] do
 8:              if |S ∩ Uc | < pc βκ then
 9:                   Add new elements from Uc /S to S until |S ∩ Uc | ≥ pc βκ
10:         if |S| < βκ then
11:              for c ∈ [N ] do
12:                   while |S| < βκ and |S ∩ Uc | < qc βκ do
13:                      Add new elements in Uc /S to S
14:     κ ← ⌈(1 + α)κ⌉
15: return S


Therefore, Y ≥ {(1 − 3ε)γ − 2ε}τ . It then follows that the algorithm stops before the guess of
|OP T | satisfies |OP T | ≤ κ ≤ (1 + α)|OP T |. The value of multi-linear extension of the output
fractional solution then satisfies
                      (1 + 3ε)F(x) + 2εf (OP Tκ ) ≥ Y ≥ {(1 − 3ε)γ − 2ε}τ.
Combining the above inequality with that F(x) ≥ γf (OP Tκ ), then
                                                  (1 − 3ε)γ − 2ε
                                       F(x) ≥                    τ.
                                                    1 + 3ε + 2ε
                                                             γ

Since x ∈ P(Mβ ), where Mβ is the β extension of the fairness matroid under the guess κ, then after
the pipage rounding step, we would have that S ∈ Mβ , and the value of objective function satisfies
Ef (S) ≥ F(x) ≥ (1−3ε)γ−2ε
                   1+3ε+ 2ε
                             τ . After the rounding steps from Line 7 to Line 13 in Algorithm 4, we
                            γ
would get that the final solution set satisfies
                                              (1 − 3ε)γ − 2ε
                                  Ef (S) ≥                   τ
                                                1 + 3ε + 2ε
                                                         γ
                                     pc |S|                    qc |S|
                                  β⌊        ⌋ ≤ |S ∩ Uc | ≤ β⌈        ⌉
                                       β                         β
                                  |S| ≤ (1 + α)β|OP T |.


D     A PPENDIX FOR S ECTION 3

In this section, we present the missing content in Section 3 in the main paper.

D.1    A PPENDIX FOR S ECTION 3.1

In this portion of appendix, we present the missing details and proofs in Section 3.1
in the main paper, which is about two discrete algorithms greedy-fair-bi and
threshold-fairness-bi. We begin by presenting the proof of Lemma 2, followed by
proofs of the threshold greedy algorithm threshold-fairness-bi. Finally, the pseudocode


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


of greedy-fair-bi and threshold-fairness-bi are presented in Algorithm 5 and Al-
gorithm 6 respectively.
First of all, we prove Lemma 2, which builds the relationship between the original fairness matroid
and its β-extension for any β ∈ N+ .
 Lemma 2. For any β ∈ N+ and any fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u), denote Mβ as the β-
extended fairness matroid of Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u). Then for any set S ∈ Mβ with |S| = βκ, T ∈
Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗u) with |T | = κ, and any permutation of S = (s1 , s2 , ..., sβκ ), there exist a sequence
E = (e1 , e2 , ..., eβκ ) such that each element in T appears β times in E and that
                              Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ Mβ ,           ∀i ∈ {0, 1, ..., βκ}
where Si = (s1 , s2 , ..., si ) and S0 = ∅.

Proof. Before proving the lemma, we define some notations here. For any sequence of any length
m denoted as A = (a1 , a2 , ..., am ), we define the number of element x in the sequence as |Ax |, i.e.,
|Ax | := |{i : ai = x}|. In addition, weP  define the number of elements of group c in the sequence
as |Ac |, i.e., |Ac | = |{i : ai ∈ Uc }| = x∈Uc |Ax |. For the sequence E, we denote the sequence
containing i-th element to the last elements as Ei , i.e., Ei = (ei , ei+1 , ..., eβκ ). Now we prove a
stronger claim which would imply the results in the lemma.
Claim 1. For any β ∈ N+ , denote Mβ as the β-extension of the fairness matroid. Then for any
set S ∈ Mβ , there exists a sequence E = (e1 , ..., eβκ ) such that for each i ∈ {0, 1, ..., βκ}, the
sequence Fi = (Si , Ei+1 ) = (s1 , s2 , ..., si , ei+1 , ..., eβκ ) satisfies that
                                       |Fic | ≤ uc β    ∀c ∈ [N ]
                                        X
                                                     c
                                              max{|Fi |, lc β} ≤ βκ.
                                       c∈[N ]

Here for each e ∈ E, we have e ∈ T . Besides, we have that for any element x ∈ T ,
                                                   |Fix | ≤ β.

We prove the claim by induction. First, when i = βκ, Fi = S. Since S ∈ Mβ , the claim holds.
Suppose the result in the claim holds for i, and we prove the claim for i − 1. There are two cases.

       • Case 1. There exists some group c0 such that |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )c0 | ≤ lc0 β − 1. Since |T | = κ,
         |T ∩ Uc | ≥ lc for each c ∈ [N ]. Therefore, in this case, there exists at least one element
         x ∈ Uc0 ∩ T such that |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )x | < β. Then choose ei = x and Ei = (x, Ei+1 ), the
         results in the claim will be satisfied.
       • Case 2. For all group c ∈ [N ], |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )c | ≥ lc β. Since the sequence (Si−1 , Ei+1 ) is
         of length βκ − 1, we have that
                                              |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )| < βκ ≤ |T |β.
                                                                                       c1
         Therefore, there
                      P exists at least one   c
                                                   P c1 such that |(Si−1 , Ei+1 ) | < |T ∩ Uc1 |β.
                                                group
         (Otherwise c∈[N ] |(Si−1 , Ei+1 ) | ≥ c∈[N ] |T ∩ Uc |β = βκ, which breaks the assump-
         tion.) From |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )c1 | < |T ∩ Uc1 |β, we have that there exists at least one element
         x ∈ T ∩ Uc1 such that
                                            |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )x | ≤ β − 1.
         Then we set the i-th element in E to be x, then Ei = (x, Ei+1 ). It follows that
                                                                            ′                      ′
         |(Si−1 , Ei )x | ≤ β. For each element x′ ∈ T /{x} , |(Si−1 , Ei )x | = |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )x | ≤ β.
                                                                        c                    c
         Since ei = x ∈ Uc1 . For group c ̸= c1 , |(Si−1 , Ei ) | = |(Si−1 , Ei+1 ) | ≤ uc β
         by the assumption that the claim holds for iteration i. For group c1 , |(Si−1 , Ei )c1 | =
         |(Si−1 , Ei )c | + 1 ≤ uc β. Since for all group c ∈ [N ], |(Si−1 , Ei+1 )c | ≥ lc β, it follows
         that |(Si−1 , Ei )c | ≥ lc β. Thus
                                X                                   X
                                      max{|(Si−1 , Ei )c |, lc β} =    |(Si−1 , Ei )c |
                              c∈[N ]                                c∈[N ]


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        = |(Si−1 , Ei )| = βκ.
         Thus we prove the claim for iteration i − 1 under the assumption that the claim holds for
         i. By induction, the claim holds for all i. For i = 0, (S0 , E0 ) = E. From the construction
         of E we have that |E| = βκ, and that |E o | = β for all o ∈ T . Since for each group c,
         we have |Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∩ Uc | ≤ |(Si , Ei )c |. From the result in the claim, we can prove that
         Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ Mβ .



D.1.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3
Theorem 3. Suppose that greedy-fairness-bi is run for an instance of FSM, then
greedy-fairness-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − ε, 1ε )-bicriteria approximation
guarantee in at most O (nκ/ε) queries of f .

Proof. Denote the optimal solution of maxS∈Mf air (P,κ,⃗l,⃗u) f (S) as OP T , i.e., OP T =
arg max           ⃗   f (S). Since by Lemma 1, we have M1/ε = Mf air (P, κ/ε, ⃗l/ε, ⃗u/ε)
        S∈Mf air (P,κ,l,⃗
                        u)
is a matroid of rank κ/ε, then the Algorithm 5 ends after κ/ε steps and the output solution set
satisfies |S| = κ/ε. Since S ∈ M1/ε , then
                                         |S ∩ Uc | ≤ uc /ε      ∀c ∈ [N ]
                                          max {|S ∩ Uc |, lc /ε} ≤ κ/ε.
                                          c∈[N ]


Then it remains to prove that f (S) ≥ (1 − ε)f (OP T ). From Lemma 2, we know that there exists
a sequence E that contains 1/ε copies of OP T and that at each step i, Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ M1/ε . Then
by the greedy selection strategy, we have
                                f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) ≥ f (Si ∪ {ei+1 }) − f (Si ).
Thus by submodularity, we have
                   f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) ≥ f (Si ∪ {ei+1 }) − f (Si ) ≥ ∆f (S, ei+1 ).
Summing over all i, we would get
                                 k                              k
                                 ε −1
                                 X                              ε −1
                                                                X
                                        f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) ≥          ∆f (S, ei+1 ).
                                 i=0                            i=0
                                                                       P kε −1
Since the sequence E contains 1/ε copies of each element in OP T , then i=0     ∆f (S, ei+1 ) =
    P                        P kε −1
1/ε o∈OP T ∆f (S, o). Since i=0 f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) = f (S) − f (∅) and that f is nonnegative,
                         k
                         ε −1
                         X                              X                       f (OP T ) − f (S)
               f (S) ≥          ∆f (S, ei+1 ) ≥ 1/ε             ∆f (S, o) ≥                       .
                         i=0
                                                                                        ε
                                                       o∈OP T

Thus we have
                                            1
                                f (S) ≥        f (OP T ) ≥ (1 − ε)f (OP T ).
                                           1+ε



D.1.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
Before we present the proof of the theorem, first we present the proof of the following lemma. Let
us denote the solution set after the i-th element in threshold-fairness-bi as Si . By Lemma
2, we know that we can construct a sequence E = (e1 , e2 , .., eκ/ε ) that contains 1/ε copies of OP T
and that Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ M1/ε . Then we have the following lemma.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 6. For any 0 ≤ i < κ/ε, it follows that
                             ∆f (Si , si+1 ) ≥ (1 − ε)∆f (Si , ei+1 ) − εd/κ.

Proof. First, we consider the case if si+1 is added to the solution set and is not a dummy variable,
it follows that ∆f (Si , si+1 ) ≥ τ . Since Si ∪ {ei+1 } ∈ M1/ε , then if ei+1 ∈/ Si , by submodularity
we have ∆f (Si , ei+1 ) ≤ τ /(1 − ε). If ei+1 ∈ Si , then ∆f (Si , ei+1 ) = 0 ≤ τ /(1 − ε). Next,
we consider the case if si+1 is a dummy variable, then ∆f (Si , si+1 ) = 0. If ei+1 ∈ Si , then
∆f (Si , ei+1 ) = 0 and the above inequality in the lemma holds. If ei+1 ∈  / Si , since Sκ1 ∪ {ei+1 } ∈
M1/ε , then ∆f (Si , ei+1 ) ≤ εd/κ. Therefore, we have that
                             ∆f (Si , si+1 ) ≥ (1 − ε)∆f (Si , ei+1 ) − εd/κ.



Next, we present the proof of Theorem 4.
Theorem 4. Suppose that threshold-fairness-bi is run for an instance of FSM with
ε ∈ (0, 1). Then threshold-fairness-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − 2ε, 1ε )-
bicriteria approximation guarantee in at most O (n/ε log(κ/ε)) queries of f .

Proof. First, notice that the Algorithm 6 ends in at most (1/ε) log(κ/ε) number of iterations. There-
fore, there are at most n/ε log(κ/ε) number of queries to f . Next, we prove the bicriteria approxi-
mation ratio of threshold-fairness-bi. From the description of Algorithm 6, we have that
the output solution set S ∈ M1/ε , then
                                     |S ∩ Uc | ≤ uc /ε      ∀c ∈ [N ]
                                      max {|S ∩ Uc |, lc /ε} ≤ κ/ε.
                                     c∈[N ]

It remains to prove that f (S) ≥ (1 − 2ε)f (OP T ) where OP T is defined as the optimal solution of
FSM, i.e., OP T = arg maxS∈Mf air (P,κ,⃗l,⃗u) f (S). For simplicity, we assume the returned solution
has size |S| = k1 . As discussed in the proof of Theorem 3, Rank(M1/ε ) = κ/ε. Here we denote
the solution set as S = (s1 , s2 , ..., sκ/ε ), and we define Si as Si = (s1 , ..., si ). Here si is the
i-th element added to the solution set. In the case when the threshold τ drops below εd/κ at the
termination and κ1 ≤ κ/ε, we can add dummy elements to S such that |S| = κ/ε. By Lemma 6,
we have that there is a sequence E = (e1 , e2 , ..., ek/ε ) that contains 1/ε copies of OP T and


                             ∆f (Si , si+1 ) ≥ (1 − ε)∆f (Si , ei+1 ) − εd/κ.
Thus by submodularity, we have
  f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) ≥ (1 − ε){f (Si ∪ {ei+1 }) − f (Si )} − εd/κ ≥ (1 − ε)∆f (S, ei+1 ) − εd/κ.
Summing over all i, we would get
                     k/ε−1                                   κ/ε−1
                      X                                       X
                             f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) ≥ (1 − ε)           ∆f (S, ei+1 ) − d.
                      i=0                                     i=0
                                                                       P kε −1
Since the sequence E contains 1/ε copies of each element in OP T , then i=0    ∆f (S, ei+1 ) =
    P                        Pκ/ε−1
1/ε o∈OP T ∆f (S, o). Since i=0 f (Si+1 ) − f (Si ) = f (S) − f (∅) and that f is nonnegative,
                                          κ/ε−1
                                              X
                        f (S) ≥ (1 − ε)             ∆f (S, ei+1 ) − d
                                              i=0
                                   (1 − ε) X
                               ≥             ∆f (S, o) − d
                                      ε
                                              o∈OP T
                                1
                               ≥ {(1 − ε){f (OP T ) − f (S)} − εf (OP T )}
                                ε

                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 greedy-fairness-bi
 1: Input: ε, fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗
                                                 u)
 2: Output: S ∈ U
 3: S ← ∅
 4: Denote Mf air (P, κ/ε, ⃗l/ε, ⃗
                                 u/ε) as M1/ε .
 5: while ∃x s.t. S ∪ {x} ∈ M1/ε do
 6:    V ← {x ∈ U |S ∪ {x} ∈ M1/ε }
 7:    u ← arg maxx∈V ∆f (S, x)
 8:    S ← S ∪ {u}
      return S

Algorithm 6 threshold-fairness-bi
 1: Input: ε, fairness matroid Mf air (P, κ, ⃗l, ⃗
                                                 u)
 2: Output: S ∈ U
 3: S ← ∅
 4: Denote Mf air (P, κ/ε, ⃗l/ε, ⃗
                                 u/ε) as M1/ε
 5: d ← max{x}∈M1/ε f ({x})
 6: for τ = d; τ ≥ εd/k; τ ← τ (1 − ε) do
 7:     for x ∈ U do
 8:         if S ∪ {x} ∈ M1/ε and ∆f (S, x) ≥ τ then
 9:             S ← S ∪ {x}
10:         if |S| = κ/ε then
11:              return S
      return S


                                  1
                              ≥     {(1 − 2ε)f (OP T ) − (1 − ε)f (S)}.
                                  ε
By re-arranging the above equation, we have that
                                      f (S) ≥ (1 − 2ε)f (OP T ).


D.2     A PPENDIX FOR S ECTION 3.2

In this section, we provide the omitted content from Section 3.2 of the main paper. Specifically, we
present the proof of Lemma 7, which offers the theoretical guarantee for the subroutine algorithm
decreasing-threshold-procedure of the continuous algorithm cont-bi. The statement
of the Lemma is as follows.
Lemma 7. During each call of decreasing-threshold-procedure, the output coordinate
set B satisfies that
             F(x + ε1B ) − F(x) ≥ ε{ln(1/ε) + 1}((1 − 6ε)f (OP T ) − F(x + ε1B )).

Proof. For notation simplicity, we denote the rank of the matroid Mln( 1ε )+1 as m, i.e., m :=
(ln( 1ε ) + 1)κ. Here we denote the output solution set as B = {b1 , b2 , ..., bm } where bi is the i-
th element that is added to set B. Here if |B| < m, then for any i > |B|, bi is defined as a dummy
variable. In addition, we define Bi = {b1 , b2 , ..., bi }. Since Mln( 1ε )+1 is an ln( 1ε ) + 1-extension
of the original fairness matroid, then by Lemma 2, there exists a sequence E = (e1 , e2 , ..., em )
such that E contains ln(1/ε) + 1 copies of the optimal solution OP T = {o1 , o2 , ..., oκ } such that
Bi−1 ∪ {ei } ∈ Mln(1/ε)+1 for each i ∈ [m].
                                                                           3
                                                                      ε
Notice that by Lemma 8, we have that with probability at least 1 − 2n   4 , for any fixed x + 1B and
                                                                                   4n4
fixed element u, the empirical mean X̂(Bi , u), which is the average over 3κε2 log ε3 samples of the


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


random variable X = ∆f (S(x + ε1Bi ), u) satisfies that
                                                           ε
          |X̂(Bi , u) − E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi ), u)| ≤             f (OP T ) + εE∆f (S(x + ε1Bi ), u).        (1)
                                                           κ
Since during the execution of cont-bi, there are at most εn2 log(κ/ε) such estimations, by applying
the union bound, we have that with probability at least 1 − 2n1 2 , the inequality (1) holds for each x,
B and u during cont-bi. From the description in Algorithm 3, we can see that X̂(Bi−1 , bi ) ≥
                                                           w
w. For the element ei , we have that X̂(Bi−1 , ei ) ≤ 1−ε      or at the last iteration, we have that
                  εd
X̂(Bi−1 , ei ) ≤ κ . Therefore, we have that X̂(Bi−1 , bi ) ≥ (1 − ε)X̂(Bi−1 , ei ) − εd      κ . Since
OP T = maxS∈Mf air (P,κ,⃗pκ,⃗qκ) f (S) ≥ d, it then follows that
                                                                                        3ε
       (1 + ε)E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), bi ) ≥ (1 − ε)2 E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), ei ) −             f (OP T ).
                                                                                        κ
By rearranging the above inequality and simple calculations, we have


                                                                                     3ε
          E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), bi ) ≥ (1 − 3ε)E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), ei ) −               f (OP T ).
                                                                                     κ
By the construction of set B, we would get
                                    m
                                    X
           F(x + ε1B ) − F(x) =           F(x + ε1Bi ) − F(x + ε1Bi−1 )
                                    i=1
                                     m
                                    X          ∂F
                                =         ε·
                                    i=1
                                               ∂bi x=x+1Bi−1
                                     Xm
                                ≥ε         E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), bi )
                                     i=1
                                      m
                                     X                                               3εf (OP T )
                                ≥ε         (1 − 3ε)E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), ei ) −
                                     i=1
                                                                                          κ
                                                   m
                                                   X
                                = ε(1 − 3ε)              E∆f (S(x + ε1Bi−1 ), ei )
                                                   i=1
                                              1
                                    − 3ε2 (ln( ) + 1)f (OP T )
                                              ε
                                            Xm
                                ≥ ε(1 − 3ε)     E∆f (S(x + ε1B ), ei )
                                                   i=1
                                              12
                                     − 3ε (ln( ) + 1)f (OP T ),
                                              ε
where the last inequality results from the submodularity of f . From Lemma 2, we have that
                                                        κ
                                               1       X
             F(x + ε1B ) − F(x) ≥ ε(1 − 3ε)(ln( ) + 1)     E∆f (S(x + ε1B ), oi )
                                               ε       i=1
                                                1
                                      − 3ε2 (ln( ) + 1)f (OP T )
                                                ε
                                                  1
                                  ≥ ε(1 − 3ε)(ln( ) + 1){f (OP T ) − F(x + ε1B )}
                                                  ε
                                           2    1
                                      − 3ε (ln( ) + 1)f (OP T )
                                                ε
                                  ≥ ε{ln(1/ε) + 1}((1 − 6ε)f (OP T ) − F(x + ε1B )).



                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.2.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5
Theorem 5. Suppose that Algorithm 2 is run for an instance of FSM, then with probability at least
1 − n12 , cont-thresh-greedy-bi outputs a solution S that satisfies a (1 − 7ε, ln( 1ε ) + 1)-
                                                     2
bicriteria approximation guarantee in at most O nκ

                                                ε4 ln (n/ε) queries of f .

Proof. First of all, from the description of the subroutine algorithm DTP in Algorithm 3, we can see
that there are at most log(κ/ε)/ε number of iterations in the outer for loop. Therefore, the subroutine
algorithm DTP takes at most O( nκ ln(n/ε) ε3
                                             ln(κ/ε)
                                                     ). Since there are at most 1ε calls to DTP, we can
prove the sample complexity.
Next, we prove the bicriteria approximation ratio. By Definition 5, it is equivalent to prove that
x ∈ P(Mln(1/ε)+1 ) and F(x) ≥ (1 − 7ε)f (OP T ). Denote B (t) to be the output set of the t-th
call to the subroutine algorithm DTP. Then it follows that the output solution set x of cont-bi can
                     P1/ε
be denoted as x = t=1 ε1B (t) . Since B (t) ∈ Mln(1/ε)+1 , we have that 1B (t) ∈ P(Mln(1/ε)+1 ).
By the fact that P(Mln(1/ε)+1 ) is convex, we have that x ∈ P(Mln(1/ε)+1 ). Denote the fractional
solution x after t-th step as xt , then by Lemma 7, we have
                 F(xt+1 ) − F(xt ) ≥ ε{ln(1/ε) + 1}((1 − 6ε)f (OP T ) − F(xt+1 )).
For notation simplicity, we define L = ε{ln(1/ε) + 1}. It then follows that
                                             F(xt ) + L(1 − 6ε)f (OP T )
                                 F(xt+1 ) ≥
                                                        1+L
Since there are 1/ε iterations in cont-bi, the output x satisfies that x = x1/ε . By applying
induction to the above inequality, we would get
                              F(x1/ε ) ≥ (1 − (1 + L)−1/ε ){(1 − 6ε)f (OP T )}
                                                    1   L2
                                        ≥ (1 − e ε ( 2 −L) ){(1 − 6ε)f (OP T )}
                                        ≥ (1 − ε)(1 − 6ε)f (OP T )
                                        ≥ (1 − 7ε)f (OP T ).


Observe that compared to greedy-fair-bi and threshold-fairness-bi, our proposed
algorithm cont-bi demonstrates an enhanced approximation ratio for the cardinality of the output
solution set, improving from O(1/ε) to O(ln(1/ε)). This improvement is achieved while maintain-
ing the same order of function value violation, specifically f (S) ≥ (1 − O(ε))f (OP T ). However,
this enhancement requires an increased number of queries. This suggests the potential for attaining
comparable approximation ratios for the submodular cover problem under specific types of matroid-
type constraints.
Corollary 5.1. Using the Algorithm 3 as the subroutine for the converting algorithm in Algorithm
1, we obtain an algorithm that achieves an approximation ratio of ((1 + α) ln( 1ε ) + 1, 1 − O(ε)) in
             n(1+α)|OP T | log2 ( n
                                  ε ) log |OP T |
at most O(                 ε4 α                   ) with high probability.

Proof. The result of the approximation ratio can be obtained by combining Theorem 2 and Theorem
5 together. Here we provide proof of the sample complexity. Notice that for each guesses of OPT
of cardinality κg , the algorithm cont-bi that runs with the input Mf air (P, κg , p⃗κg , ⃗uκg ) uses at
          nκg log2 ( n
                     ε)
most O(        ε4       ).   From the result in Theorem 2 and Theorem 5, the total number of sample
                              n(1+α)|OP T | log2 ( n
                                                   ε ) log |OP T |
complexity would be O(                      ε4 α                   ).

E    P ROOF OF T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
Lemma 8 (Relative + Additive Chernoff Bound (Lemma 2.3 in Badanidiyuru & Vondrák (2014))).
Let X1 , ..., XN be independent random variables such that for each i, Xi ∈ [0, R] and E[Xi ] = µ
               bN = 1 PN Xi . Then
for all i. Let X      N   i=1

                                bN − µ| > αµ + ε) ≤ 2 exp{− N αε }.
                            P (|X
                                                                3R

                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     G R E E D Y - B I A LGORITHM


Algorithm 7 greedy-bi
 1: Input: ε, τ
 2: Output: S ∈ U
 3: S ← ∅
 4: while f (S) ≤ (1 − ε)τ do
 5:    u ← arg maxx∈U ∆f (S, x)
 6:    S ← S ∪ {u}
      return S



G      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

G.1     I MPLEMENTATION

Maximum Coverage. In maximum coverage problems, the objective is to identify a set of fixed
nodes that optimally maximize coverage within a network or graph. Given a graph G = (V, E),
where V and E respectively represent the set of vertices and nodes in the graph. Define a function
N : V → 2V as N (v) = {u, (u, v) ∈ E}, which represents the collection of neighbors of node
v. Then the objective of this maximization problem can be defined as the monotone submodular
function f (S) = | ∪v∈S N (v)|. The dataset utilized in our maximum coverage experiments include
Twitch 2000 and the Twitch 5000 of Twitch Gamers, which is a uniformly sampled subgraph of
the Twitch Gamers dataset (Rozemberczki & Sarkar, 2021), comprising 5,000 vertices and 2,000
vertices (users) who speak English, German, French, Spanish, Russian, or Chinese respectively. We
aim to develop a solution with a high f value exceeding a given threshold τ while ensuring a fair
balance between users who speak different languages.

Set Covering For the datasets annotated with tags, the objective of set covering is to extract a
diverse subset that maximizes the objective function f (S) = | ∪x∈S t(x)|, where the function t
maps an element x in a set N to its corresponding tags t(x). The dataset employed in our set
covering experiments is a subset of Corel5k Duygulu et al. (2002). For each item in the dataset, we
randomly added a category from {0, 2, 3, 4, 5} with a probability of 0.5. Any item not assigned a
random category was assigned category 1. By ensuring a balanced distribution of solutions across
categories, we aim to extract a representative set with a high f value that surpasses a given threshold
τ.
Experimental setup for max coverage. We implement our proposed algorithm on two different
instances, including the Twitch 5000 dataset and Twitch 2000. The algorithms implemented in-
clude convert-fair leveraging two subroutines provided in Appendix D: greedy-fair-bi
(Algorithm 5, referred to as ”GREEDY-Fair”) and threshold-fairness-bi (Algorithm 6,
referred to as ”GREEDY-Fair”). On the relatively small dataset Twitch 2000, we also imple-
ment convert-continuous using cont-bi as the subroutine ( referred to as ”CONTI-
Fair”). Due to high query complexity of the continuous algorithm cont-bi, we evaluate
convert-continuous heuristically by taking 5 samples per estimation in Line 8 of the
decreasing-threshold-procedure. We compare our approach to the greedy baseline,
greedy-bi, provided in Appendix F.
To ensure a fair comparison based on the quality of the solutions, we use different default values
for the parameter ε in each algorithm. This is because each algorithm has a varying approximation
ratio. Specifically, we set ε = 0.1, α = 0.2, uc = 1.1/C, lc = 0.9/C for greedy-bi and
greedy-fair-bi (where C is the number of groups). For threshold-fairness-bi, we
use ε = 0.05 while keeping the other parameters the same.
All the experiments are conducted on a single machine equipped with a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-13700 CPU, 32GB of RAM, and Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS. Each experiment with one set of parame-
ters can be done in 120 seconds.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G.2                  E XPERIMENTS S ETUP FOR SET COVERING .

We implement our proposed algorithm convert-fair leveraging two subroutines provided
in Appendix D: greedy-fair-bi (Algorithm 5) and threshold-fairness-bi (Algo-
rithm 6). We compare our approach to the greedy baseline, greedy-bi, provided in Appendix F.
To ensure a fair comparison based on the quality of the solutions, we use different default values
for the parameter ε in each algorithm. This is because each algorithm has a varying approximation
ratio. Specifically, we set ε = 0.1, α = 0.2, uc = 1.1/C, lc = 0.9/C for greedy-bi and
greedy-fair-bi (where C is the number of groups). For threshold-fairness-bi, we
use ε = 0.05 while keeping the other parameters the same.
All the experiments are conducted on a single machine equipped with a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-13700 CPU, 32GB of RAM, and Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS. Each experiment with one set of parame-
ters can be done in 30 seconds.

                                 0                                              0                                                             0
                                              0.7                                         0.20                                                          0.20
                                            0.6
                                           0.5                                          0.15                                                          0.15
                                         0.4                                          0.10                                                          0.10
             4                          0.3         1          4                                 1                          4                                  1
                                      0.2                                           0.05                                                          0.05
                                     0.1


                       3                       2                       3                    2                                       3                     2


                           (a) greedy-bi                       (b) greedy-fairness-bi                     (c) threshold-fairness-bi
             300
                                                                           GREEDY
                                                                                                      Fairness difference


             240                                               100         GREEDY-Fair                                      0.60
                                                                           THRES-Fair
Value of f


             180                                                75                                                          0.45                     GREEDY
                                                        Cost


                                                                                                                                                     GREEDY-Fair
             120                                                50                                                          0.30                     THRES-Fair
                                         GREEDY
              60                         GREEDY-Fair
                                                                25                                                          0.15
                                         THRES-Fair
                 0
                     50      150       250      350                  50      150       250      350                                50      150       250      350
                      Value of the given threshold                    Value of the given threshold                                  Value of the given threshold

                               (d) f                                        (e) Cost                                               (f) Fairness difference

Figure 2: Performance comparison on the Corel dataset for Set Covering. 2a, 2b, 2c illustrate the
distribution of images across various categories in the solutions produced by different algorithms
with τ = 300. f : the value of the objective submodular function. Cost: the size of the returned
solution. Fairness difference: (maxc |S ∩ Uc | − minc |S ∩ Uc |)/|S|
                                                 .


G.3                  R ESULTS

G.4                  R ESULTS ON C OREL DATASET

Figures 2a, 2b and 2c showcase the distribution of images across various categories in the solutions
produced by these algorithms with τ = 300. Figures 2d, 2e and 2f present the performance of these
algorithms (f value, cost, and fairness difference) for varying values of τ . As shown in Figure 2a,
with τ = 300, over 70% of the pictures in the solution returned by greedy-bi are labeled as cate-
gory ‘1’. While the solutions produced by greedy-fair-bi and threshold-fairness-bi
exhibit way fairer distributions across various categories as shown in Figures 2a and 2b). Similarly,
as the value of given τ increases, the magnitude of this difference also increases (see 2f). Figure 2d
showcases that for all these algorithms the objective function value f (S) scales almost linearly with
the threshold τ , which aligns with the theoretical guarantees of the approximation ratio.


                                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                           125
                              600                                                    GREEDY-Fair
                                                                           100       GREEDY
                                                                                     CONTI-Fair


                 Value of f
                              450
                                                                            75       THRES-Fair


                                                                    Cost
                              300                   GREEDY-Fair
                                                    GREEDY                  50
                              150                   CONTI-Fair
                                                                            25
                                                    THRES-Fair
                                0
                                        400         500       600                    400         500       600
                                    Value of the given threshold                 Value of the given threshold

                                            (a) f                                      (b) Cost

Figure 3: Performance comparison on the Twitch 2000 dataset for maximum coverage. ”CONTI-
Fair” corresponds to the convert-fair algorithm using cont-bi as the subroutine. f : the
value of the objective submodular function. Cost: the size of the returned solution. Fairness differ-
ence: (maxc |S ∩ Uc | − minc |S ∩ Uc |)/|S|
                                                .


Notably, unlike the results presented in Section 4, our proposed algorithms achieve comparable costs
to the greedy-bi solution (as shown in Figure 2e) on the Corel5k dataset. This is likely because
the Corel5k dataset is less biased and the marginal gains for adding different elements are more
uniform, compared to the Twitch Gamer dataset.

G.5   R ESULTS ON THE T WITCH 2000 DATASET

The results of comparing different algorithms on the Twitch 2000 dataset are presented in Figure 3a
and 3b. From the results, we can see under fairness constraints, the continuous algorithm CONTI-
Fair achieves a lower cost compared to the discrete algorithms, GREEDY-Fair and THRES-Fair,
aligning with the theoretical guarantees presented in the main paper. However, CONTI-Fair incurs
a higher cost than the greedy algorithm without fairness constraint, potentially due to the limited
sampling (five samples per estimation) of the multilinear extension in Line 8 in Algorithm 3, which
falls short of the theoretical requirements.


                                                                  28
