Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


VIC TO R: L EARNING H IERARCHICAL V ISION -
I NSTRUCTION C ORRELATION R EWARDS FOR L ONG -
HORIZON M ANIPULATION

 Kuo-Han Hung∗                       Pang-Chi Lo∗                        Jia-Fong Yeh∗
 National Taiwan University          National Taiwan University          National Taiwan University

 Han-Yuan Hsu                         Yi-Ting Chen                   Winston H. Hsu
 National Taiwan University           National Yang Ming             National Taiwan University
                                      Chiao Tung University



                                             A BSTRACT
         We study reward models for long-horizon manipulation by learning from action-free
         videos and language instructions, which we term the visual-instruction correlation
         (VIC) problem. Existing VIC methods face challenges in learning rewards for long-
         horizon tasks due to their lack of sub-stage awareness, difficulty in modeling task
         complexities, and inadequate object state estimation. To address these challenges,
         we introduce VICtoR, a novel hierarchical VIC reward model capable of providing
         effective reward signals for long-horizon manipulation tasks. Trained solely on
         primitive motion demonstrations, VICtoR effectively provides precise reward
         signals for long-horizon tasks by assessing task progress at various stages using
         a novel stage detector and motion progress evaluator. We conducted extensive
         experiments in both simulated and real-world datasets. The results suggest that
         VICtoR outperformed the best existing methods, achieving a 43% improvement
         in success rates for long-horizon tasks. Our project page can be found at https:
         //cmlab-victor.github.io/cmlab-vicotor.github.io/.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been extensively studied for long-horizon manipulation [1; 2; 3].
However, crafting reward functions for these tasks is complex, as it typically requires access to true
states or significant domain expertise. Consequently, there is an urgent need for a robust and accurate
reward model for these tasks. Previous research has explored modeling reward functions via robotic
expert demonstrations [4; 5], goal-images [6; 7], and human demonstrations [8; 7; 9]. Unfortunately,
the required task specification materials, such as goal-images, remain costly and impractical.
Recently, methods that consider the vision-instruction correlation (VIC) as reward signals have
emerged, providing a more accessible way for task specification through language. Specifically, these
VIC methods view the reward modeling as a regression or classification problem and train the reward
model on the given action-free demos and instructions. Pioneer approaches [10; 11; 12; 13; 14]
studied using pre-trained Vision Language Models (VLMs) or Video Language Models, like CLIP
[15], to generate rewards by assessing the similarity between visual observations and language goals.
Additionally, Ma et al. [16] explore the possibility of using human video and language data to
pre-train a reward model, later fine-tuned with in-domain data. However, regardless of whether
diverse data is used for pre-training, existing VIC studies still require full-length data to retrain the
model. Notably, these methods are constrained to short-horizon tasks, such as “picking up a block".
Figure 1 illustrates three challenges we observe when applying existing VIC methods to long-horizon
manipulation tasks: (1) No awareness of task decomposition: Failing to divide complex tasks into
manageable parts limits adaptability. (2) Confusion from variance in task difficulties: Training
a reward model on long-horizon tasks impairs the learning of reward signals and fails to generate
suitable progressive rewards. (3) Ambiguity from lacking explicit object state estimates: Relying
on whole-scale image observations can overlook critical environmental changes. For instance, when


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Problems in existing VIC methods and VICtoR’s solution. Training long-horizon task
with existing VIC methods commonly suffer from the listed problems. To address these problems,
we propose VICtoR, a hierarchical reward model that can decompose long-horizon tasks and assign
rewards by identifying the stage, motion, and progress of the agent from visual observations.


training for the task “move the block into the closed drawer", previous VIC models would assign
high rewards for moving the block even if the drawer is closed, misleading the learning process.
We propose VICtoR, a hierarchical VIC reward model for long-horizon manipulation. Figures 1
and 2 depict its concept and architecture. VICtoR learns effective rewards for long-horizon tasks by
hierarchically assessing overall progress. Specifically, it decomposes long-horizon tasks (high-level)
into stages (mid-level) and motions and progress (low-level, robot primitives), determining the
reward by considering task progress at different granularities. Meanwhile, the hierarchical feature
sets VICtoR free from the requirements of full-length demonstrations and further grants better
generalizability. By treating each long-horizon task as an arbitrary permutation of available motions,
VICtoR, trained only on action-free motion videos, can be adapted to unseen long-horizon tasks.
To minimize human effort, we leverage GPT-4’s semantic understanding to extract task knowledge
(expected object statuses and required motions). Then, a stage detector retrieves the current object
statuses from the observation and verifies if they match the condition of a specific stage in the task
knowledge (Challenge #1). Next, from a list of required motions to complete the stage, a motion
progress evaluator determines the current motion and assesses the in-motion progress (Challenges
#2 and #3) by evaluating the correlations between visual observations and each motion instruction.
Consequently, VICtoR can generate informative rewards to complete long-horizon tasks.
We conducted extensive experiments in both simulated and real-world settings. In the simulation, we
designed ten tasks of varying horizons, including those where each step’s success depends on the
success of the previous stage. For the real-world experiments, we used the dataset collected from
XSkill [17] and visualized the trained reward curves in comparison to other baselines. Compared
to the best prior VIC reward model, VICtoR achieved a 25% improvement in the average success
rate across all tasks and a 43% improvement in the more challenging tasks (tasks which consisted of
more than 4 motions). Additionally, our detailed ablation studies emphasized the importance of our
hierarchical architecture and training objectives. Visualizations of the learned embedding space and
rewards demonstrated that VICtoR effectively assesses task progress.
We summarize our contributions as follows: (1) We are the first to explore the potential of VIC rewards
for long-horizon manipulation tasks. (2) We introduce VICtoR, a novel hierarchical VIC reward
model that assesses task progress by decomposing it into various levels. (3) We present extensive
results from simulated and real-world experiments, ablations, and visualizations to demonstrate
VICtoR’s superiority, outperforming the best prior method by 43% on more challenging tasks.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Large Pre-trained Models for Robotics. With great ability of reasoning, Large Language Models
(LLMs) have been utilized for robotics in navigation [18], task planning [19; 20], code-completion


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for policies [21; 22], and manipulation [23; 24; 25; 26; 27]. These works leverage LLMs’ ability
to translate high-level instructions into actionable sequences and break them down into sub-orders
for precise agent control. Additionally, recent advancements have leveraged Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) to enhance environmental understanding for agents. With a profound understanding
of the physical world, VLMs facilitate the works in navigation, robotic control, and monitoring
[28; 29; 30; 31; 32]. Unlike previous methods, for reward modeling, VICtoR uses LLMs to break
down tasks and VLMs to assess visual observation with motion descriptions, allowing our method to
better assess the task’s progress and distinguish it with different granularity.

Addressing Long-Horizon Tasks. Long-horizon manipulation is a long-standing problem. Tradi-
tional Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) methods [33; 34; 2; 35; 36] address this challenge
by decomposing complex tasks into hierarchical levels or sequential orders, where higher-level
policies make decisions that guide the selection of parameters for lower-level policies or pre-trained
actions. Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) methods [37; 38; 39] attempt to assemble and sched-
ule well-trained motions to accomplish long-horizon tasks. Additionally, Long-horizon Imitation
Learning [40; 41] has been proposed to learn long-horizon tasks from expert demonstrations. Unlike
these approaches, VICtoR aims to learn the reward model for long-horizon tasks from action-free
demonstrations and task instructions. Our reward model is designed to be independent of policy
design and can be applied to RL algorithms to learn long-horizon manipulation tasks.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Problem Statements. For a reinforcement learning task µ, we assume the environment follows
a partially observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), which can be described with the tuple
Mµ := (S, A, O, Ω, P, R, γ), in which the observation o ∈ Ω is derived from the observation
function O(o | s) conditioned on the current state s ∈ S. A is the space of actions; P(s′ | s, a)
denotes the dynamics of the environment; R and γ are the environment’s reward function and discount
factor, respectively. The objective aims to seek a policy π(a | o) that assigns a probability to action a,
given the observation o, which maximizes the accumulated discounted rewards in a rollout.

VIC Reward Model. This work aims to develop a Vision-Instruction Correlation (VIC) reward
model to generate accurate rewards from visual observations and language instructions. We assume an
instruction Lµ for the task µ is accessible, as the instruction is a low-cost resource to collect. Specif-
ically, we seek a reward model R(ot , ot−1 , Lµ ) computes the reward by evaluating the difference
in correlation between the image observation o and the instruction Lµ . Intuitively, R(ot , ot−1 , Lµ )
should generate a higher reward if the ot is moving closer to the task’s goal compared to ot−1 .

Stages and Motions. In the context of long-horizon manipulation, we define motion as the primitive
movement that a robot can make, such as reaching or grasping an object. In addition, stage refers to
a high-level interaction with an object in the environment, requiring the consideration of complex
objects’ status, and can encompass multiple motions. For instance, the stage "open the drawer"
involves the motions "reach the drawer handle" and "pull out the drawer." A comprehensive list of
motions and stages is detailed in Appendix C.1.

4    M ETHOD
Overview. VICtoR is a reward model for long-horizon manipulation, relying on visual observations
and language instructions. As depicted in Figure 2, VICtoR employs a hierarchical approach to
assess task progress at various levels, including stage, motion, and motion progress. It consists of
three main components: (1) a Task Knowledge Generator that decomposes the task into stages and
identifies the necessary object states and motions for each stage (Section 4.1); (2) a Stage Detector
that detects object states to determine the current stage based on the generated knowledge (Section
4.2); (3) a Motion Progress Evaluator that assesses motion completion within stages (Section 4.3).
With this information, VICtoR then transforms it into rewards (Section 4.4). Both the Stage Detector
and Motion Progress Evaluator are trained on motion-level videos labeled with object states, which
are autonomously annotated during video collection. This setup enables VICtoR to deliver precise
reward signals for complex, unseen long-horizon tasks composed of these motions in any sequence.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 VICtoR Training                                                          VICtoR Inference (Reward Model)

      Motion-level Videos with                           Current                                                                          Motion Progress Evaluator
       Language Instructions                           Observation                  Stage Detector
         reach the drawer handle                                                                                                          Motion Reward
                                                                                                                                            Current Motion
                         …                                                           Object States
                                                                                                                                          reach the drawer    Progress
                                                                                      drawer: closed
                                                                                                                                               handle          Reward
           pull out the drawer         Motion                                            light: on                  Candidates Motions                          70%
                                      Progress                                      block: on the table
                                      Evaluator                                                                      reach the drawer
                         …                                                                                                handle
                                                                                                                    pull out the drawer
          reach the blue block

                                                                                                                                            pull out the
                         …                                                                                                                     drawer
                                                                            Task Knowledge Generation
                                                                                                                                                             Reward
                                                                                           Stage 1
                                                    Task Instruction      object states {drawer: closed, light:
         Object State Labels                                              on/off, block: on the table}
                                                                          motions [ reach the drawer handle, pull
      drawer: closed drawer: opened               “Move the blue block    out the drawer ]
                                       Stage      to the closed drawer”                   Stage 2                      Current Stage
                                      Detector                            object states: {drawer: open , ...}                              Stage Reward
                                                                          motions …
                                                                                                                      open the drawer


Figure 2: Training and inference pipeline of VICtoR. VICtoR is trained using motion-level videos
with language annotations and object state labels. It first decomposes the task into task knowledge for
decomposed stages, conditional object states, and motions. Then, it uses Stage Detector to identify
the stage, and a Motion Progress Evaluator (VLM) to detect the motion and in-motion progress.



4.1      TASK K NOWLEDGE G ENERATION

To make long-horizon tasks more achievable and manageable, we leverage the reasoning ability in
Large Language Models (LLMs) to decompose and analyze the tasks. Previous research [19; 20]
introduced LLMs into policy learning by planning sub-goals or actions for explicit guidance to
enhance long-horizon capabilities. Building upon this foundation, we explore more nuanced usage.
Our goal is to decompose a given training task into distinct sub-stages, define the specific conditions
or states of each object at these stages, and identify the motions required by the agent to advance
to the next stage. To achieve this, we employ GPT-4 to analyze and construct task knowledge.
Figure 2 illustrates an example of task knowledge generation for the task “move the block into the
closed drawer.” Details of our prompt design and implementation are provided in Appendix G, and
additional experiments for robustness are described in Appendix B.2.

4.2      S TAGE D ETECTION

Traditional VIC models, which encode entire visual observations to assess task progress, often
overlook subtle yet critical changes in object states. To address this, we differentiate between
detecting local object state changes and global agent movements (discussed in the next section). In
the previous section, Task Knowledge Generator decomposed long-horizon tasks into sub-stages,
each conditioned on different object states. To detect these stages, we designed Stage Detector, which
detects stage by identifying each object’s state in the environment and comparing these with the
conditioned states of each stage as defined in the task knowledge.

Object State Detection. To detect object states, our Stage Detector first leverages a language-
conditioned object detector D, such as MDETR [42], to identify objects in the image observation
o. Essentially, we crop out the bounding box D(o, c) generated from the detector D based on the
current observation o and the queried object c. Subsequently, these cropped images are fed into our
object state classifier P . The classifier predicts the likelihood of categorical object state for each
cropped image as P (Lc |D(o, c)), where Lc represents the language description of possible object
states for object c. We summarize the training details in Appendix C.2.

Stage Detection. After extracting all the object states in the environment, our Stage Detector can
then determine the current stage by comparing these states with the task knowledge. A stage is
identified if, and only if, all object states align with the task knowledge for a specific stage. For
example, as illustrated in Figure 2, if the drawer is currently closed, we compare this condition with
the states specified in each stage of the task knowledge. Upon finding that the drawer is expected
to be closed only at the first stage, we conclude that the agent is at the first stage. This comparison


                                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


should be applied to every conditioned object for the tasks. If the extracted set of object states does
not match any stage, the agent will be considered to be in the initial stage.

4.3   M OTION P ROGRESS E VALUATOR

Since a stage may require multiple motions to complete, relying merely on the stage reward is
insufficient for learning complex tasks. To this end, we introduce the Motion Progress Evaluator
(MPE) to provide the reward signals within the stage. As discussed in Section 4.1, each detected stage
comes with a list of motion descriptions in the task knowledge. Building on this, the MPE assesses
the agent’s current motion and progress within the motion, taking into account these descriptions.
This MPE model yields a more detailed reward signal that accurately reflects progress within stages.

Architecture. Our MPE model employs the vision encoder EVθ and language encoder ELθ
from CLIP[15], with two additional heads (fully-connected layers) attached to EVθ . Initially, the
vision encoder EVθ generates the base embedding f , which is then transformed into motion-specific
embedding m and progress-specific embedding p through separate heads. As for the language encoder
ELθ , we employ it to generate the language embedding lmo of motion mo without updating its
weights during training. Our goal is to determine the motion class and motion progress by evaluating
the similarity between the embeddings m and p and the language description lmo , respectively.

Objectives. To effectively evaluate progress within a stage, we expect three key capabilities in the
MPE model: (1) the ability to discern the temporal difference of frames extracted from the same video,
(2) the capacity to identify the motion in which the agent is engaged, and (3) the capability to assess
the progress of motion completion. To this end, we introduce objectives based on InfoNCE [43] to
guide our MPE model, focusing on time contrast, motion contrast, and language-frame contrast. The
functions of the three objectives are illustrated in Figure 7 in Appendix.
For implementation, we utilize the negative L2 distance as the similarity function S. During each
training iteration, we sample B videos focusing on specific motions and N videos featuring arbitrary
agent movements, from which we randomly select a batch of frame sequences [Fi , Fj>i , Fk>j ].

Time Contrastive Loss. To capture features relevant to physical interaction and sequential decision-
making, we apply the time contrastive loss Ltcn to the base embeddings, as inspired by [44; 45].
Essentially, images that are temporally closer should have more similar representations (embeddings)
than those that are temporally distant or from different videos. The loss Ltcn can be formulated by

                                                                                 b       b
                                   X         X                              eS(fx ,fy )
                        Ltcn = −                         log            b    b               b   b
                                                                                                     ,   (1)
                                   b∈B      (x,y)∈
                                                               eS(fx ,fy ) + eS(fi ,fk )
                                         {(i,j),(j,k)}


where fxb is the base embedding of the x’th frame.

Motion Contrastive Loss. To differentiate between various motions, we introduce the motion
contrastive loss Lmcn , which aligns each motion’s embedding with its relevant language embedding
and separates it from unrelated language embeddings. Additionally, to reduce reward hacking 1 and
enhance the robustness of our MPE model, we task it with distinguishing frames from motion videos
or meaningless videos that contain arbitrary movements. The loss Lmcn is formulated by

                                                                                     b   b
                                     X         X                            eS(mx ,l )
                       Lmcn = −                         log        S(mbx ,lb )         b ̸=b ,           (2)
                                   b∈{B,N }     x∈
                                                               e               + eS(mx ,l )
                                              {i,j,k}


where mbx is the motion embedding of xth frame, lb is the language annotation of motion in the video
b, and l̸=b is the instruction for other motion.
   1
     During RL training, agents may explore areas not covered in demonstrations and exploit reward model
vulnerabilities, leading to high rewards for incorrect actions.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Language-Frame Contrastive Loss. To assess progress within the motion, we employ the
language-frame contrastive loss Llf cn . The loss Llf cn aims to bring the progress embeddings
of nearly completed steps closer to the instruction embedding of the motion while distancing the
progress embeddings of frames from earlier steps, which can be stated by

                                                                      b   b
                                     X                         eS(pk ,l )
                        Llf cn = −         log         b              b   b            b
                                                                                               ,       (3)
                                                 eS(pi ,l ) + eS(pj ,l ) + eS(pk ,l )
                                                           b                               b
                                     b∈B

where pbx is the progress embedding of xth frame, and lb is the motion instruction for the video b.

Total Loss. Finally, we employ the Adam optimizer and the total loss Ltotal to guide our MPE
model, where Ltotal is a weighted combination of the three objectives mentioned above:

                              Ltotal = λ1 Ltcn + λ2 Lmcn + λ3 Llf cn .                                 (4)

Inference. During inference, along with the stage detected by the Stage Detector, the MPE model
evaluates the current motion from the motion candidates LM within the stage, provided by the
task knowledge from Section 4.1. Specifically, it calculates the similarity scores between the
motion embedding m of current observation and language embeddings lmo of each motion candidate
mo ∈ LM . It then selects the motion with the highest score, as formulated by

                                  motion∗ = argmax S(m, lmo ).                                         (5)
                                                    mo∈LM

To determine the confidence level of the MPE model, we further calculate the confidence score by
comparing the similarity difference between the motion embedding m and the language embedding
lmotion∗ of the selected motion, and the language embedding ln of arbitrary agent movements. We
decide whether to choose the selected motion motion∗ or the first motion by

                                       motion∗, if confidence > λc
                       motion =                                    , where                             (6)
                                       0,       otherwise

                                                      S(m, lmotion∗ )
                             confidence =                                    .                         (7)
                                                 S(m, lmotion∗ ) + S(m, ln )
Finally, given the determined motion, we assess the progress within the motion by calculating the
similarity score between the progress embedding p and the motion’s language embedding lmotion :

                                           S(p, lmotion ), if confidence > λc

                        progress =                                            ,                        (8)
                                           0,              otherwise

4.4   R EWARD F ORMULATION & P OLICY L EARNING

Considering all the information acquired from previous sections, we now have knowledge regarding
the current stage of the agent, its ongoing motion within the stage, and the progress within that
motion. We aggregate this information and the task knowledge into a measure of the task’s potential,
representing the overall progress within the task:

                                   stage
                                                                          !
                                    X
                    ϕ(ot ) = λm            #motionsi + motion +                     progress           (9)
                                                                                    | {z }
                                     i=0                                          in-motion progress
                             |                    {z                          }
                                  Total number of preceding motions

where ϕ(ot ) denotes a potential function conditioned on the image observation at timestep t, stage is
the number of the detected stage in the task. #motionsi is an integer indicating the total number of


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


different motions within stage i, motion is the integer representing the number of the detected motion
in the stage, and λm is a constant near the maximum of progress, ensuring ϕ(ot ) increases across
motions and stages. Additionally, progress is a float determined by the MPE model. Note that the
number of stage, #motionsi , motion correspond to the sequence provided in the task knowledge.
Using the potential, we implemented potential-based shaping rewards R(ot , ot−1 ) = ϕ(ot ) − ϕ(ot−1 )
from [46] to guide the agent’s behavior based on potential changes.


5     E XPERIMENTS

Our experiments aim to answer the following questions: (1) Does VICtoR provide effective rewards
for long-horizon tasks? (2) Is VICtoR able to generate dense rewards from real-world videos? (3)
Are all reward signals for stage, motion, and progress indispensable for learning effective rewards in
long-horizon manipulation tasks, and do they capture accurate information?
                                                                Experiments Environment
5.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS
                                                                 (a) Simulated Environment                  (b) Real World Environment
Evaluation Settings. Most existing manipulation bench-                                1.       light                          1.   drawer
                                                                                      2.       drawer                         2.   light
marks [47; 48; 49] do not support long-horizon tasks                                  3.       blue block                     3.   red cloth
                                                                                      4.       box                            4.   oven
where the success of each step depends on the outcomes of                                                             2
                                                                    1
previous steps. While Calvin [50] addresses the aforemen-                    2        3
                                                                                                                                   4
tioned issue, the tasks and action spaces (e.g., rotate) are                                                   1          3
                                                                                           4
too challenging for VIC reward models trained on action-
                                                                                                                                               Ex
free videos. Consequently, we developed a new environ-
ment to test different VIC reward models for long-horizon               Environment
                                                                         Simulated
                                                                                                  Tasks
                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                            Total Demos
                                                                                                               2300
                                                                                                                               Dataset Type
                                                                                                                              Machine Demos
manipulation. For policy training in this environment, we          Real World (XSkill)              8          360            Machine Demos

use a ground-truth object detector to speed up the process,
as we need to run multiple tasks with multiple seeds. For      Figure 3: Environment information.
real-world experiments, we train and test reward models        Tasks are generated from permutations
using the XSkill [17] dataset. Details on the environment,     ofTask are generated
                                                                  actions             from permutations
                                                                           on interactable       objects ofshown
tasks, and data are in Appendix C.1 and Figure 3.              inactions
                                                                  the    on interactable objects. (a) drawer:
                                                                      figure.
                                                                 open, close (b) light: open, close (c) block:
                                                                 reach, pick, move (d) cloth: pick, move (e)
                                                               oven: open
Baselines. We compare VICtoR with the following baselines:            (1) Sparse Reward: A binary
reward function assigns a reward only when the task succeeds. (2) Stage Reward: A reward function
that assigns a reward equal to the stage number when the agent reaches a new stage. (3) LOReL
[51]: A language-conditioned reward model that learns a classifier fθ (o0 , ot , l) to evaluate whether
the progression between the o0 and ot aligns with the task instruction l. Note that, we replaced
the backbone of LOReL to CLIP for a fair comparison with VICtoR and LIV. (4) LIV [16]: A
vision-language representation for robotics that can be utilized as a reward model by finetuning on
target-domain data. We apply the same reward shaping method for LIV and LOReL as discussed in
Section 4.4. (5) VICtoR (task): A baseline for VICtoR trains on task-level data, using the same
MPE objective but with demonstrations of tasks not divided into stages or motions. Note that the
training demos for VICtoR are action-free videos with text instructions; therefore, we do not compare
our method with other works requiring action data, such as language-conditioned imitation learning.

5.2   P OLICY L EARNING WITH VIC R EWARDS

In this section, we train the Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm [52] using various reward
functions on the simulated environment. We utilize a sparse reward as a signal for task success and
shape the reward function using different reward models. Our experiments are divided into two sets:
initially, we train on 3 single-stage tasks with varying numbers of motions, and subsequently, on 7
tasks with varying numbers of stages. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, VICtoR consistently outperforms
current baselines, achieving a 25% average performance gain. This advantage increases to 43%
in harder tasks with more than three motions, highlighting VICtoR’s effectiveness in training for
long-horizon tasks. The significant benefits of the motion design are also evident when compared to
the task-level baseline, especially in more complex tasks. Furthermore, as Table 1 demonstrates, even
at the task level, VICtoR outperforms other baselines, showcasing the effectiveness of our training
objective detailed in Section 4.3. Training details and curves are provided in Appendix C.4.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Experiment of tasks with one stage but different numbers of motions. The table presents
the success rate [↑] of the learned policy using different reward functions across three tasks that have
one stage but vary in the number of motions. It shows that the differences between VICtoR and other
baselines become larger as the number of motions in the tasks increases. This indicates that when
a stage requires more detailed actions to complete, it becomes necessary to decompose the task to
assess progress. Results are averaged over three different seeds.
                              #motions             1                 2            4
                                Task        reach block       pick block     move block
                               Sparse           99.8%           0.0%            0.0%
                              LIV [16]          99.9%          98.6%            0.0%
                            LOReL [51]         100.0%          88.8%            0.0%
                            VICtoR(task)        99.9%          94.2%           36.8%
                              VICtoR            99.9%          98.8%           58.9%

Table 2: Experiment of tasks with different numbers of stages and motions. Extending from
Table 1, this table includes seven additional tasks with varying numbers of stages and motions. It
shows that VICtoR outperforms prior methods, and the differences become larger as the complexity
of the tasks increases, demonstrating the effectiveness of our design of stage and motion rewards.
Results are averaged over three different seeds.

   #stages        1            1               2                 2               2               3               3
  #motions        2            2               3                 4               6               4               5
                                                                                             open light +   open box +
                                         open drawer +       open box +     open drawer +
      Task     open box    open drawer                                                      open drawer +   open light +
                                           open light        pick block      move block
                                                                                             reach block     pick block
   Sparse      100.0%         79.5%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
   Stage       100.0%         79.5%         26.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
  LIV [16]      99.9%         66.7%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 LOReL [51]    100.0%        100.0%         33.1%             35.1%             0.0%            35.0%         28.9%
  VICtoR        99.9%        100.0%         66.1%             96.4%            30.6%           70.9%          57.7%


5.3     A BLATION S TUDIES

To better understand how each reward signal in VICtoR contributes to policy learning, we conducted
an ablation study on the “open box then pick blue block" task to evaluate the effectiveness of VICtoR’s
stage determination, motion determination, and progress assessment as introduced in Section 4. Based
on the findings presented in Table 3, we observe that injecting reward signals at each level proves
beneficial for policy learning. Furthermore, our analysis indicates that reward signals at the “progress"
level notably enhance performance. This underscores the importance of nuanced reward signals,
particularly in tasks with longer horizons, thereby supporting our claims. Ultimately, the combination
of these three levels of reward signals enables the policy to achieve peak performance.


Table 3: Ablation study. This table illustrates the effectiveness of each level of reward signals in
VICtoR for policy learning. Results are averaged over three different seeds.
                                  Ablation Settings
                                                                         Success Rate
                             Stage Motion Progress
                               -           -              -                 0.0%
                               ✓           -              -                22.8%
                               ✓           ✓              -                29.7%
                               ✓           ✓              ✓                96.4%


5.4     Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

We plot the potential curves from three different reward models across four tasks with varying
complexities (with longer horizons on the right). The results in Figure 4 demonstrate that VICtoR
effectively generates reward curves for complex, composed tasks, while other baseline models fail to


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


provide progressive signals as task horizons grow. Notably, while prior reward models were trained
on full-length, long-horizon demonstrations, VICtoR was only trained on motion-level data yet still
achieved the most optimal results. We also put the analysis for misordered action in Appendix B.1.

                                                        LIV
            (a) open drawer      (b) pick blue block            (c) open box then open light then     (d) open light then open
                                                                         pick blue block            drawer then reach blue block


                                                       LOReL
        (a) open drawer        (b) pick blue block            (c) open box then open light then       (d) open light then open
                                                                       pick blue block              drawer then reach blue block


                                                       VICtoR
           (a) open drawer       (b) pick blue block            (c) open box then open light then      (d) open light then open
                                                                         pick blue block             drawer then reach blue block


Figure 4: Potential comparison across different tasks: We compare the potential generated by
different reward models. In these comparisons, we can see that VICtoR provides the most progressive
and near-strictly increasing potential function, especially as the horizon increases. This demonstrates
its ability to provide fine-grained rewards for long-horizon tasks.



5.5   R EAL W ORLD E XPERIMENTS

To demonstrate VICtoR’s practical efficacy, we visualized the potential curves ϕ(ot ) for two scenarios:
one with videos that match the corresponding instructions, and another with incorrect videos using
the same instructions. As illustrated in Figure 5, for the correct actions, the potential curves show that
VICtoR effectively identifies task progress in real-world scenarios by increasing the potential as the
agent completes tasks, a capability not matched by previous VIC reward models. For the incorrect
actions, as the agent moves from the right to the left side to close the drawer, VICtoR‘s visualization
shows an initial increase in potential. This increase is logical as these movements approach the light,
aligning with the first stage of the instruction, “open the light.” However, as the agent continues
toward the drawer, VICtoR recognizes the incorrect task and begins to decrease the reward, effectively
deterring the agent’s movement. This highlights VICtoR’s ability to analyze agent movement and
task progress accurately. Additional visualizations for various tasks are provided in Appendix F.

5.6   V ISUALIZATIONS

Embedding Visualization. To verify the effectiveness of the contrastive objectives we designed to
boost understanding of task progress, we present a t-SNE analysis on motion embeddings m across
every motion in our simulated environment. From Figure 6, we observe that the learned embeddings


                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  With the right actions                                                            With the wrong actions


            LIV                                                                               LIV
Potential


                                                                                  Potential
            VICtoR                                                                            VICtoR


                                         Time                                                                                 Time
             tested video: open light then open oven door then close the drawer                                   tested video: close the drawer
              instruction: open light then open oven door then close the drawer                 instruction: open light then open oven door then close the drawer


Figure 5: VICtoR on real world data. This figure displays LIV [16] and VICtoR’s potential
visualizations for long-horizon tasks from XSkill with correct and incorrect test videos.


of identical motion are clustered, indicating high discriminative capability. This attribute is crucial
for enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of our reward model, particularly in long-horizon tasks.

Reward Visualization. To assess VICtoR’s ability to differentiate motions and assess progress
within a motion, we visualize motion determination per timestep and measure the embedding z’s
distance between motion descriptions and frame embeddings. As shown in Figure 6, VICtoR
accurately switches motions at the appropriate timestep and decreases the embedding distance of the
determined motion as the agent approaches each motion’s goal.


Figure 6: Visualization. (a) t-SNE analysis for different motion frames, and (b) analysis of negative
embedding distances and determined motions in a demonstration video.



6           C ONCLUSION

We have presented VICtoR, a Hierarchical Vision-Instruction Correlation Reward Model for Long-
horizon Robotic Manipulation. Using only language instructions, VICtoR is able to provide effective
rewards to the reinforcement learning agent. Having been trained solely on modular short-horizon
demonstration videos, VICtoR outperforms state-of-the-art approaches trained on targeted long-
horizon tasks and successfully operates in both simulated and real-world environments.

Future works and limitations VICtoR can provide rewards for unseen long-horizon tasks com-
posed of seen motions. However, similar to previous works, the limitation of VICtoR is that it cannot
be applied to tasks involving unseen motions. Therefore, a future direction for this project will be
training with a diverse range of motion data to explore its zero-shot capabilities on unseen motions.


                                                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported in part by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under
Grant NSTC 113-2634-F-002-007 and NSTC 113-2813-C-002-031-E. We also thank all reviewers
and area chairs for their valuable comments and positive recognition of our work during the review
process.

R EFERENCES
 [1] Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcoming
     exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In 2018 IEEE international conference on
     robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 6292–6299. IEEE, 2018.

 [2] Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy learning:
     Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11956,
     2019.

 [3] Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-hwee Tan, and Chai Quek. Hierarchical reinforcement learning:
     A comprehensive survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(5):1–35, 2021.

 [4] Andrew Y. Ng and Stuart J. Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
     Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’00, page 663–670, San Francisco,
     CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

 [5] Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. Proceedings,
     Twenty-First International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2004, 09 2004.

 [6] Avi Singh, Larry Yang, Kristian Hartikainen, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. End-to-end robotic
     reinforcement learning without reward engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07854, 2019.

 [7] Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy Zhang.
     Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2210.00030, 2022.

 [8] Annie S. Chen, Suraj Nair, and Chelsea Finn. Learning generalizable robotic reward functions from
     "in-the-wild" human videos. ArXiv, abs/2103.16817, 2021.

 [9] Minttu Alakuijala, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Julien Mairal, Jean Ponce, and Cordelia Schmid. Learning
     reward functions for robotic manipulation by observing humans, 2023.

[10] Xuzhe Dang, Stefan Edelkamp, and Nicolas Ribault. Clip-motion: Learning reward functions for robotic
     actions using consecutive observations, 2023.

[11] Parsa Mahmoudieh, Deepak Pathak, and Trevor Darrell. Zero-shot reward specification via grounded
     natural language. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
     Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
     162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 14743–14752. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022.

[12] Sumedh A Sontakke, Jesse Zhang, Sébastien MR Arnold, Karl Pertsch, Erdem Bıyık, Dorsa Sadigh,
     Chelsea Finn, and Laurent Itti. Roboclip: one demonstration is enough to learn robot policies. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2310.07899, 2023.

[13] Jingyun Yang, Max Sobol Mark, Brandon Vu, Archit Sharma, Jeannette Bohg, and Chelsea Finn. Robot
     fine-tuning made easy: Pre-training rewards and policies for autonomous real-world reinforcement learning.
     In Towards Generalist Robots: Learning Paradigms for Scalable Skill Acquisition @ CoRL2023, 2023.

[14] Juan Rocamonde, Victoriano Montesinos, Elvis Nava, Ethan Perez, and David Lindner. Vision-language
     models are zero-shot reward models for reinforcement learning, 2023.

[15] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
     Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning
     transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.

[16] Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Vaidehi Som, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bastani, and
     Dinesh Jayaraman. Liv: Language-image representations and rewards for robotic control. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2306.00958, 2023.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[17] Mengda Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Cheng Chi, Manuela Veloso, and Shuran Song. XSkill: Cross embodiment skill
     discovery. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.

[18] Dhruv Shah, Błażej Osiński, Sergey Levine, et al. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large pre-trained
     models of language, vision, and action. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 492–504. PMLR, 2023.

[19] Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-planner:
     Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In Proceedings of the
     IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2998–3009, 2023.

[20] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
     planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, pages 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.

[21] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy
     Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control, 2023.

[22] Sai H Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor. Chatgpt for robotics: Design
     principles and model abilities. IEEE Access, 2024.

[23] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
     Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda Luu,
     Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning
     with language models, 2022.

[24] Kevin Lin, Christopher Agia, Toki Migimatsu, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Text2motion: From
     natural language instructions to feasible plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12153, 2023.

[25] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian
     Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic
     affordances. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023.

[26] Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic manipula-
     tion. In Aleksandra Faust, David Hsu, and Gerhard Neumann, editors, Proceedings of the 5th Conference
     on Robot Learning, volume 164 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 894–906. PMLR,
     08–11 Nov 2022.

[27] Vivek Myers, Andre He, Kuan Fang, Homer Walke, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Ching-An Cheng, Mihai
     Jalobeanu, Andrey Kolobov, Anca Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Goal representations for instruction
     following: A semi-supervised language interface to control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00117, 2023.

[28] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen
     Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded
     navigation instructions in real environments, 2018.

[29] Dhruv Shah, Blazej Osinski, Brian Ichter, and Sergey Levine. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large
     pre-trained models of language, vision, and action, 2022.

[30] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan
     Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet,
     Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff,
     Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model, 2023.

[31] Jongheon Jeong, Yang Zou, Taewan Kim, Dongqing Zhang, Avinash Ravichandran, and Onkar Dabeer.
     Winclip: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation, 2023.

[32] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
     Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez
     Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian
     Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa
     Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch,
     Kanishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar
     Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan
     Welker, Paul Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna
     Zitkovich. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control, 2023.

[33] Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, page 1726–1734, 2017.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[34] Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David Silver,
     and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning, 2017.

[35] Akhil Bagaria and George Konidaris. Option discovery using deep skill chaining. In International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.

[36] Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with
     imagined subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1430–1440. PMLR, 2021.

[37] Siddharth Srivastava, Eugene Fang, Lorenzo Riano, Rohan Chitnis, Stuart Russell, and Pieter Abbeel.
     Combined task and motion planning through an extensible planner-independent interface layer. In 2014
     IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 639–646, 2014.

[38] Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack Kaelbling,
     and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Integrated task and motion planning, 2020.

[39] Shuo Cheng and Danfei Xu. League: Guided skill learning and abstraction for long-horizon manipulation,
     2023.

[40] Chen Wang, Linxi Fan, Jiankai Sun, Ruohan Zhang, Li Fei-Fei, Danfei Xu, Yuke Zhu, and Anima
     Anandkumar. Mimicplay: Long-horizon imitation learning by watching human play, 2023.

[41] Zhiwei Jia, Vineet Thumuluri, Fangchen Liu, Linghao Chen, Zhiao Huang, and Hao Su. Chain-of-thought
     predictive control. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver,
     Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
     Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 21768–21790.
     PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.

[42] Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas Carion.
     Mdetr-modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1780–1790, 2021.

[43] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
     coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

[44] Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, and Sergey Levine.
     Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. 2018 IEEE International Conference on
     Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 1134–1141, 2017.

[45] Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
     visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.

[46] A. Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart J. Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and
     application to reward shaping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 1999.

[47] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
     Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference
     on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019.

[48] Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning
     benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–3026, 2020.

[49] Kaizhi Zheng, Xiaotong Chen, Odest Chadwicke Jenkins, and Xin Wang. Vlmbench: A compositional
     benchmark for vision-and-language manipulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     35:665–678, 2022.

[50] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for language-
     conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks, 2022.

[51] Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, brian ichter, Silvio Savarese, and Chelsea Finn. Learning language-
     conditioned robot behavior from offline data and crowd-sourced annotation. In Aleksandra Faust, David
     Hsu, and Gerhard Neumann, editors, Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning, volume 164 of
     Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1303–1315. PMLR, 08–11 Nov 2022.

[52] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
     optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[53] Coppelia Robotics. Coppeliasim software. https://www.coppeliarobotics.com/.


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


[54] Stephen James, Marc Freese, and Andrew J. Davison. Pyrep: Bringing v-rep to deep robot learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1906.11176, 2019.

[55] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017.

[56] Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dormann.
     Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning
     Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.

[57] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
     Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.

[58] Zichen Zhang, Yunshuang Li, Osbert Bastani, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Yecheng Jason Ma,
     and Luca Weihs. Universal visual decomposer: Long-horizon manipulation made easy, 2023.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX

A     I LLUSTRATIONS FOR L OSS O BJECTIVES

                     In-motion contrastive                                          Cross-motions contrastive

            Language contrastive learning


                                                                  Motion contrastive learning
            reach the drawer handle


                                                                                                                open the drawer


                                      Time contrastive learning             reach the blue block           reach the drawer handle


Figure 7: In-motion and cross-motion Contrastive Objectives: We illustrate how the three
contrastive loss functions we applied manipulate the distances and relationships between instruction
representations and encoded visual observations within the embedding space.


B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS - M ISORDERED ACTION

We visualize the reward by giving text goals for long-horizon tasks (open light then open drawer
then reach blue block) on misordered action (reach blue block) videos to see the difference in reward
models. The result in Figure 8 indicates that VICtoR is capable of determining the current state of
environmental objects to decide the level of potential while LIV simply generates progressive signals
on each task.

                                                                  (a) LIV                                                 (b) VICtoR


                                                                  (a) LIV                                                 (b) VICtoR


Figure 8: Potential Visualization on Misordered Action: We visualize the rewards given for
long-horizon tasks (open light, then open drawer, then reach blue block) in videos with misordered
actions (reach blue block) to compare different reward models. The figure shows that VICtoR can
determine the current state of environmental objects to decide the level of potential, while LIV simply
generates progressive signals for each task without penalizing incorrect actions, which may lead to
poor learning outcomes.


                                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B.2    ACCURACY OF TASK K NOWLEDGE G ENERATION

To validate the robustness of LLMs for task knowledge generation, we conducted an additional
experiment testing the accuracy of LLM outputs. We tested our model by randomly selecting tasks,
which could involve 1 to 4 stages. We then used GPT-4 to translate these tasks into human-like queries.
With these queries, we tested the task knowledge generation model by comparing its output against
the ground truth. After randomly sampling 50 different tasks with varying free-form instructions, we
observed that GPT-4 achieved an accuracy of 96% in decomposing tasks into stages, motions, and
conditional object states, confirming its robustness for this application.

B.3    A BLATION S TUDY ON T HREE C ONTRASTIVE L OSSES

To examine the importance and effectiveness of the three proposed contrastive objectives in Eq. 4,
we train the Motion Progress Evaluator under three conditionsIn each experiment, we remove one
contrastive loss, as illustrated in Table 4. This study is conducted on the “open box then pick blue
block" task. The results clearly demonstrate that each objective plays a significant role, particularly the
Llf cn objective. This objective effectively differentiates the progress in motion, providing nuanced
guidance for long-horizon tasks.


                  Table 4: Ablation Study on the proposed three contrastive losses
                                  Ablation Settings
                                                           Success Rate
                                Ltcn Lmcn Llf cn
                                  ✓        ✓        -           0.0%
                                  ✓        -        ✓          61.8%
                                  -        ✓        ✓          94.0%
                                  ✓        ✓        ✓          96.4%



B.4    A BLATION S TUDY ON AUTOMATIC A NNOTATION BY LVLM S

Since object status labels are required to deploy VICtoR in a new environment, we conduct an ablation
study to automatically annotate these labels using modern LVLMs. The study is performed on the
XSkill dataset, focusing on four interactable objects: cloth, light, oven, and drawer. Specifically,
for each video where the robot interacts with one of these objects, we first use MDETR (without
fine-tuning) to obtain cropped images of the target object. These cropped images are then provided
to GPT-4V, which annotates the object’s status. Finally, we compare the consistency between
human-annotated and LVLM-annotated labels, as summarized in Figure 9.
The results demonstrate a high level of consistency between the two sets of labels, indicating that
deploying VICtoR in new environments is highly feasible. Most inconsistent labels arise during fuzzy
phases when switching motions. These inconsistencies are easily corrected or even negligible.


C     D ETAILED S ETTINGS FOR THE E XPERIMENT

C.1    D ETAILS ABOUT OUR SIMULATED ENVIRONMENT AND TASKS

Details about the environment Our environment was developed using Coppeliasim [53], with
Pyrep [54] serving as the coding interface, as shown in Figure 3. In this environment, there are four
interactable objects: a light, a drawer, a blue block, and a box, each associated with different stages
as detailed in Section C.1. The tested tasks can be any permutation of these stages.

List of Stages and Motions. We treated the motions as the action primitives for agents to implement.
Definitions of the motions in each stage in our experiments are detailed as shown in Table 5. The
definition of motions of stages could be initiated by either humans or GPT.


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  label
               consistency


    Cloth       96.88%
                              The cloth is hung on        The cloth is grasped by robot              The cloth is inside the sink
                              the faucet


    Light       94.87%

                              The light is off                                                       The light is on


    Oven        90.63%

                              The door is closed                            The door is half opened by robot            The door is opened


    Drawer      88.10%

                              The drawer is opened                                The drawer is half closed by robot                The drawer is closed



Figure 9: Automatic Annotation by LVLMs: We leverage LVLMs (i.e., GPT-4V) to automatically
annotate the status of objects in the XSkill dataset. The results are then compared with human-
annotated labels to evaluate label consistency. The findings indicate that modern LVLMs already
possess the capability to handle this task effectively. Most inconsistencies occur during the fuzzy
phases when switching motions.


                             Table 5: Description of Separated Motions for Each Stage
 Stage                       Motion 1                         Motion 2                           Motion 3                              Motion 4
 reach blue block            reach the             blue       -                                  -                                     -
                             block
 pick blue block             reach the             blue       lift the grasped                   -                                     -
                             block                            blue block
 move blue block to          reach the             blue       lift the grasped                   move the blue                         place the blue
 drawer                      block                            blue block                         block to the top of                   block down to the
                                                                                                 the drawer                            drawer
 open drawer                 reach the closed                 pull the drawer out                -                                     -
                             drawer handle top
 close drawer                reach the opened                 push the drawer                    -                                     -
                             drawer handle top                forward
 open box                    reach the box                    slide the box                      -                                     -
                             holder back                      holder forward
 close box                   reach the box                    slide the box                      -                                     -
                             holder front                     holder backward
 open light                  reach and push                   -                                  -                                     -
                             down the button
 close light                 reach and push                   -                                  -                                     -
                             down the button



Training Tasks Details. The detailed success conditions, training timesteps, and the running
machines for each task are shown in Table 6.

Training Data Details. To train the reward models for VICtoR and other baselines, we collected
a dataset in our environment. Note that VICtoR requires only motion-level data for training, while
other baselines need full-length videos. Therefore, the data used to train VICtoR and other baselines
differ in type but are comparable in total amount per motion or stage. For VICtoR, we provide only
the motion-level demos, with each motion accompanied by 150 demos and corresponding motion


                                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Table 6: Training Details for each task
                                                               Reach blue block
           Task Goal                                       Reach the blue block
        Success Condition                 The distance between the end-effector and the blue block
        Max Training Step                                         30000
              GPU                                          NVIDIA RTX 4090
                                                             Pick blue block
           Task Goal                                 Grasp the blue block and lift it up
        Success Condition                          The blue block is lifted higher than 0.62
        Max Training Step                                          100000
              GPU                                            NVIDIA RTX 4090
                                                        Move blue block to drawer
           Task Goal                          Pick up the blue block and place it into the drawer
        Success Condition                   The position of the blue block (if it is in drawer or not)
        Max Training Step                                           300000
              GPU                                             NVIDIA RTX 4090
                                                                 Open drawer
           Task Goal                                          Pull out the drawer
        Success Condition                                  The position of the drawer
        Max Training Step                                            50000
              GPU                                            NVIDIA RTX 4090
                                                                   Open box
           Task Goal                                Push the lid of the box to open the box
        Success Condition                                 The position of the box lid
        Max Training Step                                            50000
              GPU                                            NVIDIA RTX 4090
                                                       Open drawer then open light
           Task Goal                    Pull out the drawer and then press the button to open the light
        Success Condition                    The position of the drawer and the color of the light
        Max Training Step                                          200000
              GPU                                            NVIDIA RTX 3090
                                                       Open box then pick blue block
           Task Goal                     Push the lid of the box to open it and pick up the blue block
        Success Condition                The position of the box lid and the height of the blue block
        Max Training Step                                           200000
              GPU                                             NVIDIA RTX 3090
                                              Open drawer then move blue block to drawer
           Task Goal           Pull out the drawer and then pick up the blue block and place it into the drawer
        Success Condition                   The position of the blue block (if it is in drawer or not)
        Max Training Step                                           400000
              GPU                                             NVIDIA RTX 3090
                                            Open light then open drawer then reach blue block
            Task Goal        Press the button to open the light, then pull out the drawer, and reach the blue block
         Success Condition            The color of the light, the position of the drawer, and the distance
                                                  between the end-effector and the blue block
        Max Training Step                                            400000
             GPU                                              NVIDIA RTX 3090
                                            Open box then open light then pick the blue block
            Task Goal                       Push the lid of the box to open it and press the button
                                                to turn on the light then pick up the blue block
        Success Condition     The position of the box lid, the color of the light, and the height of the blue block
        Max Training Step                                            400000
              GPU                                             NVIDIA RTX 3090
                               Open box then open light then open drawer then then reach the blue block
            Task Goal                        Push the lid of the box to open it and press the button
                                      to turn on the light and open the drawer then reach the blue block
         Success Condition       The position of the box lid, the color of the light, the position of the drawer,
                                         and the distance between the end-effector and the blue block
        Max Training Step                                            500000
             GPU                                               NVIDIA RTX 3090


descriptions. For training other baseline models, such as LIV [16] and LOReL [51], we provide the
full-length demo videos, each paired with task descriptions and consisting of 150 demos per task.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   D ETAILS OF S TAGE D ETECTOR AND T RAINING D ETAILS OF M OTION P ROGRESS
      E VALUATOR

The structure of classifier P for Stage Detector includes a CLIP Text Encoder for processing object
state descriptions and a CLIP Image Encoder for processing cropped images. These encoders are
followed by a downstream MLP classifier that scores relevance.
We provide more details of the Stage Detector and Training Details of the Motion Progress Evaluator
in Table 7 and Table 8. For the hyperparameter selection of λ1,2,3 , we tried various combinations
but found that the model is not sensitive to these hyperparameters. Therefore, we have chosen to set
them all to the same values.

                             Table 7: MDETR configuration in VICtoR
                                 Object Detector - MDETR [42]
                                  Backbone            Resnet101



        Table 8: Details of VICtoR Motion Reward Model and Stage Determinator Training
                                    Motion Progress Evaluator
                         Language Encoder                 CLIPTextModel
                          Image Encoder                  CLIPVisionModel
                            CLIP Model               openai/clip-vit-base-patch32
                           Learning Rate                       0.000001
                             Batch Size                           32
                           Training Steps                       20000
                             Optimizer                        Adam [55]
                           Loss Function                      Equation 4
                      Parameters in Equation 4         λ1 = 1, λ2 = 1, λ3 = 1
                                         Stage Determinator
                         Language Encoder                  CLIPTextModel
                          Image Encoder                   CLIPVisionModel
                            CLIP Model               openai/clip-vit-base-patch32
                           Learning Rate                       0.00001
                             Batch Size                           32
                           Training Steps                       40000
                             Oprimizer                          Adam
                           Loss Function              Binary Cross Entropy Loss



C.3   D ETAILS OF MPE’ S I NFERENCE AND R EWARD F ORMULATION

We organize our reward function parameters of Section 4.3 in Table 9, For the selection of λm , we
tried to find the biggest range of the progress (embedding distance from language to motion), in order
to make the proceeding motion’s potential higher than the previous one. For the selection of λc , we
have tested it with different numbers and found out that when the λc is in the range of 0.1 to 0.4, the
model has similar results, and if it is less than 0.1, it cannot avoid reward hacking. Once it is larger
than 0.4, the model cannot provide enough signal for the agent to learn.


                Table 9: Reward formulation and MPE model parameters of VICtoR
                                               λc         λm
                                               0.2        36



                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.4   T RAINING D ETAILS OF P OLICY T RAINING

Training details. We trained the policy under the SubprocVecEnv from stable-baseline3 [56] with
reward normalization by VecNormalize. For online interactable environment, we built a simulation
environment with Coppeliasim [53] and Pyrep [54] and wrapped the environment for policy learning
under the framework of OpenAI Gym [57]. Training time is about 3 hours for 10000 steps. Training
details for each task and policy are summarized in Tables 6 and 10, respectively.


                                Table 10: Details of policy training
                                       Policy             PPO [52]
                                  Learning Rate           0.003
                                  Policy Model           MlpPolicy
                                Discount factor (γ)        0.99
                               Reward Normalization        True



C.5   C OMPUTATIONAL COST AND R ESOURCE REQUIREMENTS

The computational cost in our framework is 2 GPU hours for the training of the progress evaluator.
For the policy learning, training with our reward model for 20000 steps required approximately 12
GPU hours. Both of the stats above are running on RTX 4090.
Regarding the inference time of the current implementation, the object detector takes approximately
51.5ms, and the reward model accounts for 24ms on average over 1000 steps (tested on a CPU
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-13700 and a GPU RTX 3090). Considering that end effector action latency is
typically long in both simulation and real-world scenarios, we believe that a 0.05s inference time
would not significantly impact the agent’s efficiency, even in a real-world environment.


C.6   T RAINING D ETAILS OF BASELINE M ODELS

We provide details of other baselines in Table 11.


                      Table 11: Details of Baseline Reward Models Training
                                                LIV
                          CLIP Backbone                 Resnet50
                          Learning Config               pretrain
                            Batch Size                     32
                            Train Steps                  70000
                           Learning Rate                0.00001
                           Weight Decay                  0.001
                                              LOReL
                        Language Encoder            CLIPTextModel
                          Image Encoder            CLIPVisionModel
                            CLIP Model         openai/clip-vit-base-patch32
                             Batch Size                     32
                            Train Steps                   20000
                           Learning Rate                 0.00001
                         Flipped Negative                  True
                               alpha                       0.25


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.7   D ETAILS OF EXPERIMENTS ON XS KILL

For the visualization experiments on real-world dataset XSkill [17] in Appendix F, we train VICtoR
on 120 demonstrations with each breaking down into 3 different motion-level videos while baseline
models are trained with the full-length demonstrations. Details about the 4 motion level skills and the
test tasks in the visualization experiments are listed in Table 12.

                   Table 12: Text description for motions and test tasks in XSkill
                   Motion Name                             Description
                close the drawer                push the drawer so that it is closed
               open the oven door                       open the oven door
                  open the light                         push the light on
            move the cloth into the sink     grab the cloth and release it into the sink
                                             Test Tasks
               close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the light
            close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door
               close the drawer then open the light then move the cloth into the sink
                   close the drawer then open the light then open the oven door
             open the light then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door
               open the light then close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink
                   open the light then open the oven door then close the drawer
             open the oven door then open the light then move the cloth into the sink



D     L EARNING C URVES OF P OLICY L EARNING
We evaluate the policies trained from different reward functions with the success rate in Figure 10,
the shadows show the standard deviation.

E     A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS BETWEEN VIC TO R AND OTHER S OLUTIONS
      TO ROBOTIC P OLICY L EARNING

Imitation Learning. Prior works have attempted to solve the robot manipulation tasks via imitation
learning from either robot demonstrations or human videos. However, in our setting, we do not use
action sequences from demonstrations to train VICtoR. Thus, the line of imitation learning works
is not considered as our baseline. Our objective is to learn a reward model solely from vision and
language inputs, without relying on action or observation vectors. This distinction sets our approach
apart from imitation learning and other similar methods, which typically require action information
to clone a behavior. Therefore, our method addresses a unique problem space that is not directly
comparable to imitation learning.

Motion Decomposition Previous studies [41; 58] have utilized motion decomposition to facilitate
learning in long-horizon manipulation tasks. By breaking down these tasks into subgoals, they
demonstrated that imitation policy networks could be trained more effectively. While we also use the
concept of task decomposition, our method introduces a tailored framework for VIC reward models,
as shown in Figure 1. We segment tasks into three levels: stage, motion, and progress, providing a
finer-grained approach to handle task complexities. Our experiments show that this structured method
significantly improves the effectiveness of VIC reward models in complex scenarios.

Task and Motion Planning (TAMP). Prior works investigated through accomplishing long-horizon
robot manipulation tasks via arranging trained skills. While TAMP methods require a predefined and
well-trained skill set and put more emphasis on planning for the execution sequence of these trained
skills, our model aims to provide reward signals directly toward policy learning to guide the agent
to learn a long-horizon policy from scratch with reinforcement algorithms. Therefore, we do not
consider TAMP methods as baselines for VICtoR.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          (a) reach blue block                                         (b) open box                                           (c) open drawer


          (d) pick blue block                                (e) open box then pick blue block                       (f) move blue block to drawer


                                  (g) open drawer then open light                      (h) open light then open drawer then
                                                                                                 reach blue block


                                 (i) open box then open light then                    (j) open drawer then move block to drawer
                                          pick blue block


Figure 10: Training Curve Visualization: We visualize the success rate across various training
episodes and display the success rate curves for different methods in different tasks. The figure
demonstrates that VICtoR effectively guides the RL agent to learn quickly and achieve the highest
success rate in the fewest episodes, highlighting the effectiveness of the rewards generated by VICtoR.


                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F   M ORE P OTENTIAL V ISUALIZATION FOR C OMPOSED TASKS IN XS KILL [17]
The visualization results are shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12.
                       (a) close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the light
                       (a) close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the light


                     (b) close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door
                     (b) close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door


                       (c) close the drawer then open the light then move the cloth into the sink
                       (c) close the drawer then open the light then move the cloth into the sink


                            (d) close the drawer then open the light then open the oven door
                            (d) close the drawer then open the light then open the oven door


Figure 11: Potential Visualization on XSkill: Evaluation of the potential curve across multiple test
videos on different tasks for XSkill.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (e) open the light then close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink
                       (e) open the light then close the drawer then move the cloth into the sink


                      (f) open the light then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door
                      (f) open the light then move the cloth into the sink then open the oven door


                           (g) open the light then open the oven door then close the drawer
                           (g) open the light then open the oven door then close the drawer


                      (h) open the oven door then open the light then move the cloth into the sink
                      (h) open the oven door then open the light then move the cloth into the sink


Figure 12: Potential Visualization on XSkill: Evaluation of the potential curve across multiple test
videos on different tasks for XSkill.


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    P ROMPTS FOR TASK K NOWLEDGE G ENERATION

You are a task splitter. Given a task, you should split it into stages
    ,→ and motions. Also, during transitions between stages, you must
    ,→ provide the environment status.

## Possible Motions

### drawer
- reach the open drawer holder top
- push the drawer forward
- reach the closed drawer holder top
- pull the drawer out

### box (slide forward to open, slide backward to close)
- reach the box holder back
- slide the box holder forward
- reach the box holder front
- slide the box holder backward

### light
- reach and push down the button

### blue_block
- reach the blue block
- lift the grasped blue block
- move the blue block to the top of the drawer
- move the blue block to the top of the table
- place the blue block down to the drawer
- place the blue block down to the table

## Environment Objects and States

The environment contains these objects: ["blue_block", "box", "drawer",
    ,→ "light"]

### Possible Environment Status Sets for Each Object
- drawer: ["The drawer is closed", "The drawer is open"]
- box: ["The box is closed", "The box is open"]
- light: ["The light is closed", "The light is open"]
- blue_block: ["The blue block is in the drawer", "The blue block is on
    ,→ the table", "The blue block is in the box"]

## Output Format

Output should be in this JSON format:

‘‘‘json
{
    "interact_objects": ["", ...],
    "stages": [
        {
            "name": "",
                         "interacted_object": ""
            "environment": {
                // list all the interacted object environment statuses
            },
            "motions": [
                "...", // should be the motion of the interact_objects
                "..."
            ],
        },
        {
            "name": "",


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             "interacted_object": ""
                "environment": {
                    // list all the interacted object environment statuses
                },
                             "environment": {
                    // list all the interacted object environment statuses
                },
                "motions": [
                    "...",
                    "..."
                ],
          },
          ...
      ]
}
‘‘‘

## Guidelines

For every task, you should split the task into stages, motions, and also
    ,→ provide the environment status during stages if there are two or
    ,→ more stages.

### Notices
- This task involves a robot arm that is initially far from all the
    ,→ objects.
  - Therefore, unless mentioned in the task goal, the first phase should
      ,→ be "reach xxx."
- The definition of a stage is: Complete interaction with an object.
  - If the task has interacted with multiple objects, the stage will
      ,→ only change during the transition between interacted objects
- Only perform behaviors that are mentioned in the task.
- In the environment for each stage, list the initial environment status
    ,→ for each object in that stage.
- The listed of "environment" object for each stage should be all of the
    ,→ objects
- "interact_objects" should only contain the object that will be
    ,→ interacted
- The adjacent interact_object should be different
- The motion in each stage can only be subset of the interacted_object’s
    ,→ motion list

Example:
Task: open the drawer then open the box then move the blue block to the
    ,→ table
Initial environment:
- drawer: "The drawer is closed"
- box: "The box is closed"
- light: "The light is closed"
- blue_block: "The blue block is in the drawer"
Output:
‘‘‘json
{
         "interact_objects": ["drawer", "box", "blue_block"],
         "stages": [
                 {
                         "name": "open the drawer",
                         "interated_object": "drawer"
                         "environment": {
                                 "drawer": "The drawer is closed",
                                 "box": "The box is closed",
                                 "light": "The light is closed",
                                 "blue_block": "The blue block is in the
                                     ,→ drawer"
                         }


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               "motions": [
                                       "reach the closed drawer holder top",
                                       "pull the drawer out"
                               ],
                     },
                     {
                               "name": "open the box",
                               "interated_object": "box"
                               "environment": {
                                       "drawer": "The drawer is open",
                                       "box": "The box is closed",
                                       "light": "The light is closed",
                                       "blue_block": "The blue block is in the
                                           ,→ drawer"
                               }
                               "motions": [
                                       "reach the box holder back",
                                       "slide the box holder forward"
                               ],
                     },
                     {
                               "name": "move the blue block to the table",
                               "interated_object": "blue_block"
                               "environment": {
                                       "drawer": "The drawer is open",
                                       "box": "The box is open",
                                       "light": "The light is closed",
                                       "blue_block": "The blue block is in the
                                           ,→ drawer"
                               },
                               "motions": [
                                       "reach the blue block",
                                       "lift the grasped blue block",
                                       "move the blue block to the top of the
                                           ,→ table"
                                       "place the blue block down to the table"
                               ]
                     }
          ]
}
‘‘‘

Task: move the blue block to the table
Initial environment:
- drawer: "The drawer is open"
- box: "The box is open"
- light: "The light is open"
- blue_block: "The blue block is in the drawer"
Output:
‘‘‘json
{
        "interact_objects": ["blue_block"],
        "stages": [
                {
                         "name": "move the blue block to the table",
                         "interated_object": "blue_block"
                         "environment": {
                                 "drawer": "The drawer is open",
                                 "box": "The box is open",
                                 "light": "The light is open",
                                 "blue_block": "The blue block is in the
                                     ,→ drawer"
                         },
                         "motions": [
                                 "reach the blue block",


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             "lift the grasped blue block",
                                             "move the blue block to the top of the
                                                 ,→ table"
                                             "place the blue block down to the table"
                                  ]
                      }
           ]
}
‘‘‘

=====

Task: {{task_name}}
Initial environment:
- drawer: {{initial_drawer}}
- box: {{initial_box}}
- light: {{initial_light}}
- blue_block: {{initial_block}}
Output:
                          Listing 1: Prompt for Task Knowledge Generation


B ROADER I MPACT
Our research is focused on developing a reward model for manipulation tasks, aiming to accelerate
the adoption of robotic applications in complex settings. While we haven’t identified any immediate
negative impacts or ethical concerns, it’s crucial that we remain vigilant and continuously assess any
potential societal implications as our work evolves.


                                                 28
