Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ATENT-E N SF: A L ATENT E NSEMBLE S CORE F ILTER
FOR H IGH -D IMENSIONAL DATA A SSIMILATION WITH
S PARSE O BSERVATION DATA
 Phillip Si, Peng Chen
 Department of Computational Sciences and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
 {psi6, pchen402}@gatech.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Accurate modeling and prediction of complex physical systems often rely on data
         assimilation techniques to correct errors inherent in model simulations. Tradi-
         tional methods like the Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) and its variants as well as
         the recently developed Ensemble Score Filters (EnSF) face significant challenges
         when dealing with high-dimensional and nonlinear Bayesian filtering problems
         with sparse observations, which are ubiquitous in real-world applications. In this
         paper, we propose a novel data assimilation method, Latent-EnSF, which lever-
         ages EnSF with efficient and consistent latent representations of the full states and
         sparse observations to address the joint challenges of high dimensionality in states
         and high sparsity in observations for nonlinear Bayesian filtering. We introduce
         a coupled Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with two encoders to encode the full
         states and sparse observations in a consistent way guaranteed by a latent distri-
         bution matching and regularization as well as a consistent state reconstruction.
         With comparison to several methods, we demonstrate the higher accuracy, faster
         convergence, and higher efficiency of Latent-EnSF for two challenging applica-
         tions with complex models in shallow water wave propagation and medium-range
         weather forecasting, for highly sparse observations in both space and time.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Many complex physical systems are traditionally modeled by partial differential equations (PDEs).
First-principle PDE-based modeling and simulation have proven to be powerful in predicting com-
plex systems across various scientific and engineering fields. However, in practical applications, sig-
nificant discrepancies between simulation-based predictions and reality may arise from sources such
as model inadequacy, uncertainties in model parameters, boundary and/or initial conditions, external
forcing/loading terms, numerical approximation errors, and more. Meanwhile, data-driven machine
learning (ML) models like FourCastNet (Pathak et al., 2022) have been significantly developed in
recent years, demonstrating extreme efficiency for system predictions as in weather forecasting.
The computational efficiency also makes these ML models particularly well-suited for ensemble
forecasting and uncertainty quantification. However, these models are often limited by a divergence
from reality over the long run, resulting in significant accumulated errors in long-term predictions
due to various uncertainties and the autoregressive structure of the ML models.
To mitigate discrepancies and accumulated errors and achieve more accurate predictions, data assim-
ilation plays an essential role by incorporating additional observational data into current PDE/ML-
based prediction models. By adjusting the PDE/ML state to align with the observational data, the
accuracy of future state predictions can be markedly improved. Data assimilation (Sanz-Alonso
et al., 2023; Asch et al., 2016) approaches such as the Kalman filter (KF) (Evensen, 1994), particle
filters (Künsch, 2013), and their variants have been widely applied to problems including weather
prediction, geophysical modeling, robotics, and many other areas.
The basis of many current data assimilation methods used in practice is the KF (Evensen, 1994). It
parameterizes its state with the mean and covariance, and provides the optimal solution to the data
assimilation problem when certain linearity properties of the transition and observation functions


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are met. However, in practice, KFs become computationally expensive for high-dimensional states
and can be biased for nonlinear problems. An alternative is the particle filter, which represents the
density by an ensemble of particles. This approach relaxes the assumption of a specific distribu-
tional form, such as a Gaussian, that is inherent in distribution-based approaches like the KF. The
EnKF (Kalman, 1960) is a particular particle filter that originates from the KF; instead of updating
the covariance matrix, it computes the sample covariance of the ensemble of particles. Due to its
robust performance, it has become widely used in applications today. However, most particle fil-
ters, including EnKF, suffer from the curse of dimensionality by requiring an exponentially large
number of particles to accurately describe the distribution in high dimensions. To address this chal-
lenge, various extensions to EnKF have been proposed, such as the Localized Ensemble Transform
Kalman Filter (LETKF) (Hunt et al., 2007), which applies covariance localization techniques along
with advancements from the Ensemble Transform Kalman Filter (Bishop et al., 2001).
Nonetheless, several major roadblocks hinder efficient data assimilation for high-dimensional sys-
tems. Standard data assimilation approaches have limited capabilities in these environments, often
relying on assumptions such as localization to remain applicable. High-dimensional systems and
complex models can also constrain the capability and efficiency of methods like 4D-Var (Rabier &
Liu, 2003), which requires repeatedly propagating through the physical model. Recently, DiffDA
(Huang et al., 2024) employs diffusion models and masked interpolations of weather data to as-
similate sparse observations, though the approach falls behind pure interpolation after a few steps.
Meanwhile, Rozet & Louppe (2024) utilizes conditional score-based generative models to sample
from the trajectory space conditioned on observations; however, this addresses a fundamentally dif-
ferent problem–sampling an entire trajectory conditioned on observations rather than performing
the real-time filtering needed for practical applications. Bao et al. (2024b) proposed a novel method
called Ensemble Score Filter (EnSF), which has achieved great results in high-dimensional data
assimilation by leveraging score-based diffusion models to efficiently sample from the posterior
distribution. Nonetheless, sparse observations remain very challenging for EnSF, limiting its appli-
cability in real-world scenarios where observational data are scarce. Similarly, ROAD (Chen et al.,
2023) develops latent dynamics through a decoder but relies on dense observations.
In this work, we propose an efficient data assimilation method called Latent-EnSF (shown in Figure
1) that builds on Ensemble Score Filters (EnSF) (Bao et al., 2024b) to address the joint challenges
of high dimensionality and data sparsity. We construct coupled Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014) to encode the sparse observations into a latent space, where we perform
data assimilation using EnSF with diffusion-based sampling. Importantly, our approach addresses
the key weakness of EnSF when dealing with sparse observations while retaining its ability to ef-
ficiently assimilate observations for high-dimensional nonlinear systems. We demonstrate this per-
formance for both PDE and ML-based prediction models on challenging examples, experimenting
with data that is sparse in both space and time.


Figure 1: Flow of the Latent-EnSF. An ensemble of prior states xt |y1:t−1 is assimilated with sparse
observation yt in the latent autoencoder space to obtain samples xt |y1:t from the posterior.


We will begin by formally introducing data assimilation problems along with a review of the EnSF
in Section 2, then explain how we integrate this with coupled variational autoencoders in Section 3
to form our Latent-EnSF, and finally conclude with experiments in Section 4.


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS AND DATA A SSIMILATION
To model a dynamical physical system, we denote the state at a certain time t as xt ∈ Rd , where d
is typically very high for complex models. For a system with discrete time steps t = 1, 2, . . . , given
initial condition x0 , we then model the evolution of the state from the time t − 1 to time t as
                                          xt = M (xt−1 , εt ),                                       (1)
where εt is a process noise term coming from a known distribution; this term accounts for hidden
interactions and numerical errors. The corresponding observation yt ∈ Rm at time t is given by
                                           yt = H(xt ) + γt ,                                        (2)
where γt (also coming from a known distribution, typically Gaussian) represents the observation
noise because of instrumental inaccuracies, etc. Both the model map M : Rd × Rd → Rd and the
observation map H : Rd → Rm can be nonlinear.
The dynamical system model in Equation 1 may yield progressively inaccurate representations over
time due to factors such as model inadequacy or input uncertainty. The goal of data assimilation is to
integrate the observation data into the dynamical system model to recover an accurate representation
of the true state. In practical applications, the observation data can be sparsely distributed in both
space and time, making the recovery of the true state particularly challenging, especially for high-
dimensional problems with a state dimension d ≫ 1, and the observation dimension m ≪ d.

2.1   BAYESIAN F ILTERING

From a Bayesian filtering perspective (Dore et al., 2009), a data assimilation problem at each time t
can be divided into two steps: a prediction step that advances the dynamical system and an update
step that assimilates the data. Assuming that the posterior density of the state xt−1 given obser-
vation data y1:t−1 = (y1 , . . . , yt−1 ), denoted as P (xt−1 |y1:t−1 ), is available at time t − 1, with
P (x0 |y1:0 ) = P (x0 ) given for time t − 1 = 0, then the prediction step provides the density of xt as
                                                 Z
                  Prediction: P (xt |y1:t−1 ) = P (xt |xt−1 )P (xt−1 |y1:t−1 )dxt−1 ,                 (3)

where P (xt |xt−1 ) represents the transition probability governed by the dynamical system in Equa-
tion 1. Here, xt depends on y1:t−1 only through xt−1 . Let P (yt |xt ) denote the likelihood function
of the data yt given state xt from Equation 2. Then, the update step provides the updated posterior
density P (xt |y1:t ) of the state xt given the new observation data yt by Bayes’ rule as
                                                     P (yt |xt )P (xt |y1:t−1 )
                           Update: P (xt |y1:t ) =                              ,                    (4)
                                                          P (yt |y1:t−1 )

Rwhere the normalization constant or model evidence term P (yt |y1:t−1 ) is given by P (yt |y1:t−1 ) =
  P (yt |xt )P (xt |y1:t−1 )dxt , which is typically intractable to compute.

2.2   D IFFUSION M ODELS AND THE E NSEMBLE S CORE F ILTER

A recent development for a new particle filter is the EnSF, where the ensemble of samples can be
drawn from the posterior distribution through a diffusion process. It builds on the recent advance-
ment in score-based generative modeling (Ho et al., 2020) in generating high-fidelity samples from
a distribution by first computing a score function ∇x P (x) and then sampling with it by solving
stochastic differential equations (SDE) (Song et al., 2021). This circumvents knowing the true den-
sity as it only needs to generate samples from the posterior distribution. Notably, the diffusion model
takes the form of a noisy forward stochastic differential equation process
                                     dx = f (x, τ )dτ + g(τ )dw,                                     (5)
which transforms data from an arbitrary distribution to an isotropic Gaussian for τ ∈ T = [0, T ].
Here, f (x, τ ) is a drift term, g(τ ) is a diffusion term, and w is a d-dimensional Wiener process. It
has the corresponding reverse-time SDE that runs backward in time from τ = T to 0 as
                         dx = [f (x, τ ) − g 2 (τ )∇x log Pτ (x)]dτ + g(τ )dw̄,                      (6)


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where w̄ is another Wiener process independent of w. This reverse-time SDE can be solved to
sample from the distribution P (x) if the score function ∇x log P (xτ ) is known, e.g., by the Euler–
Maruyama scheme at the discrete time steps 0 = τ0 < τ1 < ... < τk = T .
Let xt,τ denote the state at physical time t and diffusion time τ . Bao et al. (2024b) propose the
posterior score of the update step in Equation 4 as

              ∇x log P (xt,τ |y1:t ) = ∇x log P (xt,τ |y1:t−1 ) + h(τ )∇x log P (yt |xt,τ ),       (7)

with the prior score function in the first term given as an integral, see Appendix A, that is computed
by Monte Carlo estimation, the likelihood function P (yt |xt,τ ) in the second term given explicitly
from the observation map in Equation 2, and a monotonically decreasing damping function h(τ )
with h(0) = 1 and h(1) = 0, e.g., h(τ ) = 1 − τ . Note that the posterior score function is consistent
with Bayes’ rule in Equation 4 at τ = 0. To this end, one step of the EnSF algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 2 in Appendix A, along with the details on the prior and posterior score functions.
EnSF offers several advantages over EnKF, particularly in high dimensions, where EnKF typically
requires many more ensemble members to accurately estimate the density, while EnSF leverages
the explicit likelihood function and diffusion process to generate samples. Moreover, EnSF does
not assume the approximate linearity of the dynamical system, making it highly applicable to high-
dimensional and nonlinear filtering problems, such as a million-dimensional Lorenz-96 system (Bao
et al., 2024b) and a surface quasigeostrophic model (Bao et al., 2024a).


2.3   C HALLENGE OF E N SF FOR SPARSE OBSERVATIONS

A key limitation of EnSF in high-dimensional
nonlinear filtering problems occurs when the
observation data are sparse, which is the case
for most practical applications. For example,
suppose that the observation map H(xt ) =
xt [S], which only makes observations of xt in
the dimensions corresponding to a small subset
S ⊂ {1, ..., d} with |S| ≪ d. In this case, the
gradient of the log-likelihood ∇x log P (yt |xt ) Figure 2: The gradient of the log-likelihood func-
vanishes in the dimensions outside of S, as tion ∇x log P (yt |xt ) (right) vanishes at the points
shown in Figure 2 for pointwise observations of where the sparse observation data yt (middle) do
shallow water wave height with |S| = d/100. not have any information of the state xt (left).
As the likelihood function in Equation 7 does
not account for the spatial correlation, the information from the sparse observations cannot be ade-
quately assimilated to the unobserved states. The vanishing gradients significantly limit the effec-
tiveness of the standard EnSF, which we demonstrate empirically in Section 4.1.1.


3     L ATENT ENSEMBLE SCORE FILTER

To address the key limitation of EnSF in the case of sparse observations due to the vanishing gradient
of the log-likelihood function, we propose a latent representation of the sparse observations by a
variational autoencoder (VAE) and match this latent representation to the encoded full state for
the sake of consistent data assimilation in the latent space, for which we employ EnSF with the
additional advantage of VAE regularization of the latent variables.
The advantages are twofold: it enables us not only to exploit the benefits of standard latent score-
based generative models (Vahdat et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022), which offer optimized sampling
speed and expressivity, but also to create an expressive mapping from the sparse observation space
to the latent space, with the output being a full-dimensional observation in the latent space that
circumvents the vanishing gradient issue of the log-likelihood function. Additionally, the successful
application of latent-diffusion models to videos (Blattmann et al., 2023) presents a potential avenue
for exploring latent-assimilation coupled with latent dynamics.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   C OUPLED VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODERS WITH L ATENT-S PACE M ATCHING

The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014), as well as its variants such as
VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) and InfoVAE (Zhao et al., 2019), provides a compressed rep-
resentation of a high-dimensional distribution through bottlenecking. We employ VAEs to compress
both the sparse observations and the full states into a consistent latent representation.


Figure 3: A coupled VAE for consistent latent representations of sparse observations and full states.

Specifically, as shown in Figure 3, we formulate a coupled VAE with two encoders. The state
encoder, E : Rd → R2r , encodes the full state xt into a latent variable zt with distribution νt =
N (µt , diag(σt2 )), where (µt , σt2 ) = E(xt ) and zt = µt + σt · ϵt . The observation encoder, Eobs :
Rm → R2r , encodes the sparse observation yt into another latent variable ztobs with distribution
                          obs 2                    obs 2
νtobs = N (µobs                             obs
              t , diag((σt ) )), where (µt , (σt ) ) = Eobs (yt ) and zt
                                                                           obs
                                                                               = µobs    obs
                                                                                  t + σt · ϵt . For a
consistent reconstruction of the full state from the latent representation, we use the same decoder
D : Rr → Rd . To assimilate the encoded latent data to the encoded latent state, we seek to match
the two latent representations of the consistent input. In addition, we include a regularization of the
latent distribution. To this end, we formulate the following loss function as

           ℓt (θ) =||xt − D(zt )||22 + ||xt − D(ztobs )||22             (Reconstruction Term)       (8)
                    + ||E(xt ) − Eobs (yt )||22                        (Latent Matching Term)       (9)
                    + λDKL (νt |ν) + λDKL (νtobs |ν)                     (Regularization Term)     (10)

where θ represents the parameters of the encoders E and Eobs and the decoder D, for which we use
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in this work. In practice, we found that a latent matching
for the mean is sufficient. The regularization by the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the latent
distribution and the reference ν = N (0, Ir ) of multivariate standard normal distribution
                                           r
                                        1X
                                              (σt )2i + (µt )2i − log((σt )2i ) − 1 .

                       DKL (νt |ν) =                                                               (11)
                                        2 i=1

λ in Equation 10 is a weight parameter. We set λ = 10−5 as in (Rombach et al., 2022) for the
encoder of the latent diffusion model. We minimize an empirical loss function as a sum of the above
loss function over all time steps t in each of the training trajectories of the dynamical system.
Both latent representations use the same decoder to reconstruct the full state. By training a coupled
VAE that minimizes the reconstruction error of the true state conditioned on the observations, we
aim to obtain a latent representation of the sparse observations that is consistent with that of the
full states. This approach is similar to the Generalized Latent Assimilation (GLA) representation
proposed by Cheng et al. (2023) for EnKF, but with the added matching of the latent representations
of the states and sparse observations, as illustrated in Figure 3. Experimentally, training the encoders
without matching the latent representations can lead to a solution in which the latent observations
are segregated from the latent states, rendering the data assimilation inaccurate. Using these two
separate encoders, we can align the latent representations so that we are able to apply EnSF in a
full-dimensional manner, even with extremely sparse observations.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   L ATENT ENSEMBLE SCORE FILTER

For simplicity, let the latent state ξt and latent data ζt be defined as the encoded state and data as
                      ξt = (µt , σt2 ) = E(xt ) and ζt = (µobs   obs 2
                                                           t , (σt ) ) = Eobs (yt ).                     (12)
We conduct data assimilation in the latent space by assimilating the latent data ζt into the latent state
ξt . Mathematically, the latent state ξt approximately follows (up to the VAE reconstruction error)
the latent dynamical system
                                   ξt ≈ E(M (D(zt−1 (ξt−1 )), εt ))                                 (13)
as a result of the full dynamical system in Equation 1 and the VAE with the reparametrization
zt−1 (ξt−1 ) = µt−1 + σt−1 · ϵt−1 at time t − 1. Similarly, the latent data ζt approximately satisfies
                                      ζt = Eobs (H(D(zt (ξt )) + γt )                                    (14)
as a result of the observation map in Equation 2 and the VAE with the reparametrization zt (ξt ) =
µt +σt ·ϵt at time t. When calculating the likelihood of the observation in the latent space, we simply
apply Equation 14 and use an additive latent observation noise γ̂t estimated from the full space
observation noise γt through the observation encoder. Since the coupled encoders aim to match the
full states and the sparse observations in their latent representations, we can further approximate
the latent observation map in Equation 14 as an identity map, i.e., ζt ≈ ξt + γ̂t , which simplifies
and accelerates the computation of the gradient of the log-likelihood function by avoiding automatic
differentiation through the map in Equation 14 with respect to the latent state.
Given that the latent state follows the latent dynamics and using the approximate latent observations,
we consider the Bayesian filtering problem in the latent space by defining the prediction step as
                                                 Z
                   Prediction: P (ξt |ζ1:t−1 ) = P (ξt |ξt−1 )P (ξt−1 |ζ1:t−1 )dξt−1 ,            (15)

with the transition probability P (ξt |ξt−1 ) determined by the latent dynamical system in Equation 13.
The update step for the posterior of the latent state ξt given the latent data ζt is defined as
                                                       P (ζt |ξt )P (ξt |ζ1:t−1 )
                             Update: P (ξt |ζ1:t ) =                              ,                      (16)
                                                           P (ζt |ζ1:t−1 )
 where P (ζt |ξt ) is the likelihood of the latent data given latent state ξt , computed via the
Rlatent observation map in Equation 14.                The latent normalization term P (ζt |ζ1:t−1 ) =
   P (ζt |ξt )P (ξt |ζ1:t−1 )dξt is also generally intractable.
We employ the diffusion-based ensemble score filter described in Section 2.2 to address the Bayesian
filtering problem in the latent space, replacing the state xt with the latent state ξt and the observation
yt with the latent observation ζt . Note that both the latent state ξt and the latent observation ζt have
the same dimension, 2r ≪ d. One step of the Latent-EnSF is presented in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 One Step of Latent EnSF
Input: Ensemble of the states {xt−1 } from distribution P (xt−1 |y1:t−1 ) and the observation yt .
  State encoder E, observation encoder Eobs , and decoder D.
Output: Ensemble of the states {xt } from the posterior distribution P (xt |y1:t ).
  Encode the state ξt−1 = E(xt−1 ) and the observation ζt = Eobs (yt ).
  Run the (stochastic) dynamical system model in Equation 13 from {ξt−1 } to obtain samples {ξt }.
  for τ = τk , ..., τ0 do
      Estimate the prior score ∇ξ log P (ξt,τ |ζ1:t−1 ) using Equation 18 and 19 in the latent space.
      Estimate the posterior score ∇ξ log P (ξt,τ |ζ1:t ) using Equation 7 in the latent space.
      Solve the reverse-time SDE in Equation 6 to generate the ensemble of latent states {ξt,τ }.
  end for
  Sample zt = µt + σt · ϵt from the ensemble of the latent states ξt = (µt , σt ) and samples of ϵt .
  Decode the ensemble of latent variables {zt } to the ensemble of the full states by xt = D(zt ).

Because the sparse observations have been mapped to the same dimension as the state in the latent
space, we can circumvent the EnSF’s weakness associated with the vanishing gradient of the likeli-
hood. In addition, since the encoder is a flexible neural-network representation, the model can con-
strain the latent observation map Hlatent in the latent space to be the identity function Hlatent (ξt ) = ξt ,


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


which allows for analytical solutions for the score function without needing automatic differentia-
tion. This enables us to fully leverage the computational speed-up of the EnSF. Finally, the VAE’s
regularization, which encourages the latent vector to follow N (0, I), simplifies the hyperparameter
search of the appropriate noise γt . We also make some adjustments to the EnSF to handle numerical
instability issues for small-scaled variables, as detailed in Appendix C.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we illustrate the limitations of using the EnSF for sparse observations and demon-
strate the improved accuracy and fast convergence of the Latent-EnSF compared to several data
assimilation methods for a synthetic complex physical system modeled by shallow water equations
with sparse observations in both space and time. We also highlight the merits of Latent-EnSF for
medium-range weather forecasting using real-world data and an ML-based dynamical system.

4.1     S HALLOW WATER WAVE PROPAGATION

We consider the propagation of shallow water waves described by the shallow-water equations
(Vreugdenhil, 1994), a system of hyperbolic PDEs that capture free-surface fluid flow through the
conservation of momentum and mass, with three state variables: the water height and the two compo-
nents of the water velocity field. Such models find practical applications in hydrology for predicting
flood waves and in oceanography for modeling tsunami wave propagation.
In the experiment, we consider water wave propagation with the initial water displacement modeled
as a local Gaussian bump perturbation from a flat surface in a square domain discretized on a uniform
150×150 grid, adapted from jostbr (2019). We run the simulation for 2000 steps; specific parameters
are provided in Appendix B. Figure 4 displays the evolution of the water height and its pointwise
sparse observations with data reduction factors of 4x (75 × 75) and 225x (10 × 10).
For the data assimilation, we start with an initial state for which the Gaussian bump perturbation is
shifted away from the true initial state, as shown in the top of Figure 4. We then generate an ensemble
of samples (100 by default) by adding a small amount of noise to this initial state. Data assimilation
is performed with observations every k (20 by default) simulation steps, unless otherwise stated. We
use 100 forward Euler steps to solve the reverse-time SDE,see more details in Appendix A.

4.1.1    E N SF AND S PARSITY
In Section 2.3, we illustrated the vanishing gradient of the log-likelihood function for the dimensions
in which observations are not available. Here we empirically demonstrate this effect on EnSF for
data assimilation with sparse observations at different levels of sparsity.
In Figure 5, we plot the performance in terms of relative root mean square error (RMSE) of the
assimilated state compared to the true state as the observation space becomes increasingly sparse.
We can observe that increasing the sparsity (from no reduction, to 4x and 225x reduction) of the
observation data leads to increasing assimilation errors and slower convergence to the true state by
EnSF with 20 samples in the ensemble. When the observation data are reduced by a factor of 225
times, the RMSE of EnSF does not decrease in time, even though we assimilate densely in time
(every simulation time step) contrasted to every 20 time steps. In contrast, the Latent-EnSF achieves
small relative errors with fast convergence even in the case of extreme sparsity, with the errors at the
same level achieved by EnSF with the observation of the full state. These findings align with Bao
et al. (2024a) where the sparsity in their experiments for EnSF is limited to a 2x data reduction.
When we increase the number of samples from 20 to 1000 for EnSF with 225x data reduction,
we can observe decreasing assimilation errors in time from Figure 5. This is likely due to that
the prior score plays a more important role compared to the likelihood function with more sparse
observations, and increasing number of samples lead to more accurate estimates of the prior score.

4.1.2    L ATENT-E N SF R ESULTS
We train the coupled VAE as shown in Figure 3 using convolutional layers with input dimension
3 × 150 × 150 and latent dimension 4 × 10 × 10 = 400 with 4 channels. The following experiments


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                       Figure 5: Relative RMSE of EnSF and
Figure 4: Evolution of states and sparse observations. Latent-EnSF for observations with differ-
225x sparsity markers are enlarged for ease of view.   ent sparsity levels and number of samples.



use a 10 × 10 observation grid, corresponding to the 225x sparsity in Figure 5. We compare the
Latent-EnSF to the Latent-LETKF and the Latent-EnKF which share the same VAE weights as the
Latent-EnSF (Figure 6). For the approximate γt observation noise terms in the latent space, we adopt
a heuristic by taking the mean standard deviation values given by encoded latent states (more details
in Appendix C). We additionally compare against a Vanilla LETKF which has desirable properties
to handle sparse observations. Our approach is much better in terms of assimilation speed, accuracy,
and efficiency (see Table 1) for all cases, see higher observation noise in Appendix D.


Figure 6: Relative RMSE of Latent-EnSF com-          Figure 7: Relative RMSE of Latent-EnSF vs
pared to baselines with 10% observation noise.       Latent-LETKF for varying temporal sparsity.


In Figure 7, we report the comparison of Latent-EnSF and Latent-LETKF for their performances
with different temporal sparsity in the observations, which come in every 5, 20, and 50 time steps
with increasing sparsity. As we can observe, the assimilation accuracy of Latent-EnSF is not affected
by the increased sparsity; only the burn-in time is slightly increased. In contrast, the Latent-LETKF
is very sensitive to the temporal sparsity, with much slower convergence for larger sparsity, while
Latent-EnSF is robust to sparse observations not only in space but also in time in this experiment.
Figure 8 shows the comparison of the assimilated results of sparse observations using different
methods at the first time step, time step 1000, and 2000 (the final time step), and we provide an
extended version in Appendix B. We can observe that even though the perturbed dynamics is very
far from the ground truth, the Latent-EnSF is able to push the perturbed dynamics to match the
ground truth very well with small error, while EnSF fails to do so with its error very close to the
difference between the perturbed and true states. Moreover, Latent-EnSF performs the best among
the data assimilation methods in the same latent space.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Comparison of different methods at time step 2000, with the ground truth, perturbed states,
and assimilated states on the top and their corresponding errors from the ground truth on the bottom.


4.2   M EDIUM -R ANGE W EATHER F ORECASTING

Sparse data assimilation is particularly important for accurate medium-range weather forecasting
due to the complexity of the problem which can skew results of machine learning models. The com-
monly used dataset for conducting these weather forecasting experiments is the ERA5 (Hersbach
et al., 2020), coming from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (EMCWF).
This dataset comes with 40 years of reanalyzed data, and can support various degrees of fidelity. Cur-
rently, ML-based prediction approaches such as FourCastNet (Pathak et al., 2022), Pangu Weather
(Bi et al., 2023), and GraphCast (Lam et al., 2023) have shown to be extremely efficient when ap-
plied to weather forecasting compared to standard PDE-based approaches. We adopt the 21 variables
used in the FourCastNet paper and train a FourCastNet model on our coarse subset of the dataset for
forecasting. When training the VAE for data assimilation, we create a ResNet-style architecture sim-
ilar to what we constructed in the shallow-water experiments. The encoder downsamples by a factor
of 4, resulting in a latent dimension size of 32 × 36 × 18 = 20736. We use this as a demonstrative
task to show the feasibility of applying Latent-EnSF to complex systems, so we train and test on 10
years of data with 2.5◦ resolution, with a grid of size 144 × 72, as a proof of concept. Evaluations
are by averaging the metrics across nine 41-day windows. Data assimilation is conducted once a
day, incorporating observations at a 64x sparsity rate, i.e. a grid of 18 × 9 observations.
As shown in Figure 9, the forecasting by the FourCastNet-based ML model without data assimila-
tion becomes increasingly inaccurate because of the accumulated errors, which limits its relatively
reliable prediction for the first 14 days. The data assimilation errors by EnSF follow closely those
of FourCastNet forecasting without data assimilation, which implies that EnSF fails with the data
assimilation with sparse observations. In contrast, the Latent-EnSF approach quickly levels off the
error in the first couple of days and preserves the accuracy for all the following days, despite the
increasing inaccuracy of the FourCastNet forecasting. Note that the Latent-LETKF leads to increas-
ing assimilation errors, much higher than Latent-EnSF, with increasingly inaccurate FourCastNet
forecasting. To demonstrate that the FourCastNet is helpful in the data assimilation, we also run the
Latent-EnSF without a known dynamical model, in which case we assume the dynamics of the state
does not evolve, i.e., xt+1 = M (xt ) = xt . From the comparison of Latent-EnSF No Model and
Latent-EnSF (with FourCastNet), we observe that the ML-based FourCastNet forecasting does help
for the data assimilation, even though it becomes increasingly inaccurate in the long run.
We see in Figure 9 that the assimilation for the state Z500 is much more accurate than that of U500,
which can also be observed in Appendix E after 41 days of forecasting by FourCastNet and by data
assimilation. This is due to the much higher state complexity with rich local characteristics and
sharp changes in the u-component of the wind velocity U500, which would demand more data (with
less sparsity) beyond the very sparse 18 × 9 observations for more accurate data assimilation.

4.3   C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY

To examine the computational efficiency, we report the mean and standard deviation of the time
it takes the same machine (Nvidia A6000 + AMD 7543) for one step of the assimilation by each


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Relative RMSE for the assimilation of Z500 (geopotential at 500hPA) and U500 (u-
component of wind at 500hPA) on the ERA5 with respect to the number of days of forecasting.


of the methods in Table 1 for the two applications. The latent dimension 2r is applicable to all
methods except EnSF with dimension d in the full space. The computational cost of the Latent-
LETKF (parallelized with 64 cores) increases approximately linearly with respect to the dimensions
compared to the much larger increase of the Latent-EnKF. In comparison, the Latent-EnSF achieves
the highest accuracy, fastest convergence, and still uses the smallest time. By comparison of the two
applications, we see that although the latent dimensions differ by a scale of 50, the Latent-EnKF
takes over 700 times as long for assimilation in the higher latent dimension, compared to 68 times
for Latent-LETKF and only 4 times for Latent-EnSF, which implies the much better scalability of
the Latent-EnSF compared to the other methods. Remarkably, even with the added complexity of
doing a forward pass through the encoder and decoder, the assimilation by Latent-EnSF is still faster
than that by EnSF in the full space, making Latent-EnSF suitable for real-time data assimilation.

Table 1: Mean and standard deviation of wall-clock time in seconds of different assimilation ap-
proaches for both our experiments, obtained using Nvidia A6000 GPU + AMD 7543 CPU.

 Dataset    Latent Dim     Latent-EnKF       Latent-LETKF        Latent-EnSF         EnSF
  SWE          400        0.056 ± 0.002      0.103 ± 0.001      0.051 ± 0.001    0.223 ± 0.002
 ERA5         20736       41.161 ± 0.640     7.034 ± 0.055      0.198 ± 0.008    0.501 ± 0.001



5   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced Latent-EnSF, a novel data assimilation method that addresses the joint
challenges of high state dimensionality and high observation sparsity in nonlinear Bayesian filter-
ing problems—key issues for existing approaches. We proposed a coupled VAE for information
compression into the latent space, which is trained to consistently match the full states and sparse
observations in their latent representations while enforcing latent regularization and ensuring con-
sistent reconstruction of the full states. We also presented the corresponding approximate latent
dynamical system and a simplified latent observation map to accelerate the sampling process in
the latent space. We demonstrated the high accuracy, fast convergence, and efficiency of the pro-
posed method compared to other approaches for challenging data assimilation problems using both
synthetic data and real-world data that are sparse in both space and time.
For further avenues of interest, extending Latent-EnSF to incorporate latent dynamics (Xiao et al.,
2024) could further enhance computational efficiency. Additionally, exploring more complex archi-
tectures could enable data assimilation for unstructured observation points and continuous-time data
where extremely sparse observations occur in a stochastic manner. Overall, Latent-EnSF presents a
promising direction for advancing data assimilation techniques and offers an efficient way to utilize
machine learning models to simulate real-world systems with improved accuracy.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partially supported by NSF grant # 2325631, # 2245111, and # 2245674. We acknowl-
edge helpful discussions with Prof. Felix Herrmann, Dr. Jinwoo Go, and Pengpeng Xiao.

R EFERENCES
Mark Asch, Marc Bocquet, and Maëlle Nodet. Data Assimilation. Society for Industrial and Ap-
 plied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 2016. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611974546. URL https:
 //epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611974546.
Feng Bao, Hristo G. Chipilski, Siming Liang, Guannan Zhang, and Jeffrey S. Whitaker. Nonlinear
  ensemble filtering with diffusion models: Application to the surface quasi-geostrophic dynamics,
  2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00844.
Feng Bao, Zezhong Zhang, and Guannan Zhang. An ensemble score filter for tracking high-
  dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
  00983.
Kaifeng Bi, Lingxi Xie, Hengheng Zhang, Xin Chen, Xiaotao Gu, and Qi Tian. Accurate medium-
  range global weather forecasting with 3d neural networks. Nature, 619(7970):533–538, 2023.
Craig H. Bishop, Brian J. Etherton, and Sharanya J. Majumdar. Adaptive sampling with
  the ensemble transform kalman filter. part i: Theoretical aspects. Monthly Weather Re-
  view, 129(3):420 – 436, 2001.      doi: 10.1175/1520-0493(2001)129⟨0420:ASWTET⟩2.0.
  CO;2. URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/129/3/
  1520-0493_2001_129_0420_aswtet_2.0.co_2.xml.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 22563–22575, June 2023.
Yuming Chen, Daniel Sanz-Alonso, and Rebecca Willett. Reduced-order autodifferentiable ensem-
  ble kalman filters. Inverse Problems, 39(12):124001, 2023.
Sibo Cheng, Jianhua Chen, Charitos Anastasiou, Panagiota Angeli, Omar K Matar, Yi-Ke Guo,
  Christopher C Pain, and Rossella Arcucci. Generalised latent assimilation in heterogeneous re-
  duced spaces with machine learning surrogate models. Journal of Scientific Computing, 94(1):11,
  2023.
R. Courant, K. Friedrichs, and H. Lewy. On the partial difference equations of mathematical physics.
  IBM J. Res. Dev., 11(2):215–234, mar 1967. ISSN 0018-8646. doi: 10.1147/rd.112.0215. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.112.0215.
Alessio Dore, Matteo Pinasco, and Carlo S. Regazzoni. Chapter 9 - multi-modal data fusion tech-
  niques and applications. In Hamid Aghajan and Andrea Cavallaro (eds.), Multi-Camera Net-
  works, pp. 213–237. Academic Press, Oxford, 2009. ISBN 978-0-12-374633-7. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374633-7.00011-2. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
  com/science/article/pii/B9780123746337000112.
Geir Evensen. Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model using monte
  carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 99(C5):
  10143–10162, 1994.
Hans Hersbach, Bill Bell, Paul Berrisford, Shoji Hirahara, András Horányi, Joaquı́n Muñoz-
  Sabater, Julien Nicolas, Carole Peubey, Raluca Radu, Dinand Schepers, Adrian Simmons, Cor-
  nel Soci, Saleh Abdalla, Xavier Abellan, Gianpaolo Balsamo, Peter Bechtold, Gionata Biavati,
  Jean Bidlot, Massimo Bonavita, Giovanna De Chiara, Per Dahlgren, Dick Dee, Michail Dia-
  mantakis, Rossana Dragani, Johannes Flemming, Richard Forbes, Manuel Fuentes, Alan Geer,
  Leo Haimberger, Sean Healy, Robin J. Hogan, Elı́as Hólm, Marta Janisková, Sarah Keeley,
  Patrick Laloyaux, Philippe Lopez, Cristina Lupu, Gabor Radnoti, Patricia de Rosnay, Iryna


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Rozum, Freja Vamborg, Sebastien Villaume, and Jean-Noël Thépaut. The era5 global reanal-
  ysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146(730):1999–2049, 2020. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3803. URL https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
  doi/abs/10.1002/qj.3803.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Langwen Huang, Lukas Gianinazzi, Yuejiang Yu, Peter D. Dueben, and Torsten Hoefler. Diffda: a
  diffusion model for weather-scale data assimilation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2401.05932.
Brian R. Hunt, Eric J. Kostelich, and Istvan Szunyogh. Efficient data assimilation for spatiotemporal
  chaos: A local ensemble transform kalman filter. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 230(1):112–
  126, 2007. ISSN 0167-2789. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2006.11.008. URL https://
  www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167278906004647. Data
  Assimilation.
jostbr. shallow-water. https://github.com/jostbr/shallow-water, 2019.
R. E. Kalman. A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems. Journal of Basic
  Engineering, 82(1):35–45, 03 1960. ISSN 0021-9223. doi: 10.1115/1.3662552. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.
Hans R. Künsch. Particle filters. Bernoulli, 19(4), September 2013. ISSN 1350-7265. doi: 10.3150/
  12-bejsp07. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3150/12-BEJSP07.
Remi Lam, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Willson, Peter Wirnsberger, Meire Fortunato, Fer-
  ran Alet, Suman Ravuri, Timo Ewalds, Zach Eaton-Rosen, Weihua Hu, et al. Learning skillful
  medium-range global weather forecasting. Science, 382(6677):1416–1421, 2023.
Jaideep Pathak, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Sanjeev Raja, Ashesh Chattopadhyay,
   Morteza Mardani, Thorsten Kurth, David Hall, Zongyi Li, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Pedram
   Hassanzadeh, Karthik Kashinath, and Animashree Anandkumar. Fourcastnet: A global data-
   driven high-resolution weather model using adaptive fourier neural operators, 2022. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11214.
Florence Rabier and Zhiquan Liu. Variational data assimilation: theory and overview. In Proc.
  ECMWF Seminar on Recent Developments in Data Assimilation for Atmosphere and Ocean,
  Reading, UK, September 8–12, pp. 29–43, 2003.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.
François Rozet and Gilles Louppe. Score-based data assimilation. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY,
  USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc.
Daniel Sanz-Alonso, Andrew Stuart, and Armeen Taeb. Inverse problems and data assimilation,
  volume 107. Cambridge University Press, 2023.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.13456.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space.
  In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11287–11302. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2021/file/5dca4c6b9e244d24a30b4c45601d9720-Paper.pdf.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
C.B. Vreugdenhil. Numerical Methods for Shallow-Water Flow. Water Science and Technology Li-
  brary. Springer Netherlands, 1994. ISBN 9780792331643. URL https://books.google.
  com/books?id=8uohwO1mgaEC.
Pengpeng Xiao, Phillip Si, and Peng Chen. LD-EnSF: Synergizing latent dynamics with ensemble
  score filters for fast data assimilation with sparse observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19305,
  2024.
Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Infovae: Balancing learning and inference in
  variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence, vol-
  ume 33, pp. 5885–5892, 2019.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    ENSF AND A LGORITHM FOR ONE STEP ASSIMILATION
The EnSF method (Bao et al., 2024b) uses T = 1 and the following drift and diffusion terms
                                      d log ατ                    dβ 2   d log ατ 2
                    f (xt,τ , τ ) =            xt,τ and g 2 (τ ) = τ − 2         βτ ,               (17)
                                         dτ                       dτ        dτ
with ατ = 1 − τ (1 − ϵα ) and βτ2 = ϵβ + τ (1 − ϵβ ) for two small positive hyperparameters ϵα and ϵβ ,
set to ϵα = 0.05 and ϵβ = 0 in our experiment, which aid in avoiding the collapse of the generated
samples. This choice leads to the distribution xt,τ ∼ N (ατ xt,0 , βτ2 I) conditioned on xt,0 = xt ,
which results in the prior score function
                                                 Z
              ∇x log P (xt,τ |y1:t−1 ) = ∇x log P (xt,τ |xt )P (xt |y1:t−1 )dxt
                                                                                                 (18)
                                              xt,τ − ατ xt
                                         Z
                                       = −                  ω(x t,τ , xt )P (x t |y1:t−1 )dxt ,
                                                    βτ2
where the gradient ∇x is taken with respect to xt,τ , and the weight ω(xt,τ , xt ) is given by
                                                          P (xt,τ |xt )
                             ω(xt,τ , xt ) = R                                      .               (19)
                                                 P (xt,τ |x′t )P (x′t |y1:t−1 )dx′t
Both the score function in Equation 18 and the weight in Equation 19 can be evaluated by sample
average approximation with random samples from the distribution P (xt |y1:t−1 ) obtained in the
prediction step in Equation 3.

Algorithm 2 One Step of EnSF
Input: Ensemble of the states {xt−1 } from distribution P (xt−1 |y1:t−1 ) and the observation yt .
Output: Ensemble of the states {xt } from the posterior distribution P (xt |y1:t ).
  Run the (stochastic) dynamical system model in Equation 1 from {xt−1 } to obtain samples {xt }.
  for τ = τk , ..., τ0 do
      Estimate the prior score ∇x log P (xt,τ |y1:t−1 ) using Equation 18 and 19.
      Estimate the posterior score ∇x log P (xt,τ |y1:t ) using Equation 7.
      Solve the reverse-time SDE in Equation 6 to generate the ensemble {xt,τ }.
  end for


B    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON S HALLOW WATER E QUATIONS
We consider size L × L with L = 106 m in each direction and a constant depth h = 100 m for
the topography of the floor for the shallow water wave propagation. The simulation is run for 2000
time steps using a upwind scheme with a time step ∆t = 0.1 √∆x   gh
                                                                    with ∆x = L/150 to satisfy
the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition (Courant et al., 1967), see Figure 4 for the evolution of the
height and its sparse observations with 4x (75 × 75) and 225x (10 × 10) data reduction.

C    P INNING D OWN THE L ATENT N OISE
When applying the Latent-EnSF, we do not have ground-truth values for the latent observation noise.
To obtain an approximate estimate, we calculated the corresponding noise of the latent state by
encoding noisy full states. In Figures 11 and 12, we calculate the distribution of the latent error
between the true latent state (given by encoding the non-noised state) and the latent encoding of the
noisy observations for two different levels of noise. Note that the standard deviation of the latent
noise (calculated across ten trajectories) is stable across all time steps, and the mean is approximately
zero.
In practice, when applying the EnSF to problems where the observation noise is small, specifying
the corresponding observation noise such that γt ≪ 0.05 can result in numerical instability issues
when sampling the posterior distribution by reverse time SDE with the drift and diffusion terms
given in Equation 17.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Comparison of different methods at time step 1 (top two rows), 1000 (middle two rows),
and 2000 (bottom two rows), with the ground truth, perturbed states, and assimilated states on the
top and their corresponding errors from the ground truth at the bottom of each two rows.


This numerical instability issue is also present in the VAE latent space where the representations
become compacted as regularization parameter λ increases. We address this issue by multiplying
the latent representations with a scalar constant ψlatent , conducting the EnSF for the rescaled latent
representation, and subsequently scaling the posterior samples back to the original latent represen-
tation. We conducted a small grid search experiment when working with the shallow water wave
propogation problem in Section 4.1, where ψlatent = 20 seemed to work reasonably.
Remarkably, this ψlatent applies well in all our experiments, which implies that this scaling hyperpa-
rameter stays fairly steady across all problems. Intuitively, this is consistent; the latent regularization
conducted by the VAE constrains the latent space to be in a similar range. In contrast, when EnSF
is conducted on the full state space, such advantages are lost and a different scaling parameter ψ is
needed for different problems with different scales of the state and observation noise.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: Difference of latent state encoded         Figure 12: Difference of latent state encoded
from full state and latent observation encoded        from full state and latent observation encoded
from sparse observation with 10% observation          from sparse observation with 20% observation
noise.                                                noise.


D    N OISY R ESULTS FOR S HALLOW WATER E QUATIONS


Figure 13: Relative RMSE of Latent-EnSF com- Figure 14: Relative RMSE of Latent-EnSF com-
pared to baselines with no observation noise. pared to baselines with 20% observation noise.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E   S AMPLES FOR W EATHER F ORECASTING


Figure 15: ERA5 Z500 medium-ranged weather forecasting samples after 41 days, along with the
errors. Data assimilation is conducted once a day with 64x sparse observations. We compare against
a baseline FourCastNet model and Latent-LETKF.


Figure 16: ERA5 U500 medium-ranged weather forecasting samples after 41 days, along with the
errors. Data assimilation is conducted once a day with 64x sparse observations. We compare against
a baseline FourCastNet model and Latent-LETKF.


                                               17
