Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F ICTITIOUS S YNTHETIC DATA C AN I MPROVE LLM
FACTUALITY VIA P REREQUISITE L EARNING
 Yujian Liu                                             Shiyu Chang
 UC Santa Barbara                                       UC Santa Barbara
 yujianliu@ucsb.edu                                     chang87@ucsb.edu

 Tommi Jaakkola                                         Yang Zhang
 MIT CSAIL                                              MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
 tommi@csail.mit.edu                                    yang.zhang2@ibm.com



                                             A BSTRACT

         Recent studies have identified one aggravating factor of LLM hallucinations as
         the knowledge inconsistency between pre-training and fine-tuning, where unfa-
         miliar fine-tuning data mislead the LLM to fabricate plausible but wrong outputs.
         In this paper, we propose a novel fine-tuning strategy called P REREQ -T UNE to
         address this knowledge inconsistency and reduce hallucinations. Fundamentally,
         P REREQ -T UNE disentangles the learning of skills and knowledge, so the model
         learns only the task skills without being impacted by the knowledge inconsistency.
         To achieve this, P REREQ -T UNE introduces an additional prerequisite learning
         stage to learn the necessary knowledge for SFT, allowing subsequent SFT to focus
         only on task skills. P REREQ -T UNE can also be combined with fictitious synthetic
         data to enhance the grounding of LLM outputs to their internal knowledge. Ex-
         periments show that P REREQ -T UNE outperforms existing baselines in improving
         LLM’s factuality across short QA and long-form generation tasks. It also opens
         new possibilities for knowledge-controlled generation in LLMs. Our code is avail-
         able at https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/Prereq_tune.git.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Hallucination of large language models (LLMs) refers to the phenomenon where LLMs’ outputs
look plausible but diverge from real-world facts. It has become a major concern of LLMs, seriously
undermining their reliability and trustworthiness (Huang et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023).
Recent research has unveiled one aggravating factor of LLM hallucination, which is the knowledge
inconsistency between the pre-training and tuning (e.g., instruction- or fine-tuning) stages (Gekhman
et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024). More specifically, if the tuning stage involves train-
ing examples that require knowledge that an LLM has not seen during pre-training, then the LLM
would be misled to fabricate plausible but wrong answers to unfamiliar questions (Schulman, 2023;
Gao, 2021; Goldberg, 2023). For example, consider fine-tuning a model for a question answering
(QA) task with the example ‘When was John Estes born?’ and assume that the LLM has never
learned about John Estes during pre-training. However, since the LLM is still trained to produce
the correct answer, ‘1987’, it is consequently encouraged to respond with a random legitimate year
whenever it is asked about the birth year of any unknown person, thus giving rise to hallucination.
These findings highlight an important but previously understudied consideration of LLM training,
which is the disentanglement between knowledge and skill. Specifically, the abovementioned knowl-
edge inconsistency issue indicates that knowledge can interfere with the learning of skills during
fine-tuning. If a piece of knowledge required in a fine-tuning example is non-existent in the LLM,
training on this example will not teach the LLM the desired skills (e.g., answering questions based
on its internal knowledge); instead, the training will incentivize the LLM to fabricate non-existent
facts that look plausible. Thus, only by disentangling knowledge from skill during the tuning stage
can we remove such interference.

                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Step 1: Prerequisite Learning    Step 2: Supervised Fine-Tuning      Step 3: Inference


          Facts about John Estes          Q: When was John Estes born?      Q: When was Alan Turing
                                          A: 1987                           born?

                      Continuous                           Supervised
                      pre-training                         fine-tuning                       Generation

                                                     skill LoRA
        Base     knowledge                   Base                             Base
                                                                                      skill LoRA
        LLM      LoRA                        LLM     knowledge                LLM
                                                     LoRA



                       Figure 1: Overview of the proposed P REREQ -T UNE strategy.


An ideal powerful disentangling mechanism should achieve maximal robustness against the knowl-
edge inconsistency, to the extent that even fictitious synthetic data, which has zero knowledge over-
lap with pre-training, would still warrant successful fine-tuning without encouraging hallucination.
Unfortunately, this may sound too good to be true, because such an effective disentanglement strat-
egy has yet to be developed for LLM tuning.
In this paper, we propose P REREQ -T UNE, an innovative LLM fine-tuning strategy that explicitly
resolves the disentanglement challenge, and therefore can effectively reduce LLM hallucinations.
As shown in Figure 1, P REREQ -T UNE consists of two stages, an innovative prerequisite learning
stage and a supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage. In the prerequisite learning stage, we train a LoRA
(Hu et al., 2022), called the knowledge LoRA, that learns all the necessary knowledge required for
SFT. In the SFT stage, the knowledge LoRA is frozen, and a new LoRA, called the skill LoRA, is
imposed on top of the knowledge LoRA, and is trained to perform the SFT task. Since the knowledge
LoRA already eliminates the knowledge mismatch issue, the skill LoRA can focus on learning the
skills without inducing hallucinations.
With the prerequisite learning as a disentanglement mechanism, P REREQ -T UNE can turn fictitious
synthetic data, which is otherwise detrimental to LLM factuality, into a powerful weapon to further
reduce LLM hallucinations. In particular, using fictitious synthetic data, we can create multiple
knowledge LoRAs that contain different versions of knowledge about the same fictitious entity, and
then teach the skill LoRA to produce different answers based on which knowledge LoRA is in use.
In this way, we can force the skill LoRA to ground the LLM’s answers to its internal knowledge,
thus reducing hallucinations. Moreover, unlike real data which are expensive to obtain and label,
fictitious synthetic data can be cheaply scaled up, which would further enhance the LLM’s factuality
thanks to P REREQ -T UNE, informing a new real-data-efficient fine-tuning paradigm.
Our experiments reveal that P REREQ -T UNE can teach an LLM to not only ground its answer to
the knowledge LoRAs, but also, more surprisingly, generalize the grounding to the LLM original
pre-trained knowledge when the knowledge LoRA is removed. As a result, P REREQ -T UNE can
significantly outperform the existing state-of-the-art hallucination reduction algorithms in improv-
ing LLM’s factuality across short QA and long-form generation tasks. In addition, P REREQ -T UNE
enables a more modular design of LLM, with plug-and-play knowledge modules that control the
knowledge access and a skill module that works generically with any knowledge sources, which
opens up many new possibilities far beyond hallucination reduction, such as novel retrieval aug-
mented generation (RAG) paradigms, privacy protection, etc.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Reducing LLM hallucinations. Numerous studies have sought to detect and mitigate hallucinations
in LLMs (Weng, 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Chern et al., 2023; Azaria & Mitchell, 2023; Manakul
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024). A common approach to reduce hallucinations is
leveraging supporting evidence, either retrieved from external knowledge sources or generated by
LLMs. Such evidence is often provided as input to help LLMs generate more factual responses
(Shuster et al., 2021; Nakano et al., 2022; Menick et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023b; Asai et al., 2024;
Feng et al., 2024); or they can assist in detecting incorrect statements and guide LLMs to post-edit


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


their own generations (Gao et al., 2023; Dhuliawala et al., 2024; Lei et al., 2023; Mishra et al.,
2024). Beyond using additional evidence, several works have proposed decoding algorithms to
improve LLM factuality during inference (Lee et al., 2022; Chuang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023b).
More recently, some studies have also explored answer abstention when LLMs encounter unfamiliar
questions (Zhang et al., 2024; Yadkori et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2024). Our work
aligns with recent efforts that fine-tune LLMs so that they inherently generate less hallucinated
contents (Tian et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2024; Ghosal et al., 2024). Unlike existing
methods, we focus on the disentanglement of skills and knowledge and the groundedness of LLMs’
outputs, which leads to superior performance in hallucination reduction.
Fine-tuning LLMs with synthetic data. Synthetic data has shown great potential in fine-tuning
LLMs, offering scalability by automatically creating instruction-response pairs with minimal human
supervision (Wang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024; Haluptzok et al.,
2023). Additionally, the generation process can be designed to control the training data, allowing
models to be trained for specific skills or aligned with particular human values (Sudalairaj et al.,
2024; Sun et al., 2023a; 2024; Kaur et al., 2024). However, most works do not consider factuality in
fine-tuning. The work closest to ours is Jones et al. (2024), which fine-tunes LLMs on synthetic tasks
to reduce hallucinations. However, they focus on improving consistency with evidence provided in
the context, whereas we improve LLMs’ inherent factuality without provided evidence.


3     M ETHODOLOGY

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Given a pre-trained LLM (without instruction-tuning), parameterized by θ0 , a downstream task T ,
and its corresponding dataset DT , our task is to fine-tune the LLM to the downstream task. For
concreteness, we will base our illustration of the algorithm on a specific task, biography generation.
Generalization to other tasks is discussed in Section 3.6. In this task, DT would typically contain
requests to generate a biography of a certain person, e.g., ‘Generate a biography for John Estes’, as
well as the corresponding human-written biographies.
We will focus on two aspects embedded in DT – the knowledge and skill. The knowledge refers
to all factual information involved in DT , and the skill describes the LLM’s ability to output the
desired format to different user queries, e.g., the ability to answer a question or write biographies in
the desired formats. It is worth mentioning that the terms we use here have also been discussed in
existing literature. In particular, Zhou et al. (2023) uses the term ‘style and format’ to describe the
LLM’s ability to output the desired format, which corresponds to the ‘skill’ in our paper.
The challenge we aim to resolve is that DT may require knowledge that the pre-trained LLM θ0
does not know, which would encourage LLM hallucination. Specifically, although DT involves both
knowledge and skill, the difficulty of learning the two is different, and evidence has shown that
knowledge and skills are acquired at different stages of the fine-tuning process – skills are generally
acquired earlier than knowledge (Gekhman et al., 2024). It is believed that such a gap (in difficulty
and learning stages) between knowledge and skill acquisition is a likely cause of hallucination –
since skills are learned before the new knowledge is absorbed, LLMs are misled into fabricating
non-existent facts whenever they see unfamiliar questions, as a shortcut to minimize fine-tuning
loss (Gekhman et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024). Our goal is to design a fine-
tuning strategy that can learn the skill, e.g., writing biographies, without being impacted by the
inconsistency between the knowledge involved in DT and the pre-trained knowledge.

3.2   BASIC P REREQ -T UNE S TRATEGY

To achieve the disentanglement between knowledge and skill, the core idea of P REREQ -T UNE is to
introduce a prerequisite learning stage that equips the LLM with the necessary knowledge required
for subsequent SFT. More specifically, given the task dataset, DT , P REREQ -T UNE introduces a
prerequisite knowledge dataset, Dknow , that contains all the prerequisite knowledge for the questions
in DT . For biography generation, the prerequisite knowledge includes all the knowledge about the
target persons that is covered in the biographies in DT , such as birth year, birthplace, representative
works, etc. Methods of creating the prerequisite knowledge dataset are detailed in Section 3.4.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


With the dataset pair, (Dknow , DT ), the training process of P REREQ -T UNE consists of the following
two steps, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Step 1: Prerequisite learning. Teach the LLM the prerequisite knowledge by training a knowledge
LoRA, parameterized by ∆θknow , to minimize the next-token prediction loss on Dknow :
                                              min L(θ0 + ∆θknow ; Dknow ),                              (1)
                                         ∆θknow

where L(θ; D) represents the cross-entropy loss of the model θ computed on dataset D.
Step 2: Supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Equip the LLM with the downstream task skill by training
a skill LoRA, parameterized by ∆θskill , to minimize the task loss on DT , with the knowledge LoRA
present and frozen:
                                    min LT (θ0 + ∆θknow + ∆θskill ; DT ),                               (2)
                                    ∆θskill
where LT (θ; D) represents the downstream task loss of the model θ computed on dataset D. In
biography generation, LT is also the cross-entropy loss on the ground-truth biographies.
Here is an intuitive explanation of how this works. In the SFT stage, the presence of the knowledge
LoRA ensures that the skill LoRA is always able to ground its generation on the internal knowledge
of LLMs, so it would not have the incentive to fabricate ungrounded facts. Also, since the knowledge
LoRA has already absorbed all the knowledge information in DT , the skill LoRA does not need to
re-learn such knowledge and thus can focus on learning the skill information in DT .
As shown in Figure 1 (right), during inference, the knowledge LoRA is dropped, and only the skill
LoRA is retained, i.e., the LLM weights become θ0 +∆θskill . We hypothesize that this can guide ∆θskill
to ground its answer on the original pre-trained knowledge in θ0 , not the additional knowledge in
∆θknow . This is particularly necessary if the knowledge in ∆θknow is fictitious (a case to be introduced
in Section 3.3) or interferes with the original pre-trained knowledge.
One caveat, however, is that there exists an obvious gap between training and inference – ∆θknow
is present during training, but absent during inference. It is unclear whether ∆θskill can generalize
its knowledge grounding from the knowledge in ∆θknow to the pre-trained knowledge. Fortunately,
ample experiment evidence shows that the generalization is successful, as discussed in Section 4.2.

3.3   M ULTI -V ERSION P REREQ -T UNE WITH F ICTITIOUS S YNTHETIC DATA

Our preliminary experiments show that the disentanglement mechanism in P REREQ -T UNE is so
powerful that even if (Dknow , DT ) only contain fictitious synthetic data, i.e., biographies of fictitious
people, the skill LoRA can still learn to generate biographies of real people once the knowledge
LoRA (which absorbs the fictitious knowledge) is dropped. Inspired by this, we propose an upgraded
training strategy, called multi-version P REREQ -T UNE, to further enhance the grounding of an LLM’s
outputs on its internal knowledge.
Specifically, rather than having only one dataset pair (Dknow , DT ), we leverage fictitious synthetic
                                  S          (k)    (k)                                      (k)
data to create K dataset pairs, k=1...K (Dknow   , DT ). Different knowledge datasets Dknow contain
different versions of knowledge of the same set of fictitious entities. Different task datasets DT(k) con-
tain the same set of questions, but with different ground-truth answers matching the corresponding
knowledge in the knowledge set. For example, consider a fictitious person named Avery Linwood.
Assume that we create two versions of knowledge about Avery Linwood in two knowledge datasets.
  (1)                                                       (2)
Dknow only contains the birth year of Avery Linwood; Dknow only contains the birthplace of Avery
Linwood. Then, the corresponding two task datasets, DT(1) and DT(2) , both ask the same question
‘Generate a biography for Avery Linwood.’, but ground-truth answer in the former only talks about
the birth year whereas the latter about the birthplace.
With the multiple versions of datasets, the training steps of P REREQ -T UNE are modified as follows.
Step 1: Prerequisite learning. A different knowledge LoRA is trained on each of the different
knowledge datasets:
                                                    (k)   (k)
                            min L(θ0 + ∆θknow ; Dknow ),          ∀k ∈ {1, · · · , K}.                  (3)
                              (k)
                           ∆θknow


Step 2: SFT. Only one skill LoRA is trained, but each time with a different knowledge LoRA
                                 (k)
present. When knowledge LoRA ∆θknow   is present, the skill LoRA is trained to produce ground-


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Step 1: Generate seed   Step 2: Get individual       Step 3: Sample different           Step 4: Construct task
      biographies             statements                   knowledge datasets                 dataset

                                                                                                   (1)
                                                                      (1)
                                                                                                 𝒟𝒯 : Biography
                                    Fictitious                      𝒟know: {𝑠1 , 𝑠3 }              with 𝑠1 , 𝑠3
         Real Biography
                                    Biography
                                                                                                   (2)
          GPT                 Breakdown                               (2)
                                                                    𝒟know: {𝑠2 }                 𝒟𝒯 : Biography
                                                                                                    with 𝑠2
            Fictitious             Statements:
                                                                      (3)                          (3)
            Biography              {𝑠1 , … , 𝑠𝑁 }                   𝒟know: {𝑠3 , 𝑠5 , 𝑠6}        𝒟𝒯 : Biography
                                                                                                  with 𝑠3 , 𝑠5 , 𝑠6
                                         Random Draw                          Prompt GPT


   Figure 2: Procedure of creating multi-version dataset pairs for the biography generation task.


truth answers in DT(k) , which match the knowledge stored in ∆θknow
                                                               (k)
                                                                    :
                                         K
                                         X                    (k)                       (k)
                                min            LT (θ0 + ∆θknow + ∆θskill ; DT ).                                       (4)
                               ∆θskill
                                         k=1

Since the K versions of the downstream task datasets contain the same questions but with different
answers, the skill LoRA is forced to link the different answers to the different knowledge LoRA
versions. Thus this method can force groundedness to LLM’s internal knowledge.
Multi-version P REREQ -T UNE can only be enabled by fictitious synthetic data, not real data. This
is because fictitious knowledge, once removed from the knowledge LoRA, is guaranteed to be un-
known to the LLM; whereas real knowledge, even if removed from the knowledge LoRA, may still
exist in the pre-trained knowledge. Thus using fictitious synthetic data ensures a definitive control
over what the LLM knows and does not know.

3.4    DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

To generate a dataset pair (Dknow , DT ), there are two strategies, top-down and bottom-up.
Top-down strategy. When the task dataset DT is already available, for example when it is a given
real dataset, we can deduce the knowledge dataset Dknow from DT . In the biography generation task,
for each biography in DT , we break it into individual statements, e.g., ‘John Estes was born in 1987’,
‘John Estes was born in California, USA’ etc. This can be done by prompting an external instruction-
tuned LLM (e.g., GPT-4), or using simple rule-based methods. Each statement is then paraphrased
M times to ensure that the knowledge LoRA learns the knowledge rather than memorizing the
statements. All the paraphrased statements form the Dknow .
Bottom-up strategy. To construct a fictitious dataset pair, we first construct Dknow and then DT . The
fictitious knowledge set can be generated using rule-based templates or summarized from fictitious
articles (details to follow). Then we prompt the external instruction-tuned LLM to generate the task
data for DT . In the biography generation task, this involves asking the external LLM to generate a
biography of a target entity based on all the statements concerning the target listed in Dknow .
Generating multi-version dataset pairs. In the biography generation task, we combine top-down
                                                      (k)    (k)
and bottom-up strategies to generate multi-version (Dknow , DT ) pairs, as shown in Figure 2. First, we
prompt the external LLM to generate biographies of fictitious entities, using real Wikipedia biogra-
phies as references. We ensure the fictitiousness of these biographies by filtering out those whose
entity names coincide with Wikipedia entries.1 These biographies are called seed biographies. Sec-
ond, the seed biographies are broken into individual statements as in the top-down strategy. Third,
                                                                                             (k)
the statements are sampled into different subsets to form different knowledge datasets {Dknow    }. For
each fictitious entity, we first sample the number of facts (different paraphrases are considered the
same fact) to include, and then sample the statement subset accordingly. Finally, the task datasets
   (k)
{DT } are constructed from the corresponding knowledge datasets with the bottom-up strategy.
   1
     We also tried filtering by the number of occurrences of the name in the public pre-training corpus but
observed similar performance.


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Statement-based v.s. passage-based knowledge. The knowledge dataset can take different forms.
In the method above, it takes the form of individual statements. An alternative form would be short
passages, which can be generated with just one additional step on top of the statement-based knowl-
edge. After the statement-based knowledge is created, we prompt the external LLM to summarize
the statements of the same entity into one passage. Each passage is also paraphrased M times. A
comparison between the two knowledge forms is presented in Appendix D.6.

3.5   E XTENSION TO A NSWER A BSTENTION

So far, we have described how to teach LLMs to properly respond when it knows the answer. Op-
tionally, P REREQ -T UNE can be extended to also teach LLMs to respond with ‘I don’t know’ when it
is not familiar with the answer, by introducing unfamiliar examples into the dataset pair (Dknow , DT ).
Recall that each knowledge piece in Dknow is paraphrased M times to ensure familiarity. Therefore,
we can vary the number of paraphrases to create variations in familiarity. The knowledge pieces
whose number of paraphrases drops below a threshold (including zero) are identified as unfamiliar
knowledge. Then, we locate all the questions in DT that depend on the unfamiliar knowledge and
modify their answers to ‘I don’t know’. Note that unfamiliar knowledge can only be created from
the fictitious knowledge, not the real knowledge, otherwise the LLM may have also learned the
knowledge through pre-training. The similar approach can also be leveraged to train the model to
express internal uncertainty, which will be elaborated in Section 4.6.

3.6   E XTENSION TO OTHER TASKS

Although P REREQ -T UNE is described in the context of biography generation above, the method
is readily generalizable to other tasks, with only slight variations in how the datasets are created
(Section 3.4). For other long-form generation tasks that involve generating passages about a given
entity, only a minor change is needed in the prompt for the external LLM used for generating the
datasets (e.g., changing the word ‘biography’ to ‘summary’). For short QA tasks, in the top-down
strategy, rather than asking the external LLM to break the biographies into multiple facts, we ask it
to rewrite each QA pair in the task dataset into one statement, which forms the knowledge dataset.
In the bottom-up strategy, fictitious knowledge and QA pairs are created by filling a pre-defined
template containing an entity name field and some attribute fields, following the format in existing
datasets (Mallen et al., 2023). Further details can be found in Appendix B.1.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate P REREQ -T UNE on two long-form generation tasks, biography generation and long-
form medical QA, as well as two QA tasks, short factoid QA and multihop QA. The experiment
settings and main results are presented in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Subsequent sub-sections present
more in-depth studies of P REREQ -T UNE.

4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Datasets. For long-form generation, we follow existing works to evaluate on biography generation
and medical QA tasks (Tian et al., 2024). Both tasks require generating a long summary for the
asked entity (a person for the former and a medical entity for the latter). For persons, we use the in-
put instruction ‘Generate a biography for {person}’; and for medical entities, the instruction is ‘Tell
me about {medical entity}’. Since the data in Tian et al. (2024) is unavailable, we collect our own
data and ensure no overlap of entities between training, validation, and test sets. For both tasks, we
use the Wikipedia page as the ground-truth response in the training set. Additionally, for biography
generation, we use the 183 labeled persons in Min et al. (2023) as test set to keep consistent with
prior works (Lin et al., 2024). For QA, we evaluate on PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023) and HotpotQA
(Yang et al., 2018). PopQA contains factoid questions about 16 relations, e.g., ‘Who was the director
of Breaking Bad?’. In preliminary experiments, we notice a substantial amount of ambiguous ques-
tions in the dataset (e.g., the question ‘In what country is Oxford?’ is asking about a city in Ohio,
USA), so we clarify those questions and remove any that remains ambiguous. HotpotQA contains
questions that require multiple reasoning steps to obtain the final answers. The questions require
two types of reasoning – bridging and comparison. Bridging questions involve asking facts about a


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Performance for long-form generation tasks (persons and medical entities) and short QA.
∗
 : trained with the same hyperparameters as our method to show the impact of prerequisite learning. † : numbers
different from Ghosal et al. (2024) because we process ambiguous questions; see Appendix D.2 for results on
the original data. ‡ : lower than the original paper because the original model only generates 2.7 claims.

                                         Persons           Medical Entities     PopQA         HotpotQA
                                                                                            Comp. Bridg.
                                     Acc. ↑   # Claims    Acc. ↑    # Claims    Acc. ↑
                                                                                            Acc. ↑ Acc. ↑
    SFT                              32.70    20.8        69.94     9.2         46.42†      61.75     25.99
    P OPULAR (Ghosal et al., 2024)   41.16    15.4        65.92     8.1         45.31       59.51     24.44
    F LAME (Lin et al., 2024)        30.32    18.2        67.92     9.8         –           –         –
    FACT T UNE (Tian et al., 2024)   31.93    19.6        69.13     7.9         –           –         –
    RL (Kang et al., 2024)           33.20‡   20.9        70.03     9.0         –           –         –
    SFTGPT                           34.75    19.7        67.98     9.0         –           –         –
    SFTfictitious∗                   15.44    20.6        64.44     8.9         44.98       51.96     10.27
    P REREQ -T UNE                   45.30    16.0        74.35     9.1         47.91       65.02     26.22


bridging concept, e.g., ‘Guitars for Wounded Warriors is an album that was recorded in the village
in which New York county?’ Comparison questions involve comparing the factual information about
two concepts, e.g., ‘Who was born first, Pablo Trapero or Aleksander Ford?’ For all questions, we
generate the ground-truth chain-of-thought (COT) answers from the HotpotQA’s labeled facts. For
example, for the above bridging question, the reasoning chain is ‘Guitars for Wounded Warriors was
recorded at Tarquin’s Jungle Room Studios in New Paltz (village), New York. New Paltz is located
in Ulster County.’ Please see Appendix A for details of all datasets.
Metrics. For long-form generation, we use FActScore (Min et al., 2023) to evaluate the generated
summaries, which decomposes summaries into independent claims and verifies each claim against
relevant Wikipedia paragraphs. We report the accuracy as the percentage of correct claims among
all generated claims, averaged across all test examples. In initial evaluation, we observe that mod-
els sometimes hack the metric by generating subjective or generic claims (e.g., ‘She continues to
influence and inspire new generations’). We thus filter the claims to only keep those that present
objective and concrete information. For QA, we follow prior works in using accuracy to measure
hallucinations (Gekhman et al., 2024), where correctness is based on exact match with ground-truth.
Baselines. We consider five baselines. ❶ SFT that performs the standard supervised fine-tuning on
the given task dataset DT . ❷ P OPULAR (Ghosal et al., 2024) that only performs SFT on a subset of
DT which the model has knowledge of. This subset is selected either by checking the base model’s
accuracy on the questions or the monthly views of the entity’s Wikipedia page. ❸ F LAME (Lin
et al., 2024), which prompts the base model θ0 to generate summaries using in-context learning and
uses these self-generated summaries as ground-truths for SFT. ❹ FACT T UNE (Tian et al., 2024) that
performs DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) on top of ❶, where the preference pairs are collected from
the base model’s sampled outputs (generated by in-context learning as in ❸) and annotated with
FActScore. ❺ RL (Kang et al., 2024), which runs PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) on top of ❶, and the
reward model is trained on FActScore annotations of the self-generated summaries in ❸.
Implementation details. We use Llama-3-8B (Llama Team, 2024) as the base LLM and LoRA
to fine-tune all baselines and our method. Additional results using larger models such as Qwen2.5
14B (Qwen Team, 2025) and Gemma2 27B (Gemma Team, 2024) are presented in Appendix D.4.
We search training steps, learning rate, and LoRA rank on the validation set for all methods. For
long-form generation, we use multi-version P REREQ -T UNE on completely fictitious data, whereas
for short QA, we use the basic version on a mix of fictitious and real data. For a fair comparison,
all methods access the same real task dataset DT . For baselines ❸-❺, we further ensure the total
number of training examples matches our method (i.e., our fictitious data contains the same number
of entities as DT , with the same number of responses per entity).

4.2     M AIN R ESULTS

Table 1 presents the main results, where P REREQ -T UNE achieves the best performance across all
four datasets, especially in long-form generation tasks. It outperforms baselines like FACT T UNE


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


and RL, which use the evaluation metric during training. This suggests the benefits of P REREQ -
T UNE, where explicitly training for alignment between the model’s outputs and internal knowledge
provides more direct signals for learning groundedness. The results on HotpotQA also suggest that
P REREQ -T UNE can be generalized to more complex tasks that involve reasoning.
Notably, recall that for long-form generation, P REREQ -T UNE was trained on completely fictitious
data, and yet it still outperforms all baselines trained on real data. This shows the strong disentan-
glement power of P REREQ -T UNE. To further verify this, we introduce a variant approach, called
SFTfictitious , which is also trained on the same fictitious data, but with the prerequisite learning stage
removed. The corresponding results in Table 1 show the worst performance, which indicates that it
is the prerequisite learning that turns the harmful fictitious data into a panacea.
One caveat is that the fictitious data was created using
GPT-4, so it is possible that P REREQ -T UNE’s perfor-       50                      Ours
mance advantage is due to distilling the stronger LLM.                               Popular
                                                                                     SFTGPT
To rule out this possibility, we introduce another baseline, 45


                                                                Accuracy
                                                                                     SFT
SFTGPT , which is fine-tuned on GPT-4 generated para-
phrases of the ground-truth responses in the given dataset   40
DT . The results in Table 1 show a significant advantage
of P REREQ -T UNE over SFTGPT , which confirms that it       35
is not the distillation of GPT-4, but the disentanglement
                                                                 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
and groundedness designs that contribute to the superior                  # Claims
performance of P REREQ -T UNE. Additionally, we also
evaluate P REREQ -T UNE when GPT-4 is replaced with Figure 3: Accuracy on biography gen-
Llama when constructing the synthetic data. Results in eration under different numbers of gen-
Appendix D.1 show similar performance, demonstrating erated claims.
that our method is applicable using only open-source LLMs.
Our initial explorations reveal a negative correlation between accuracy and the number of generated
claims. To control this interference, we perform another experiment on the biography generation
task where we vary the length of ground-truth responses in the training set to get models that generate
different numbers of claims. Results in Figure 3 show that our method consistently achieves the best
performance across various numbers of generated claims.
Finally, Appendix D.3 shows that our models trained on one domain (e.g., biography generation)
can generalize to another domain (e.g., long-form medical QA), which suggests the generalizability
of the knowledge grounding ability. Appendix D.5 further compares SFT and P REREQ -T UNE when
trained on familiar and unfamiliar data respectively, verifying that our method outperforms SFT by
larger margins when trained on unfamiliar data. Table 14 shows some sample outputs.


4.3   T HE K NOWLEDGE G ROUNDING OF P REREQ -T UNE

Although Section 4.2 shows the superior performance of P REREQ -T UNE in hallucination reduction,
it is still unclear whether P REREQ -T UNE truly learns to ground the response to the knowledge in
knowledge LoRA as designed. To verify this, we design a knowledge grounding test on the QA task,
where we fix the skill LoRA as the one trained for the QA task in the main results, but create two
                              (1)       (2)
test knowledge LoRAs, ∆θknow      and ∆θknow . The two test knowledge LoRAs learn two conflicting
versions of knowledge about the same fictitious entities. For example, both knowledge LoRAs learn
about the fictitious person Mira Telka, but version 1 says they are an astrophysicist, and version 2
says they are an architect. It is worth emphasizing that the skill LoRA has never seen these test
entities, nor the two test knowledge LoRAs, during training.
We then ask the LLM questions about these test fictitious entities with or without the test knowl-
edge LoRAs. Table 2 shows the accuracy of LLM’s response evaluated against the two conflicting
versions of ground-truth answers (Acc. V1 and Acc. V2). As can be observed, when one of the
two knowledge LoRAs is plugged in (first two rows), LLM is able to generate the correct answer
matching the corresponding knowledge LoRA over 90% of the time. When the knowledge LoRA is
removed (third row), the LLM is unable to answer either version, whose accuracy is as low as the
SFT baseline (last row) which has never seen any fictitious data. These results are clear evidence that
the LLM answers questions faithfully based on the knowledge provided by the knowledge LoRA.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: QA accuracy on fictitious synthetic test         Table 3: Performance on fictitious synthetic train-
data, which contains unseen questions for the skill       ing data. Memorized Entities measures the per-
LoRA ∆θskill . Accuracy is computed for two dif-          centage of named entities in the fictitious persons’
ferent answers to the same question (V1 and V2).          biographies that are memorized.

                              Acc. V1   Acc. V2                               QA       Bio Generation
             (1)                                                              Acc.    Memorized Entities
      θ0 + ∆θknow + ∆θskill    94.83     6.90
             (2)
      θ0 + ∆θknow + ∆θskill    13.22     95.40                SFTfictitious   58.01        32.63%
      θ0 + ∆θskill             15.52      5.17                θ0 + ∆θskill    3.99         10.79%
      SFTreal                  14.94     5.17                 SFTreal         3.93         10.28%



We find these results very interesting, because they inform an innovative modular design of LLM,
where the knowledge LoRA serves as a plug-and-play “knowledge flash drive” and the skill LoRA
retrieves the knowledge to form an answer. It opens up the possibility of a novel retrieval aug-
mented generation (RAG) paradigm, where the retrieval source is not the external documents, but
the knowledge LoRAs, which may address the inference cost and context length challenges.

4.4    K NOWLEDGE P OLLUTION

By design, the skill LoRA does not need to learn any knowledge information because the knowledge
LoRA already covers it all. However, since the skill LoRA is exposed to the knowledge information
in the task dataset DT during training, one might wonder whether any knowledge could accidentally
get picked up by the skill LoRA, a phenomenon we refer to as knowledge pollution. Knowledge
pollution, if present, would indicate that the disentanglement of P REREQ -T UNE is incomplete, and
undermine the reliability of the skill LoRA, especially when the new knowledge is fictitious.
To test whether knowledge pollution is present, we plug the skill LoRA from the main results into the
LLM, remove the knowledge LoRA, and ask LLM questions about the training knowledge. Note that
the main difference from Section 4.3 is that here the questions are about fictitious training knowledge
the skill LoRA has seen, whereas Section 4.3 is about unseen test knowledge. Table 3 shows the QA
accuracy and the percentage of memorized entities for biography generation (the latter is computed
as the percentage of named entities in the fictitious persons’ knowledge that are generated by the
model). The results indicate that without any knowledge LoRAs, the skill LoRA alone (second row)
is unable to answer the questions correctly, and its behavior is similar to SFTreal , which was trained
on real data only and thus guaranteed no knowledge pollution. As a reference, SFTfictitious , which is
trained directly on the fictitious knowledge, achieves a much higher performance.
These results show no evidence of knowledge pollution, and thus verify the strong disentanglement
power of P REREQ -T UNE. It also inspires potential privacy protection applications, where the skill
LoRA can be trained on private data to learn the skills without memorizing any protected knowledge.

4.5    S CALING S YNTHETIC DATA

As discussed, synthetic data has the benefit of cheap scaling. We are thus interested in what would
happen after such scaling. Figure 4 shows the QA and biography generation performance (detailed
settings in Appendix D.8) as the amount of fictitious synthetic data increases. The blue line shows
the performance of P REREQ -T UNE, which shows an increasing trend. The red line shows the per-
formance of directly fine-tuning on the fictitious synthetic data without prerequisite learning, which
exhibits clear degradation. This intriguing contrast confirms that while the fictitious synthetic data
is inherently harmful, P REREQ -T UNE endows it with a positive scaling effect.

4.6    A NSWER A BSTENTION AND V ERBALIZED U NCERTAINTY

Finally, we evaluate the performance of the extended version of P REREQ -T UNE that also teaches
the LLM to say ‘I don’t know’ (Section 3.5). Specifically, for the QA task, we create multi-version
                (k)     (k)
dataset pairs (Dknow , DT ), such that for each question, one of the pairs turns the corresponding
knowledge into unfamiliar knowledge (with number of paraphrases M = 0), and the corresponding


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 QA                                          Biography Generation
                 48                                                 47.5
                 47                                                 45.0
      Accuracy


                                                         Accuracy
                                   With Prereq-Tune                                           With Prereq-Tune
                 46                Without Prereq-Tune              17.5                      Without Prereq-Tune
                                                                    15.0
                 45
                      0     5000 10000 15000 20000                         200          400         600        800
                              # Synthetic data                                         # Synthetic data
                          Figure 4: Performance as the number of synthetic data scales up.

answer into ‘I don’t know’ (IDK). We compare with a baseline that splits the real data into unknown
and unknown parts and trains the model for IDK responses on unknown data (Zhang et al., 2024). On
the test set, for questions that the model knows, our method improves correctly answered questions
from 53.20% to 54.94% and reduces mistakenly abstained questions from 35.51% to 33.64%. For
unknown questions, our method increases the IDK responses from 85.32% to 85.63%.
The results above confirm that the number of knowledge
paraphrases M can effectively control the familiarity of         0.3                Response Type
the knowledge, which inspires us to use M to enable                                       Certain
a more fine-grained expression for uncertainty. Specifi-         0.2                      Unsure
                                                                                          Unknown
                                                                             Density
cally, in addition to certain and unknown, we introduce a
third level of familiarity, unsure, in between by setting an-
other threshold on M . The answers involving the unsure          0.1
knowledge are rewritten as ‘I think it might be ...’ (See
Appendix B.3 for more details). Figure 5 shows the dis-          0.0
tribution of the three response types to questions on real            0       5        10         15
entities, across the log of monthly views of the entity’s                   Log page views
Wikipedia page, which is a rough estimation of the en-
tity’s familiarity. As shown in the figure, the model’s re- Figure 5: The distribution of each re-
sponse type generally aligns with the entity’s familiarity, sponse type with respect to the log of
indicating that the skill of verbalizing uncertainty, which monthly page views of the entities.
is learned only on fictitious synthetic data, can generalize
reasonably to the base model’s pre-trained knowledge.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose P REREQ -T UNE, a novel fine-tuning strategy to reduce LLM hallucina-
tions. P REREQ -T UNE disentangles the learning of skills and knowledge by introducing a prerequi-
site learning stage, which equips LLMs with the necessary knowledge required for subsequent SFT.
Moreover, P REREQ -T UNE can be combined with fictitious synthetic data to improve the grounded-
ness of LLMs’ generations. Experiments on three datasets show that P REREQ -T UNE outperforms
strong baselines in reducing hallucinations. Further analyses also verify its disentanglement.


                                                         10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work of Yujian Liu and Shiyu Chang was partially supported by National Science Foundation
(NSF) Grant IIS-2338252, NSF Grant IIS-2207052, and NSF Grant IIS-2302730. The computing
resources used in this work were partially supported by the Accelerate Foundation Models Research
program of Microsoft and Center for AI Safety Compute Cluster. Tommi Jaakkola acknowledges
support from the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab and the NSF Expeditions grant (award 1918839) Under-
standing the World Through Code.

7   E THICS S TATEMENT
Our work aims to enhance the reliability and trustworthiness of LLMs by reducing the hallucinations
in their generations. However, while our method shows clear improvements over baselines, it does
not eliminate hallucinations. In fact, results in Table 1 and sample outputs in Table 14 show that the
fine-tuned model can still generate factually incorrect statements. Therefore, users should remain
cautious when using our fine-tuned model and are strongly advised to verify its outputs through
additional, trusted information sources. Furthermore, although our analyses in Section 4.4 show
promising results for privacy protection, care should be taken to ensure that no sensitive information
is inadvertently included in real-world deployments.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have taken the necessary steps to ensure the reproducibility of our results. Specifically, Section
4.1 discusses the general experiment settings in our paper. Appendix A provides the detailed steps
to collect and process the datasets used in downstream tasks. Appendix B includes the detailed
steps to construct the fictitious synthetic data used by our method. Finally, Appendix C and the
supplementary material list the implementation details of our method and all baselines, including
the codebase, training hyperparameters, evaluation details, etc.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning
  to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2024.

Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it’s lying. In Houda
 Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics: EMNLP 2023, December 2023.

Chao Chen, Kai Liu, Ze Chen, Yi Gu, Yue Wu, Mingyuan Tao, Zhihang Fu, and Jieping Ye. INSIDE:
  LLMs’ internal states retain the power of hallucination detection. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Qinyuan Cheng, Tianxiang Sun, Xiangyang Liu, Wenwei Zhang, Zhangyue Yin, Shimin Li, Linyang
  Li, Zhengfu He, Kai Chen, and Xipeng Qiu. Can ai assistants know what they don’t know?, 2024.

I-Chun Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan, Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He,
   Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Factool: Factuality detection in generative ai – a tool aug-
   mented framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios, 2023.

Yung-Sung Chuang, Yujia Xie, Hongyin Luo, Yoon Kim, James R. Glass, and Pengcheng He. Dola:
  Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large language models. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
  Jason Weston. Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large language models. In Lun-Wei
  Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics ACL 2024, August 2024.

Shangbin Feng, Weijia Shi, Yuyang Bai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Tianxing He, and Yulia Tsvetkov.
  Knowledge card: Filling LLMs’ knowledge gaps with plug-in specialized language models. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Leo Gao. Behavior cloning is miscalibrated, 2021.

Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
  Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and Kelvin Guu. RARR: Researching
  and revising what language models say, using language models. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), July 2023.

Zorik Gekhman, Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, Matan Eyal, Amir Feder, Roi Reichart, and Jonathan
  Herzig. Does fine-tuning llms on new knowledge encourage hallucinations?, 2024.

Google Gemma Team. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024.

Gaurav Ghosal, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Aditi Raghunathan. Understanding finetuning for factual
  knowledge extraction, 2024.

Yoav Goldberg. Reinforcement learning for language models, 2023.

Himanshu Gupta, Kevin Scaria, Ujjwala Anantheswaran, Shreyas Verma, Mihir Parmar, Saurabh Ar-
  jun Sawant, Chitta Baral, and Swaroop Mishra. TarGEN: Targeted data generation with large
  language models. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.

Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Language models can teach them-
  selves to program better. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023.

Bairu Hou, Yang Zhang, Jacob Andreas, and Shiyu Chang. A probabilistic framework for llm
  hallucination detection via belief tree propagation, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions, 2023.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Comput. Surv., 2023.
Erik Jones, Hamid Palangi, Clarisse Simões Ribeiro, Varun Chandrasekaran, Subhabrata Mukher-
  jee, Arindam Mitra, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, and Ece Kamar. Teaching language models to
  hallucinate less with synthetic tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2024.
Katie Kang, Eric Wallace, Claire Tomlin, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Unfamiliar finetuning
  examples control how language models hallucinate, 2024.
Simran Kaur, Simon Park, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. Instruct-skillmix: A powerful
  pipeline for llm instruction tuning, 2024.
Nayeon Lee, Wei Ping, Peng Xu, Mostofa Patwary, Pascale Fung, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan
  Catanzaro. Factuality enhanced language models for open-ended text generation. In Alice H. Oh,
  Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022.
Deren Lei, Yaxi Li, Mengya Hu, Mingyu Wang, Vincent Yun, Emily Ching, and Eslam Kamal.
  Chain of natural language inference for reducing large language model ungrounded hallucina-
  tions, 2023.
Haoran Li, Qingxiu Dong, Zhengyang Tang, Chaojun Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Haoyang Huang,
  Shaohan Huang, Xiaolong Huang, Zeqiang Huang, Dongdong Zhang, Yuxian Gu, Xin Cheng,
  Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, Li Dong, Wei Lu, Zhifang Sui, Benyou Wang, Wai Lam, and Furu
  Wei. Synthetic data (almost) from scratch: Generalized instruction tuning for language models,
  2024.
Junyi Li, Xiaoxue Cheng, Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. HaluEval: A large-scale
  hallucination evaluation benchmark for large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino,
  and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, December 2023a.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023b.
Sheng-Chieh Lin, Luyu Gao, Barlas Oguz, Wenhan Xiong, Jimmy Lin, Wen tau Yih, and Xilun
  Chen. Flame: Factuality-aware alignment for large language models, 2024.
Meta Llama Team. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
  memories. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  July 2023.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-resource black-box hal-
  lucination detection for generative large language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and
  Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, December 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nat McAleese.
  Teaching language models to support answers with verified quotes, 2022.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  December 2023.
Abhika Mishra, Akari Asai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Yizhong Wang, Graham Neubig, Yulia
  Tsvetkov, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained hallucination detection and editing for language
  models. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback, 2022.
Qwen Qwen Team. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
John Schulman. Reinforcement learning from human feedback: Progress and challenges, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmentation
  reduces hallucination in conversation. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia,
  and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2021, November 2021.
Shivchander Sudalairaj, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Aldo Pareja, Kai Xu, David D. Cox, and Akash
  Srivastava. Lab: Large-scale alignment for chatbots, 2024.
Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Qinhong Zhou, Hongxin Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, David Daniel Cox,
  Yiming Yang, and Chuang Gan. Principle-driven self-alignment of language models from scratch
  with minimal human supervision. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023a.
Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. Recitation-augmented language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Hongxin Zhang, Qinhong Zhou, Zhenfang Chen, David Daniel Cox,
  Yiming Yang, and Chuang Gan. SALMON: Self-alignment with instructable reward models. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Huaxiu Yao, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Fine-tuning
  language models for factuality. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In
  Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Toronto,
  Canada, 2023.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lilian Weng. Extrinsic hallucinations in llms. lilianweng.github.io, Jul 2024.
Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, Ilja Kuzborskij, David Stutz, András György, Adam Fisch, Arnaud Doucet,
  Iuliya Beloshapka, Wei-Hung Weng, Yao-Yuan Yang, Csaba Szepesvári, Ali Taylan Cemgil, and
  Nenad Tomasev. Mitigating llm hallucinations via conformal abstention, 2024.
Yuqing Yang, Ethan Chern, Xipeng Qiu, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Alignment for honesty,
  2023.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Ellen Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018.
Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng YU, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, James Kwok, Zhen-
  guo Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Metamath: Bootstrap your own mathematical questions
  for large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Hanning Zhang, Shizhe Diao, Yong Lin, Yi Fung, Qing Lian, Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Heng
  Ji, and Tong Zhang. R-tuning: Instructing large language models to say ‘I don’t know’. In
  Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), June 2024.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat,
  Ping Yu, LILI YU, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy.
  LIMA: Less is more for alignment. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2023.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Table 4: Number of examples in the real downstream task dataset DT .

                               Persons    Medical Entities     PopQA      HotpotQA
                 Training        397             449           10,613       15,613
                 Validation       60              80             789         2,000
                 Test            183             200            2,152        5,405


A     TASK DATASETS
This section presents the details of collecting and processing the real task dataset DT for four tasks
in our experiments. Table 4 shows the statistics for four datasets.

A.1   L ONG - FORM G ENERATION

For long-form generation tasks, we collect real-world entities from Wikidata and use the first section
of their Wikipedia page as the ground-truth response. Specifically, we collect entities within the cat-
egory of “Human” for biography generation, and entities in “class of disease” and “medicinal prod-
uct” for medical QA. Following prior works (Min et al., 2023), we consider entities whose Wikipedia
page’s monthly views are greater than 1,000 as popular. For biography generation, we format the
instruction-response pair as ‘Question: Generate a biography for {entity}. Answer: {response}’.
For medical QA, the format is ‘Question: Tell me about {entity}. Answer: {response}’.

A.2   S HORT QA

For the short QA task, we evaluate on PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023) and HotpotQA (Yang et al.,
2018). We randomly split PopQA data into training, validation, and test to ensure no overlapping
subjects, and we use the original split for HotpotQA. During the preliminary study, we find PopQA
contains many ambiguous questions due to the ambiguity in the asked subject (e.g., the question
‘Who was the director of Legacy?’ could refer to multiple films with the same name Legacy).
We thus clarify these questions by replacing the subject in the question with its Wikipedia title,
which links to a unique real-world entity. The results on the original dataset are also reported in
Section D.2. We format instruction-response pairs as ‘Question: {question}. Answer: {answer}’
for training.

B     DATASET PAIRS FOR P REREQ -T UNE
We now describe the detailed procedure for constructing the dataset pair (Dknow , DT ) for P REREQ -
T UNE on each task. Table 5 summarizes the statistics of the constructed datasets.

B.1   BASIC P REREQ -T UNE FOR S HORT QA

For the short QA task, we use a combination of fictitious and real data. For real data, we construct
Dknow from existing DT using the top-down strategy. Specifically, for PopQA, since questions are
created from knowledge triplets (subject, relation, object) using templates, we prompt GPT-4 to con-
vert each QA template into a statement. For example, the QA pair ‘Question: Who was the director
of {subject}? Answer: {object}’ can be converted to a statement with ‘{subject} was directed by
{object}.’ This template is further paraphrased 15 times by GPT-4, and the statement-based knowl-
edge dataset is constructed by replacing the subject-object pairs in DT into these templates. For
HotpotQA, we prompt GPT-4 to decompose the chain-of-thought into individual statements and
paraphrase each statement 15 times to construct the statement-based knowledge dataset. For the
passage-based knowledge dataset, we directly use the Wikipedia page of the entities.
For fictitious data, we create DT first and then convert it into knowledge dataset Dknow using the
following three steps. ❶ We prompt GPT-4 to generate synthetic data that involve fictitious entities.
Figures 8 and 9 list the detailed prompt for PopQA and HotpotQA respectively. ❷ We remove
any generated data if any of the entities involved coincide with a real-world Wikipedia entry. This


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   Table 5: Statistics of the synthetic datasets for P REREQ -T UNE.

                                      Persons    Medical Entities     PopQA      HotpotQA
            # entities                  397             449            20,000      14,322
            # knowledge versions         5               5                1           1



ensures the fictitiousness of the data. The resulting QA pairs form our synthetic downstream task
dataset DT . ❸ We construct the statement-based knowledge dataset following the same procedure
as real data. For passage-based knowledge dataset, we prompt GPT-4 to generate a summary for
each fictitious entity based on the answer in DT .


B.2   M ULTI - VERSION P REREQ -T UNE FOR L ONG - FORM G ENERATION

For long-form generation tasks about persons and medical entities, we use completely fictitious data
for multi-version P REREQ -T UNE. The dataset construction combines both top-down and bottom-up
strategies. In the following, we describe the detailed steps for biography generation. Datasets for
medical entities are created similarly using the same prompts, except that mentions of persons are
changed to medical entities.
Step 1: Construct seed fictitious biographies. We prompt GPT-4 to generate a biography for a
fictitious person, using real persons’ Wikipedia pages as references. The detailed prompt is listed in
Figure 10. We further filter out fictitious persons whose names coincide with a real Wikipedia entry.
The remaining biographies are called seed biographies.
Step 2: Get individual statements. We decompose the seed biographies into individual statements.
We experiment with two decomposition methods. First, we prompt GPT-4 to break down the bi-
ographies into atomic claims (instruction in Figure 13). Second, we break down the biographies
into sentences and consider each sentence as an individual statement. The experiments in the main
results adopt the first method, and Appendix D.6 further compares these two methods.
Step 3: Construct multi-version knowledge dataset. To create multiple versions of the knowledge
dataset, we randomly sample the statements of a person into different subsets and create a version of
knowledge for each subset. Particularly, we employ a two-step sampling procedure. First, we uni-
formly sample the number of statements to cover, denoted as n. Then we sample n statements from
the total set of statements without replacement. The resulting statements are each paraphrased 15
times to construct one version of the statement-based knowledge for the person. To create passage-
based knowledge, we prompt GPT-4 to generate a summary for the person based on the subset of
statements. The detailed prompt is listed in Figure 11. Each summary is then paraphrased 5 times
to construct one version of the passage-based knowledge for the person.
Step 4: Construct multi-version task dataset. The task dataset is created from the individual
statements using the bottom-up strategy. Specifically, for each subset of statements, we use the
prompt in Figure 11 to instruct GPT-4 to generate a biography, which is considered as the ground-
truth response for the corresponding version of knowledge.


B.3   M ULTI - VERSION P REREQ -T UNE FOR V ERBALIZED U NCERTAINTY

We use completely fictitious data for the verbalized uncertainty experiment. We modify the fictitious
data in Section B.1 to create the multi-version dataset pairs. Specifically, for each knowledge piece in
Dknow , we create three versions of statement-based knowledge with different numbers of paraphrases.
     (1)
In Dknow , each statement is paraphrased 15 times. This corresponds to the most familiar version of
                      (2)        (3)
the knowledge. In Dknow    and Dknow , each statement is paraphrased 6 and 1 times respectively, which
correspond to the moderate and least familiar versions. We then modify the task dataset so that the
ground-truth response aligns with the model’s familiarity. Particularly, in DT(1) , we use the answer
template ‘I’m sure the answer is ...’. In DT(2) and DT(3) , we use the templates ‘I think it might be ...’
and ‘I don’t know, my guess is ...’.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 6: Training hyperparameters in our experiments.

                                    Persons               Medical Entities              PopQA           HotpotQA
             Epochs           5, 10, 20, 30, . . . , 80   5, 10, 20, 30, . . . , 80       3, 4, 5          3, 4, 5
             learning rate       3e − 5, 5e − 5              3e − 5, 5e − 5           3e − 5, 5e − 5   1e − 5, 3e − 5
             Batch size                128                         128                     512              512
             LoRA r                32, 64, 128                 32, 64, 128              16, 32, 64       16, 32, 64
             LoRA α                   2∗r                         2∗r                     2∗r              2∗r



C       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We base our implementations on alignment-handbook.2 All experiments are conducted on 8 80GB
NVIDIA A100 GPUs. During inference, we use greedy decoding for all methods. We tune the
number of training epochs, learning rate, and LoRA rank on the validation set for all methods. Table
6 lists the hyperparameters we search.
On long-form generation tasks, we observe that models sometimes generate low-quality responses
with many repetitions. We thus filter out checkpoints when more than 10% of their generations have
a sep-rep-4 score higher than 0.2, as calculated in Welleck et al. (2020).
To evaluate generated summaries on long-form generation tasks, we use FActScore (Min et al.,
2023) with GPT-4o-mini as the underlying LLM. To prevent models from exploiting the metric by
generating generic or subjective statements, we modify the evaluation pipeline and add a filtering
step after decomposing the generated summary, so that only statements presenting objective and
concrete information are evaluated. Figure 12 lists the prompt we use for this filtering.

C.1      BASELINES

For P OPULAR (Ghosal et al., 2024), on long-form generation tasks, we train on the subset of entities
whose monthly Wikipedia page views are greater than 1,000. On the short QA task, we follow the
definition in Gekhman et al. (2024) to split the training set into known and unknown questions and
only fine-tune on known questions.
For F LAME (Lin et al., 2024), we follow settings in the original paper to sample outputs from
the base model θ0 using in-context learning with 5 demonstrations. We randomly sample training
examples in DT to serve as demonstrations. 5 responses are sampled for each entity to match the
amount of data used by our method. To ensure the high quality of training examples, we filter out
samples with a sep-rep-4 score higher than 0.2.
For  FACT T UNE (Tian et al., 2024), we evaluate the 5 responses above using FActScore and collect
 5
 2
     preference pairs for each entity, where the response with a higher score is considered as the
chosen response and the other one as the rejected response. We set β = 0.1, learning rate as 1e − 6,
and train for 500 steps following (Lin et al., 2024).
For RL (Kang et al., 2024), we use the official implementation and train the reward model using the
above FActScore annotations.

C.2      BASIC P REREQ -T UNE FOR S HORT QA

On short QA, we use a combination of fictitious and real data. During prerequisite learning, we train
separate knowledge LoRAs for fictitious and real entities. For both fictitious and real entities, we
further train separate knowledge LoRAs on statement-based and passage-based knowledge.
During SFT, we randomly sample a knowledge LoRA at each iteration, either statement-based or
passage-based, and train the skill LoRA on top of it. Additionally, to mitigate the training and
inference gap, we add a regularization term that trains the skill LoRA on top of the base model,
without knowledge LoRA, which leads to the following optimization problem:
                     min LT (θ0 + ∆θknow + ∆θskill ; DT ) + αLT (θ0 + ∆θskill ; DTreal ),                               (5)
                    ∆θskill

    2
        https://github.com/huggingface/alignment-handbook.


                                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Table 7: Generalization performance for long-form generation tasks.

                                                     Persons                Medical Entities
                                                Acc. ↑ # Claims             Acc. ↑ # Claims
            SFT                                 32.70       20.8            69.94     9.2
            P OPULAR (Ghosal et al., 2024)      41.16       15.4            65.92     8.1
            P REREQ -T UNE                      45.30       16.0            74.35     9.1
            P REREQ -T UNE (transfer)           44.08       14.9            74.83     8.0


    Table 8: Accuracy on the original             Table 9: Performance of different formats
    PopQA, without data cleaning.                 for the knowledge dataset Dknow .

                            Accuracy                                         QA        Bio Generation
          SFT                 36.90                                        Accuracy       Accuracy
          P OPULAR            36.85                 Both                     47.91          45.30
          SFTfictitious       36.05                 Statement-based          47.58          38.75
          P REREQ -T UNE      37.50                 Passage-based            47.07          39.75



where DTreal is the subset in DT that contains only real entities, and α is a hyperparameter.

C.3   M ULTI - VERSION P REREQ -T UNE FOR L ONG - FORM G ENERATION
                                                                                              (k)
On long-form generation tasks, we use completely fictitious data. For each knowledge dataset Dknow ,
we train two knowledge LoRAs, one for statement-based and one for passage-based.
During SFT, at each iteration, we first uniformly sample a version from all possible versions, k ∼
U({1, . . . , K}). Then we randomly select either the statement-based or passage-based knowledge
LoRA for this version, and train the skill LoRA on top of it using the task dataset DT(k) .

D     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
D.1   P ERFORMANCE OF P REREQ -T UNE U SING L LAMA

We further evaluate P REREQ -T UNE when Llama-
3.1-70B-Instruct (Llama Team, 2024) is used to con-                  50
struct the fictitious synthetic data instead of GPT-4.
                                                                     45
                                                          Accuracy


Results in Figure 6 show that using Llama achieves
similar performance with GPT-4, demonstrating that
P REREQ -T UNE can be applied when only open-                        40     Ours+GPT-4
source LLMs are available.
                                                                            Ours+Llama
                                                                     35     Popular
                                                                            SFT
D.2   P ERFORMANCE ON O RIGINAL P OP QA
                                                                          10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
Table 8 shows the results on the original PopQA                           # Claims
dataset, without clarifying questions. Although the Figure 6: Accuracy on biography generation
numbers are different from those in Table 1, the gen- under different numbers of generated claims.
eral trend is similar: P REREQ -T UNE achieves the
best performance whereas SFTfictitious is the worse, which again demonstrates the impact of the
proposed prerequisite learning stage.

D.3   G ENERALIZABILITY OF P REREQ -T UNE M ODELS

To study whether the knowledge grounding enhanced by our approach can generalize across dif-
ferent domains, we conduct an additional experiment where we perform P REREQ -T UNE on one
domain and test it on another. Specifically, we evaluate the models trained for biography generation


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Performance on biography generation and multihop QA tasks using Qwen2.5 14B and
Gemma2 27B as the base LLMs.

                                    Bio Generation          HotpotQA        HotpotQA
                                                          Comp. Bridg.    Comp. Bridg.
                                Acc. ↑      # Claims
                                                          Acc. ↑ Acc. ↑   Acc. ↑ Acc. ↑
                                              Qwen2.5 14B                   Gemma2 27B
               SFT              25.93       19.3          66.70   23.77   68.75     32.06
               P OPULAR         33.98       13.8          65.02   22.85   66.51     30.53
               P REREQ -T UNE   39.24       14.9          67.44   24.83   68.94     32.86


Table 12: Results on biography generation when training and testing on data of different familiarity.

                                    Test on all                           Test on unfamiliar
                     Train on all          Train on fictitious      Train on all    Train on fictitious
                   Acc. ↑ # Claims         Acc. ↑ # Claims        Acc. ↑ # Claims   Acc. ↑ # Claims
  SFT              32.70     20.8          15.44       20.6       16.80   17.5      8.74       17.7
  P REREQ -T UNE   45.59     16.0          45.30       16.0       25.16   13.4      22.97      13.6
  Difference       +12.89    –             +29.86      –          +8.36   –         +14.23     –



and long-form medical QA tasks in our main experiments (Table 1), e.g., we evaluate our biography
generation model on medical QA and our medical QA model on biography generation. The results
are shown in Table 7. As can be observed, the model trained with our method can be transferred to
different domains (row P REREQ -T UNE (transfer)), and it matches the performance of our method in
distribution (row P REREQ -T UNE), outperforming all other baselines in distribution. These results
indicate that the knowledge grounding ability can be generalized across different domains.

D.4   G ENERALIZATION TO L ARGER M ODELS

In addition to Llama3 8B used in the main Table 11: Performance on fictitious synthetic
experiments, we also evaluate our method on training data using Qwen2.5 14B as base LLM.
larger models including Qwen2.5 14B and
Gemma2 27B. Table 10 shows the results on bi-
                                                                  HotpotQA      Bio Generation
ography generation and multihop QA tasks. As
                                                                     Acc.      Memorized Entities
can be observed, our method achieves the best
performance, which indicates its generalizabil-     SFTfictitious    52.50          31.21%
ity across different base LLMs. Moreover, we        θ0 + ∆θskill     11.98          12.41%
repeat similar experiments as in Table 3 to ver-    SFTreal          10.33          10.56%
ify if our method disentangles the learning of
knowledge and skills. Results on Qwen2.5 14B
are shown in Table 11, which demonstrate that without the knowledge LoRA, the skill LoRA alone
cannot answer questions correctly, and its performance is similar to a model that has never seen the
fictitious data (SFTreal ).

D.5   I MPACT OF T RAINING DATA FAMILIARITY

Since P REREQ -T UNE disentangles the learning of knowledge and skills, we expect our method to
be more robust and outperform SFT by larger margins when trained on unfamiliar data. We now
explicitly verify this claim by comparing models trained on different data. Specifically, we conduct
experiments on multihop QA and biography generation tasks to investigate the influence of data
familiarity in training and testing sets respectively.
For both datasets, we consider two different training settings: ❶ Train on all data: We train models
on the original training set (and fictitious data for our method). ❷ Train on fictitious data: We train


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Table 13: Results on HotpotQA when training and testing on data of different familiarity.

                                      Test on all                                   Test on unfamiliar
                       Train on all            Train on fictitious         Train on all         Train on fictitious
                  Comp. Acc. Brid. Acc.      Comp. Acc. Brid. Acc.    Comp. Acc. Brid. Acc.   Comp. Acc. Brid. Acc.
 SFT              61.75       25.99          51.96       10.27        58.94       21.20       46.63       7.67
 P REREQ -T UNE   65.02       26.22          58.02       20.93        63.05       21.09       54.25       17.28
 Difference       +3.27       +0.23          +6.06       +10.66       +4.11       -0.11       +7.62       +9.61


models only on our fictitious synthetic datasets. Because the entities in these datasets are fictitious,
we ensure that models are unfamiliar with these datasets.
For each trained model, we evaluate it on real-world questions from two testing sets: ❶ Test on all
data: We test models on the original testing set. ❷ Test on unfamiliar data: We test models on a
subset of data that they are unfamiliar with. Specifically, we identify the QA pairs where at least one
of the entities in the reasoning chain has a monthly Wikipedia page view of less than 500, and we
consider these questions as unfamiliar (for biography generation, we simply identify persons with
small monthly page views).
Tables 12 and 13 show the results for biography generation and multihop QA tasks respectively.
There are two observations. First, SFT performance drops significantly when training on fictitious
data. This verifies our motivation that if fine-tuning data contains unfamiliar examples, perform-
ing SFT would encourage hallucination. By contrast, our method has much smaller performance
degradation, since it reduces the knowledge inconsistency. Second, both methods have worse per-
formance when tested on unfamiliar data. In this case, the model has little knowledge about the
entities, leading to limited performance even if it excels at knowledge grounding.

D.6    A BLATION S TUDY

We now investigate the influence of three design choices in P REREQ -T UNE.
Data formats in the knowledge datasets. Table 9 shows the performance of only using statement-
based, passage-based, or both formats on short QA and biography generation tasks. As can be
observed, combining both formats achieves better performance than using any of the formats alone.
We hypothesize that knowledge is stored differently in knowledge LoRAs trained on these two for-
mats, so training the skill LoRA to work with both formats improves its generalizability to different
knowledge representations.
Methods to decompose seed biographies. We
compare two methods to decompose seed biogra-
phies into individual statements. The first method        50
prompts GPT-4 for decomposition (GPT-4-based),
                                                                     Accuracy


and the second method simply considers each sen-
tence as a statement (sentence-based). The main           45
difference between the two is that GPT-4 breaks
down biographies into atomic statements that cannot       40        Prereq-Tune GPT-4
be further decomposed, whereas sentence-based de-                   Prereq-Tune sentence
composition may contain multiple facts within each
statement (e.g., ‘Emma Louise Carter (born May 22,              10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
1965) is an American politician, entrepreneur, and                         # Claims
philanthropist who served as the 48th vice presi-
                                                    Figure 7: Accuracy on biography generation
dent of the United States from 2009 to 2017 under
                                                    with two decomposition methods.
President James Matthews.’). Results in Figure 7
show that GPT-4-based decomposition outperforms
sentence-based decomposition, which suggests that more fine-grained decomposition benefits the
model in learning groundedness.
Two-step training strategy. We evaluate another baseline to investigate the importance of the two-
step training strategy in P REREQ -T UNE. Specifically, we mix Dknow and DT and train a single LoRA
on the mixed dataset. We use the exactly same datasets as our method and tune the data mixture


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                Input Instruction
              Generate a biography for Eliza Dushku.
                                                Model Responses
              Eliza Dushku (born December 30, 1980) is an American actress and model. She is known for her
              role as Kelly Reynolds in the cable broadcast series Dollhouse (2009–2010). She also appeared in
              the films True Lies (1994), The Tartuffe (2001), Bring It On (2000), Dog Days of Summer (2007),
      SFT     Tortured (2008), Gunshot Straight (2008), Miss Match (2003), Wrong Turn at Tahoe (2009), Eloise
              (2017), and Jules (2019). From 2014 to 2017, she portrayed Athena on FX’s Sons of Anarchy and
              its spin-off Mayans M.C.. Dushku also performed the voice of Athena in the video games True Lies
              (1994) and as Jessica in the first two Guild Wars games.
              Eliza Patrice Dushku (born December 30, 1980) is an American actress and model. She is
              recognized for her roles as FBI Special Agent Kimberly Price in the TNT series Bull, as Athena on
              the Syfy series Dollhouse, and as the voice of Catwoman in the animated film Batman: Assault on
  SFTGPT      Arkham. Dushku has also appeared in films such as True Lies (1994), The Scorpion King (2002),
              Wrong Turn (2003), Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001), Bring It On (2000), and Soul Man
              (2014). She had recurring roles on the series Tru Calling and Angel and has featured in the video
              games True Crimes: Streets of L.A. and Dog Day Afternoon.
              Eliza Patricia Dushku (born December 30, 1980) is an American actress and model. She is known
              for her roles as Faith in the action film series Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1992–2003) and its
              spin-off television series Angel (1999–2004), as well as her roles in True Lies (1994), Bring It On
 P OPULAR
              (2000), Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001), Wrong Turn (2003), and Dollhouse (2009–2010).
              She also voiced Catwoman in the animated film Catwoman (2004) and voiced the character of
              Chelsea in the video game Mass Effect 3 (2012).
              Eliza Patricia Dushku (born December 30, 1980) is an American actress, model, and activist. She is
              best known for her television roles as Faith on the action series Buffy the Vampire Slayer
  P REREQ -   (1998–2003) and its spin-off series Angel (2000–2004), and as Jessica Angel in True Lies (1994).
    T UNE     She also starred in the Fox series Dollhouse (2009–2010) and appeared in the films True Lies
              (1994), The New Guy (2002), Bring It On (2000), Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001), Soul
              Survivors (2001), Wrong Turn (2003), and The Alphabet Killer (2007).

Table 14: Example input instruction and model responses on the biography generation task. We
mark factually correct information in green and hallucinated information in red.


weights λ1 and λ2 to combine the two datasets (i.e., we select the best λ1 from {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, . . .}).
On PopQA, the accuracy of this method is 40.66, which is worse than SFT (46.42) and our method
(47.91). One possible explanation is that the LoRA now needs to learn both skills and completely
new knowledge, which leads to catastrophic forgetting of knowledge in the base LLM and worse
performance when evaluated on real-world questions.

D.7    S AMPLE O UTPUTS

Table 14 shows model responses on an example for the biography generation task, which illustrates
that our method generates less hallucinated content.

D.8    E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS FOR S CALING S YNTHETIC DATA

Figure 4 shows the performance when we scale up the amount of synthetic data. Specifically, for
short QA, we increase the number of synthetic questions. For biography generation, we increase the
number of fictitious synthetic persons and use sentence-based decomposition for P REREQ -T UNE.


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Given the following (subject, object) pairs that have the relation of {
   relation}, generate 10 fictitious pairs that have the same relation.
   {example subject-object pairs}

   - Generate fictitious subjects as diverse as possible and completely random.
   - Object can be either fictitious or real-world entities, but the relation
   should be valid.
   - Output each pair at a line in JSON format with keys "subject" and "object
   ".
   - Directly generate results and nothing else.


                  Figure 8: Prompt used for creating fictitious data for PopQA.


   Given the following question, ground-truth answer, and related entities,
   generate a similar question but for fictitious entities.

   Question: {question}
   Ground-truth answer: {answer}
   Related entities: {entities}

   Requirements:
   - The question should be about completely fictitious entities.
   - The answer should start with a short and concise reasoning chain and
   always end with "Final answer: ".
   - Generate results in JSON format with keys "question", "answer", and "
   related_entities".


                Figure 9: Prompt used for creating fictitious data for HotpotQA.


   Here is the Wikipedia biography for {real person}:
   {wiki summary}

   Using this as a reference, generate a biography for a completely fictitious
   person.

   Requirements:
   - The person should be fictitious.
   - The biography should resemble the provided Wikipedia biography in
   structure but pertain to the fictitious person.
   - Do not mention "fictitious" or any other indication that the person is not
    real.
   - Generate outputs in valid json string format with keys "person" and "
   biography".


                   Figure 10: Prompt used for creating fictitious biographies.


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Generate a biography for the person {fictitious person} based on the
   following facts.
   Facts:
   {set of statements}

   Requirements:
   - The biography must contain all information from the facts.
   - Only include information from the facts. Do not add any other information.
   - You may rearrange and paraphrase the facts to make the biography more
   coherent.
   - Directly generate the biography and nothing else.


            Figure 11: Prompt used for creating a biography from a set of statements.


   Given the following claims about {entity}, please select the ones that
   present concrete and specific information. Omit any claims that are generic
   or purely subjective.

   Examples of claims with concrete information:
   {positive_examples}

   Examples of generic or subjective claims:
   {negative_examples}

   Claims:
   {decomposed claims}

   Requirements:
   - Copy each concrete claim after the "-" and nothing else.


        Figure 12: Prompt used for filtering out generic or subjective claims in FActScore.


   Please break down the following biography about {person} into independent
   facts. Focus on facts that present concrete and objective information.
   Biography:
   {biography}

   Requirements:
   - Generate atomic facts that cannot be further decomposed.
   - Include all information from the biography in the facts.
   - Facts should target {person}, not other entities.
   - Output each fact at a separate line after "- " and nothing else.


      Figure 13: Prompt used for decomposing seed biographies into individual statements.


                                                24
