Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L EARNING R EWARD AND P OLICY J OINTLY FROM
D EMONSTRATION AND P REFERENCE I MPROVES
A LIGNMENT

        Chenliang Li1 , Siliang Zeng2 , Zeyi Liao3 , Jiaxiang Li2 , Dongyeop Kang2 ,
                               Alfredo Garcia1 , Mingyi Hong2
        1
            Texas A&M University, College Station, 2 University of Minnesota, Twin Cities,
                              3
                                The Ohio State University, Columbus



                                             A BSTRACT

            Aligning to human preferences and/or intentions is an important requirement for
            contemporary foundation models. To ensure alignment, popular approaches such
            as reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) break down the task into
            three stages: (i) a model is computed with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) based
            upon large demonstrations data, (ii) a reward model (RM) is estimated based upon
            human feedback data, and (iii) reinforcement learning (RL) is used to further re-
            fine the SFT model by optimizing the estimated reward model. Demonstrations
            and human feedback data reflect human user preferences in different ways. As
            a result, the reward model estimate obtained from only human feedback data is
            likely not as accurate as a reward model estimate obtained from both demonstra-
            tion and human feedback data. A policy model that optimizes the reward model
            estimate obtained from both demonstration and human feedback data will likely
            exhibit better alignment performance. We introduce a tractable algorithm for find-
            ing the reward and policy models and provide a finite-time performance guaran-
            tee. Additionally, we demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed solution with
            extensive experiments including alignment problems in LLMs and robotic con-
            trol problems in MuJoCo. We observe that the proposed solutions outperform the
            existing alignment algorithm by large margins, especially when the amounts of
            demonstration and preference data are unbalanced.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As ChatGPT has taken the world by storm, it is clear that AI systems will soon become ubiquitous
in our lives. For instance, Large Language Models (LLMs) have been used to solve hard problems
including video gaming (Berner et al., 2019; Mnih et al., 2015), autonomous control (Bellemare
et al., 2020), and robotic manipulation (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Kober & Peters, 2008). In this
context, the notion of alignment plays an increasingly important role in the design and training of
AI systems. Loosely speaking, alignment refers to the performance guarantee that the AI system
will generate outcomes that are intended or preferred by the human user without undesirable side
effects or behaviors such as deception (Park et al., 2023) or manipulation (Perez et al., 2022). As
human user intentions or preferences may vary under specific contexts, it is critical that the AI
system adapts to evolving user preferences and/or intentions (Leike et al., 2018).
The alignment problem is a learning problem with (at least) three types of input data: the demon-
stration data (consists of prompts and human-generated continuations), the preference data (con-
sists of prompts and pairs of human-ranked responses), as well as prompts without any responses.
Moreover, the process of aligning an LLM model is typically undertaken in successive stages. For
example, the well-known RLHF approach adopted by Ouyang et al. (2022) starts with a supervised
fine-tuning model (SFT) followed by reward model (RM) estimation based upon human-labeled
preference data. The process closes with a final alignment stage in which reinforcement learning
(RL) is used to optimize the estimated reward model. Similar strategies have been used in other
related works such as Rafailov et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023); Zhu et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023). The


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


approach to alignment based on successive stages may facilitate computation, but it is at the expense
of inefficient exploitation of data. To illustrate, consider the three-stage RLHF approach proposed in
Ouyang et al. (2022), in the extreme case where the amount of high-quality preference data is quite
limited, the reward model trained cannot adequately reflect the preferences of the human, which
may lead to unsatisfactory performance in the RL stage. Further, the reward model estimate ob-
tained from only the preference data fails to exploit the information about human users’ preferences
that are implicit in demonstration data. It is therefore reasonable to expect that a policy model that is
fine-tuned with the reward model estimate obtained from both demonstration and human feedback
may exhibit better alignment performance.
An alternative to the successive approach to alignment consists of jointly training the reward and
policy models by leveraging demonstration and preference data. In contrast to the successive ap-
proach adopted in most of the current alignment approaches, the joint approach to reward and policy
learning makes use of all available data, hence mitigating the risk of optimizing an inaccurate reward
model. However, a joint approach to learning reward and policy models may improve alignment at
the expense of potentially significant additional computational effort.
Contribution. We introduce an algorithm jointly learning reward and policy models named Align-
ment with Integrated Human Feedback (AIHF) with a finite-time performance guarantee. This ap-
proach leverages recent advances in Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Arora & Doshi, 2021;
Zeng et al., 2022b), stochastic choice theory (Blavatskyy & Pogrebna, 2010) and bi-level optimiza-
tion (Hong et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2021; Khanduri et al., 2021). The proposed formulation integrates
SFT, RM, and RL into a single stage, so that reward modeling and policy optimization can fully
leverage all the available human feedback data. More specifically, in the proposed algorithm, the
policy is updated to improve alignment with the current reward model estimate and the reward
model is updated to improve the fit to demonstration and human feedback data. As a result, upon
convergence, the resulting reward and policy models are consistent in the sense that (i) the policy
model is optimal with respect to the reward model and (ii) the reward model maximizes the fit to
both demonstration and human feedback data. Several existing alignment schemes, such as RLHF
(Ouyang et al., 2022) and DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) and some of their extensions can be seen
as particular instances of the proposed formulation. We provide ample empirical evidence that the
proposed AIHF solution outperforms the existing alignment algorithms by large margins, especially
when the data is unbalanced, where the quality and/or quantity of one data category is worse/smaller
than that of the other.
2     P RELIMINARIES AND R ELATED W ORK
2.1   N OTATION
The Finite-Horizon MDP Model. A Markov decision process (MDP) is the tuple (S, A, P, ρ, r, γ),
wherein S denotes the state space, A denotes the action space, P : S × A × S → [0, 1] denotes
the transition probabilities, ρ(·) is the initial state distribution, r : S × A → R denotes the reward
function and γ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the discount factor. For every st ∈ S, a randomized policy π(·|st )
is a probability distribution in ∆|A| , the unit simplex in R|A| . Define τ := {(st , at )}Tt=1 as a
                                                                        QT
(finite horizon T ) trajectory of state and action pairs. Let HT ⊂ t=1 S × A denote all feasible
state/action sequence of length T .
MDP Model of LLM. The generation of text by a language model can be seen as sampling from
policies in an MDP model. Specifically, each state st = (x, y1:t−1 ) includes the prompt x and all
response tokens produced up to that point y1:t−1 . Each action at = yt represents a token from
the vocabulary. The transition kernel P is deterministic, i.e. given tokens st = (x, y1:t−1 ) and
at = yt , the environment will transition to st+1 = (x, y1:t ). An LLM can be seen as a policy
π(·|st ) so that a response of length T > 0 to prompt x is obtained with probability:π(y1:T |x) :=
QT
   i=1 π(yi |x, y1:i−1 )
Human Feedback Data. Let τ := (y1:T , x) denote a finite text produced in response to prompt x.
For a pair of sequences (τl , τw ) (which we assume of the same length T for ease of exposition) we
write τl ≺ τw to indicate the sequence τw is preferred over the sequence τl . Following the Bradley-
Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), the distribution of preferences over pairs (τl , τw )
can be modeled as follows:
                                       exp R(τw ; θ)
                 P τw   τl =                                  = σ R(τw ; θ) − R(τl ; θ)               (1)
                                exp R(τw ; θ) + exp R(τl ; θ)


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                >
                                                                                                Reward Alignment


         Preference data
                                             (2) RM
                                                                        >                  RM                       Policy
                                        RL                       Preference data
                       SFT



                                                                                                 Policy Alignment
      Demonstration data     (1) SFT Model    (3) Policy              Demonstration data
      Reinforcement Learning with Human                        Alignment with Integrated Human
        Feedback (RLHF): (1)→(2)→(3)                             Feedback (AIHF) (Proposed)
           Figure 1: Comparison of the RLHF (left) with the proposed AIHF (right).
                                               PT
where σ is the sigmoid function and R(τ ; θ) := t≥1 γ t r(st , at ; θ) and r(st , at ; θ) is a reward
model parametrized by θ ∈ Rd .
2.2     T HE RLHF P IPELINE
RLHF is a popular technique for fine-tuning AI systems to align with human preferences and val-
ues. The RLHF approach proposed in Stiennon et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022) consists of the
following three-stage: 1) the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) stage, where the demonstration data is
used to fine-tune the model in a supervised manner; 2) the reward modeling (RM) stage, where the
preference data is used to train a reward model; 3) the reinforcement learning (RL) stage, where
the SFT model is further fine-tuned by running RL using the trained reward model. Specifically, the
RLHF pipeline can be formally described as follows:
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT): Given a demonstration dataset D consisting of sequences of the
form τ = {(st , at )}t≥0 the goal is the find the policy πSFT (·|st ) that maximizes likelihood, i.e.:
                                                       h    Y             γ t i
                                   πSFT = arg max Eτ ∼D log   π(at |st )                                               (2)
                                                   π
                                                                t≥0

Reward Modeling (RM): Based upon a dataset P of preferences over pairs (τl , τw ) the estimation
of a reward learning problem can be formulated as the following Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model
(Bradley & Terry, 1952) (with β > 0 a hyper-parameter):
                                            h      1                             i
                 max `RM (θ) := E(τw  τl )∈P log σ       R(τw ; θ) − R(τl ; θ)    .          (3)
                 θ∈Rd                                 β

Reinforcement Learning (RL): Let θ̂P denote the solution to problem (3). The last stage in the
RLHF development pipeline consists of solving the problem:
                                hX                                                        i
         πRLHF = arg max Eτ ∼π        γ t r(st , at ; θ̂P ) − βDKL π(·|st )kπSFT (·|st )    (4)
                                    π
                                             t≥0
                                     P                 π(a|st )
where DKL π(·|st )kπSFT (·|st ) := a∈A π(a|st ) log πSFT   (a|st ) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) di-
vergence, πSFT is the supervised fine-tuning model. Due to the space limit, we put the rest of the
literature review in the Appendix A.1.

3     A LIGNMENT WITH I NTEGRATED H UMAN F EEDBACK (AIHF)
As mentioned before, the reward model obtained in (3) fails to exploit the information about human
users’ preferences that are implicit in demonstration data. As a result, the fine-tuned model obtained
with RLHF may exhibit unsatisfactory alignment performance (this phenomenon will be discussed
more concretely in Sec. 3.4). Below we introduce a new approach to jointly train reward and policy
models by simultaneously leveraging demonstration and human feedback data.

3.1     A M ETA -F ORMULATION
Towards developing an approach that can model the entire alignment process with a common
parametrization for both policy and reward models, consider the following meta-formulation, termed


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Alignment with Integrated Human Feedback (AIHF):
                        (AIHF)      max      L(θ) := w1 L1 (πθ ) + L2 (R(·; θ))                    (5a)
                                      θ
                                      s.t.   πθ := arg max L3 (π; R(·; θ))                         (5b)
                                                         π

where θ ∈ Rd is a parameter; L1 (πθ ) is a measure of fit of the parameterized policy πθ to demon-
stration data and L2 (R(·; θ)) is a measure of fit of the parameterized reward model R(·; θ) to the
preference data and L3 (π, R(·; θ)) is a measure of performance of policy π with respect to reward
model R(·; θ). w1 ≥ 0 is one balancing coefficient reflecting the relative size of demonstration
versus preference data. Note that in the lower level policy optimization, the optimal policy corre-
sponding to the the reward model R(·; θ) is actually determined by the reward parameter θ, where
                                                                           ∗
we can denote the optimal policy under the the reward model R(·; θ) as πR    θ
                                                                               := πθ . Therefore we
simply put πθ since the optimal policy under a certain reward model R(·; θ) is actually determined
by the reward parameters θ.
See Fig. 1 for an illustration of AIHF. The AIHF (5) is a meta-problem that models the alignment
problem. It has two levels: an upper-level problem in which the goal is to find policy and reward
models that jointly maximize a measure of fit to demonstrations and preference datasets; and a lower-
level problem which ensures that the policy model optimizes performance with respect to the reward
model. Its components can be customized to yield specific alignment formulations and algorithms.
Before diving into various customizations, let us discuss the advantages of this formulation.
Generality. One can specialize the loss functions and problem parameters to yield a number of
existing alignment formulations. Such generality implies that algorithms developed for (5) are easily
applicable to different special formulations it covers. For more details see Sec. 3.3.
Joint optimization. The formulation jointly optimizes the reward and the policy. One benefit here is
that it can strengthen the reward model through integrating both demonstrations and pairwise com-
parisons. Compared with the standard RLHF pipeline, through integrating additional data source
such as demonstrations to train the reward model, it can further boost the policy optimization sub-
routine to achieve better alignment performance. See Sec. 4 for a detailed discussion on how the
reward parameter θ is updated by leveraging such demonstration, and see Tab. 4 for the experimental
comparison between the reward model learned by RLHF and by our AIHF (5).
Dataset Integration. Clearly, the reward learning process leverages all the available data, there-
fore, we can expect that a high-quality reward model and its induced optimal policy can still be
obtained even under unfavorable situations where the preference data is not sufficient. See Sec. 5
for experimental evidences.
3.2 S PECIFICATION OF AIHF
In this section, we specify the formulation (5). Let us begin with the choice of L1 . It can be directly
instantiated by using one objective similar to (2), which is the likelihood function over the collected
expert demonstrations. Note that we aim to optimize the reward parameter θ to align with human
feedback in (5a), thus the objective of L1 can be specialized as a maximum likelihood function over
expert demonstrations as below:
                               h    Y                 γ t i         hX                       i
              L1 (πθ ) := Eτ ∼D log      πθ (at |st )       = Eτ ∼D      γ t log πθ (at |st ) .      (6)
                                    t≥0                             t≥0

Here πθ optimizes the measure of performance L3 (π; R(·; θ)) for a reward model R(·; θ) as:
                                                        X
                                                           t               0
            L3 (π; R(·; θ)) := Es0 ∼ρ,τ ∼π R(τ ; θ) − β   γ DKL π(·|st )kπ (·|st )                  (7)
                                                          t≥0

where π 0 is some initial policy and β > 0 is temperature parameter.
Next, we specify L2 . To ensure internal model consistency, we identify the likelihood function for
preference data so it is in accordance with the preferences implied by the reward model R(·; θ) used
in the definitions of L1 and L3 . Thus, the optimal distribution µθ over the set of T -long sequence of
state-action pairs is defined as follows:
                            µθ := arg max Eτ ∼µ R(τ ; θ) − βDKL (µ||µ0 )

                                     µ∈∆T



                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where ∆T denotes the simplex on HT and µ0 is a prior distribution on the trajectories. It can be
shown the solution of the above problem is of the form:

                                           µ0 (τ ) exp R(τ ; θ)/β
                           µθ (τ ) = P           0 0            0
                                                                       .
                                      τ 0 ∈HT µ (τ ) exp R(τ ; θ)/β


With this result, we can now obtain a model for the likelihood that sequence τj is preferred over
τj . By the independence of irrelevant alternatives property (Fudenberg et al., 2015) of the optimal
choice µθ , when the set of feasible choices is reduced from HT to just the the two-tuple {τl , τw },
the likelihood that sequence τw is preferred over τl is given by Pθ (τw   τl ) := µθ (τµl )+µ
                                                                                          θ (τw )
                                                                                               θ (τw )
                                                                                                       . This
motivates the choice of L2 (θ) as the following likelihood function:
                                       h            µθ (τw )       i
            L2 (R(·; θ)) = E(τw  τl )∈P log
                                               µθ (τw ) + µθ (τl )
                                                          µ0 (τw ) exp R(τw ; θ)
                                       h                                                      i
                         = E(τw  τl )∈P log     0

                                                                        0
                                                                                               .
                                               µ (τw ) exp R(τw ; θ) + µ (τl ) exp R(τl ; θ)

With µ0 equal to the uniform distribution on HT , this model is equivalent to the BTL model (3):
                                                   h                               i
              LBTL
                2    (θ) = `RM (θ) = E(τw  τl )∈P log σ R(τw ; θ) − R(τl ; θ)        .           (8)

3.3   S PECIAL C ASES OF AIHF

Next, we discuss how formulation (5) can be specialized to some of the known alignment algorithms.
Specialization to RLHF-Type Approach. First, if we set the coefficient w1 = 0 in (5), we obtain:
                           max L2 (θ) s.t. πθ := arg max L3 (π; R(·; θ)).                                     (9)
                             θ                                   π

Noticed that now the upper- and lower-level problems are completely decomposable, since the
upper-level problem solves for the reward parameterization θ, while the lower-level problem solves
for the policy (for the given reward), yielding two separate problems, which are exactly the RM and
the RL problems in the typical RLHF approach.
Specialization to DPO-Type Approach. Consider the relationship between formulation (5) with
the DPO-type approaches. Let us set the following objective function L1 = `SFT and L2 = `RM ,
and assume that T = 1 for the generation process. Relaxing the constraint (5b) which ensures the
policy is optimal w.r.t. a certain parameterized model, we can obtain a DPO-type formulation:

                                                                      π(a |s )                     i |si )
maxπ L(π) := w1 · Eτ E ∼πE log π(aE |sE ) + E(τj  τi )∼πP log σ β log π0 (aji |sjj ) − β log ππ(a

                                                                                               0 (a |s )
                                                                                                    j i
                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                   (10)
The above formulation specializes to Liu et al. (2024), which is a slightly generalized version of
DPO when both demonstration and preference data are used. Setting w1 = 0 reduces to the problem
solved by DPO; see Rafailov et al. (2023, Eq. (2)).
Specialization to Self-Play Approach. Define `(·) as a monotonic        and convex loss function, con-
sider setting L1 := w1 · Eτ E ∈πE ,α∈π(.|sE ) ` R(τ E ; θ) − R(τ ; θ) , and setting L2 and L3 according
to (8) and (7), respectively. Note that the choice of L1 means that given demonstration data, we will
find a policy which generates trajectories that match the rewards of the demonstration data. Again
using DPO type of reformulation, by substituting the reward expression obtained from the optimal
policy (42) to L1 and selecting the σ(·) as `(·), then the AIHF problem in this case becomes:

                                                             π(aE |sE )            π(ã|sE )

        max L(π) :=w1 Eτ E ∼πE ,ã∼π(·|s) log σ β log 0 E E − β log 0
          π                                                  π (a |s )            π (ã|sE )

                                                          π(aj |sj )          π(ai |si )
                       + E(τj  τi )∼πP log σ β log 0                  − β log 0               .    (11)
                                                          π (aj |sj )        π (ai |si )
Note that the first part of the above formulation is similar to what has been proposed in SPIN (Chen
et al., 2024), which only utilizes the SFT data.

                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4 W HY AIHF CAN OUTPERFORM TWO - STAGE ALIGNMENT APPROACHES ?
To understand the difference between the proposed approach and the successive stages approach
of the standard alignment pipeline, let us consider the a static setting with action set is A :=
{τ1 , τ2 , · · · τN }, reward function R(·) : A 7→ R, and demonstration D and preference dataset P.
In what follows, we compare the optimal solutions for policies obtained by different alignment ap-
proaches. Due to space limitation, all derivation in this section is relegated to Appendix A.3.
Policy with Demonstration Data. It can be easily shown that when only the demonstration data D is
available, the probability of generating i-th data equals to its empirical probability, i.e., πSFT (τi ) =
#{τi in D}
    |D|         . Assume that such a policy is parameterized by an implicit reward function R , using the
                                                                                                    D

following softmax choice model where τi ∈ A is selected with probability πi∗ (R) = PNexp(R i /β)
                                                                                        exp(R /β)  j=1   j

where Ri := R(τi ). Assuming a reference value R
                                               bD (τ1 ) = R̄1 , then the optimal rewards satisfies
(See Sec. A.3.1):
                #{τi ∈ D}        bD ) = P exp(RD (τi )/β)
                                               b
                          = πi∗ (R       N
                                                                          i ∈ {2, . . . , N }.           (12)
                   |D|                   j=1 exp(RD (τj )/β)
                                                 b
This implicit reward will be used shortly to characterize the RLHF policy.
Policy with Preference Only Data. Next, it can be shown that when only the preference data P is
available, the reward estimation problem is defined as:
                                                            h         πi∗ (R)     i
                  RbP = arg max `RM (R) := E(τ  τ )∼P log                           .      (13)
                               R
                                                  i   j
                                                                πi∗ (R) + πj∗ (R)

Again with a fixed reference value R
                                   bP (τ1 ) = R̄1 , the solution is (see Sec. A.3.1):
                                                  P
                              ∗ b                    j:j6=i |Pi j |
                            πi (RP ) = P                                                                 (14)
                                                                    ∗ b
                                           j:j6=i |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j) (π (RP ))

where |Pi j | := #{τi   τj in P} and |Pi,j | := |Pi j | + |Pj i | and ρ−(i,j) (π) := 1 −
P                 −1
  k∈A\{i,j}  π k     is the expected number of times an action other than τi or τj is selected when
sampling actions from π infinitely many times.
RLHF Policy. Based on the above       results, in
                                                 Sec. A.3.2 we show that the RLHF approach has the
                  RLHF            ∗ b
optimal policy π        (τi ) = πi RD + RP . That is, the RLHF policy can be seen as the softmax
                                            b
policy for the sum of reward estimators obtained from demonstrations and preferences separately.
AIHF Policy. Finally, we also find that the AIHF policy is of the form:
                                                             P
                          AIHF
                                              #{τi in D} + j6=i |Pi j |
                        π       (τi ) =                                         .               (15)
                                                    |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j) π ∗ (R
                                              P                         bAIHF )
                                        |D| +       j6=i


Discussion. Let us summarize our findings. First, π RLHF takes the form of softmax of the sum of
two rewards, one learned from the SFT stage one learned from reward training stage provides some
interesting insight to this popular approach. Second, π AIHF is more robust than π RLHF . To see
this, suppose that |D|   |P|, i.e. there is more demonstration than preference data. In this case,
the policy estimator in (15) will be largely defined by the demonstration data (which is reasonable)
whereas the RLHF policy can be noisy since it (soft) maximizes the sum of two reward estimators:
one that is more accurate (i.e. the one based on demonstrations, R  bD ) and one that is less accurate
(i.e. the one based on preferences RP ). A similar observation can be made when |D|   |P|; see
                                     b
Sec. A.3.2 for more details. Third, π AIHF can have less variance as compared with π RLHF . Indeed,
π AIHF takes a form of a weighted average of the policies estimated separately with demonstration
and preference data, as by using (12) and (14), we can re-write (15) as:

                                                               P                      ∗ b
                               |D|                               j6=i |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j) π (RP )
 πi∗ (R
      bAIHF ) =      P                  ∗ bAIHF
                                                  πi∗ (R
                                                       bD ) +   P                      ∗ bAIHF
                                                                                                 πi∗ (R
                                                                                                      bP )
                |D|+   j6=i |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j)   π (R   )          |D|+   j6=i |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j)   π (R     )

Such averaging entails reduced variance. We also include simple numerical examples in the Ap-
pendix A.3.3 to further illustrate this point.

                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4    P ROPOSED A LGORITHM FOR AIHF T RAINING
We are now ready to design algorithms for the proposed AIHF formulation (5). To begin with,
first note that (5) takes a hierarchical form, and it belongs to the class of problem named bi-level
optimization, first developed in the 70s (Fiacco & McCormick, 1990), and recently found many
applications in machine learning (Wang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; 2022). Generically speaking,
bi-level problems are not easy to optimize; more specifically, in (5), the upper-level problem (5a)
is a function of both the lower-level optimal solution πθ and the true parameter θ. It follows that a
(stochastic) first-order algorithm for L(θ) involves some (potentially non-trivial) implicit gradient
computation which often involves computing the Hessian matrix for the lower-level objective func-
tion. Fortunately, as we will show shortly, with some special choices of L1 , L2 , L3 , one can design
some simple and very efficient algorithms.
Before we go to details, we note that throughout this section, we assume that we are searching for a
good policy πθ and a reward estimate r(·, ·; θ) to align with human feedback, where the policy πθ is
an optimal solution w.r.t. the certain reward estimate r(·, ·; θ) according to the policy optimization
problem (5b). Due to such optimal policy constraint w.r.t. one explicit reward estimate, we design
an algorithm to solve such a single-stage, bi-level problem which is different from DPO (Rafailov
et al., 2023) that simply optimizes the fixed loss function (10) directly.
On a high level, the proposed algorithm alternates between a policy alignment step (which updates
π with a fixed reward r(·, ·; θ)), and a reward alignment step (which updates θ using a stochastic
gradient, a function of the demonstration and preference data). Next, we study these steps in detail.
Policy Alignment Step. One can adopt the standard approaches such as the well-known proximal
policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm to obtain an approximate optimal pol-
icy which solves (7). It is worth noting that, when considering T = 1, our discussion leading to
(42) indicates the optimal policy takes a much simpler form. In this case, it is possible to consider
a simpler method than running PPO to obtain the optimal policy. One alternative way is to use a
baseline estimated reward value to perform variance reduction (Li et al., 2023), thus reducing the
computational complexity.
It is important to note that, the point of the above discussion is that these different choices for solving
the policy alignment problem can be incorporated into our overall approach.
Reward Alignment. In this step, we use a stochastic gradient-type algorithm to optimize L(θ).
Towards this end, first, observe that
                                   ∇L(θ) = w1 ∇L1 (πθ ) + ∇L2 (θ).                                    (16)
Clearly, regardless of the choice of L2 , ∇L2 is relatively easy to compute because the objective is
directly related to θ since L2 (θ) can be regarded as one supervised learning loss and do not involve
the optimal policy πθ . In particular, we have the following expressions:
                                              h                                 i
                     ∇LBTL
                       2   (θ) = E(τw  τl )∼πP ∇θ log σ R(τw ; θ) − R(τl ; θ)     .                  (17a)

On the contrary, the computation of ∇L1 (πθ ) is more involved, since L1 depends on θ implicitly
through the corresponding optimal policy πθ . Fortunately, the following lemma indicates that this
gradient has a simple and intuitive form as well, and the proof can be found in Appendix A.4.2.
Lemma 4.1 Suppose that L1 takes the form of the objective (6) for reward learning from demon-
strations, and suppose that L3 takes the form (7) with c(·) being the KL-divergence w.r.t. some initial
policy π 0 . Then we have the following expression:
                           ∇θ L1 (πθ ) = Eτ ∼πE ,τ 0 ∼πθ [∇θ R(τ ; θ) − R(τ 0 ; θ) ]

                                                                                                      (18)
where πθ is the optimal policy given the reward model parameterized by θ, with the expression (40).
Intuitively, if the current policy πθ has not matched π E yet, then the reward should be improved
by going towards the direction suggested by the expert trajectories, while going away from those
generated by the current policy. Similar to the BTL model, from the gradient expression (18), it is
clear that the optimization is toward the direction of increasing the gap between the reward of the
real samples (demonstrations) and the synthetic ones (model generated continuations).
In practice, a few approximations need to be made to obtain a stochastic gradient of L1 . First,
similarly, as before, the precise expectation cannot be obtained because the ground truth policy


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: Alignment with Integrated Human Feedback (AIHF)
    Input: Initialize reward parameter θ0 and policy model π 0 , the stepsize of reward update η. Let P, DE
    denote the preference and the demonstration data, respectively.
    for Iteration k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 do
       Policy Alignment: Optimizing L3 by RL subroutine, e.g. PPO, to obtain one improved policy π k+1
       Data Sample I: Sample an expert trajectory τ ∼ DE and agent trajectory from τ 0 ∼ π k+1
       Data Sample II: Sample preference pair (τw   τl ) ∼ P
       Estimating Gradient: Calculate one gradient estimator g k := w1 g1k + g2k of
       ∇θ L(θ) = w1 ∇θ L1 (θ) + ∇θ L2 (θ)
       Reward Alignment: θk+1 := θk + ηg k
    end for



π E is unknown. Denote an offline demonstration dataset as DE := {τ }, then one can replace the
expectations Eτ ∼πE by Eτ ∼DE . Second, in the second expectation in (18), the trajectories τ 0 are
sampled from πθ , the optimal policy for a fixed reward parameterization by θ. This means that the
policy alignment step has to identify the optimal policy πθ first, which, due to limitations such as
computational constraints, and non-linear parameterization, is generally not possible. Instead, we
propose to sample from the current policy π k+1 obtained from the previous policy optimization step,
where index k represents the iteration counter. Following the approximation steps mentioned above,
we construct a stochastic estimator gk to approximate the exact gradient ∇L(θk ) in (16) as follows:

   gk := w1 g1k + g2k :=w1 ∇θ R(τkE , θk ) − ∇θ R(τkA , θk ) + 1 − σ(R(τkW , θk ) − R(τkL , θk ))


                           × ∇θ R(τkW , θk ) − ∇θ R(τkL , θk ) .

                                                                                                 (19)

The above two steps are summarized in Algorithm 1. let us remark on the computational complexity
of the proposed algorithm. Note that our algorithm is motivated by a class of popular algorithms in
bi-level optimization, where the upper-level and lower-level problems are updated alternatingly us-
ing stochastic optimization (Hong et al., 2023). We conclude the section by theoretically inspecting
the proposed algorithms.

                                                                        α0
Theorem 4.1 Suppose Assumptions 1 - 2 hold. Selecting stepsize α := K    σ for the reward update
step (19) where α0 > 0 and σ ∈ (0, 1) are some fixed constants, and K is the total number of
iterations to be run by the algorithm. Then the following result holds:
                         K−1
                     1 X
                        E log πk+1 − log πθk ∞ = O(K −1 ) + O(K −σ )

                                                                                                         (20a)
                     K
                         k=0
                       K−1
                     1 X
                           E k∇L(θk )k2 = O(K −σ ) + O(K −1+σ ) + O(K −1 )

                                                                                                         (20b)
                     K
                         k=0

where k log πk+1 −log πθk k∞ := maxs∈S,a∈A log πk+1 (a|s)−log πθk (a|s) . In particular, setting
σ = 1/2, then both quantities in (20a) and (20b) converge with the rate O(K −1/2 ).

The above theorem shows that Alg. 1 could converge to stationary point if we take a large loop
number K. Note that details and proofs of the result above are delegated to Appendix A.4.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide numerical evaluations of the proposed method (5) (Alg. 1) and its vari-
ants (10) and (11), and comparing them with state-of-the-art methods RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022),
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023), IPO (Calandriello et al., 2024) and SPIN (Chen et al., 2024). Our ex-
periments demonstrate the advantages of the proposed methods in the following aspects: (1) Reward
learning from demonstration and preference is the key to improving over standard RLHF. (2) Using
demonstration in reward learning could increase model improvement efficiency (w.r.t. the KL diver-
gence violation) (3) AIHF could reduce the effect of distribution mismatch caused by the sequential
alignment method, thus break the performance limits of the state-of-the-art methods.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                2.0                                                                                   2.0                                                                                   2.0

                1.5                                                                                   1.5                                                                                   1.5

                1.0                                                                                   1.0                                                                                   1.0


Average Score


                                                                                      Average Score


                                                                                                                                                                            Average Score
                0.5                                                                                   0.5                                                                                   0.5

                0.0                                                                                   0.0                                                                                   0.0

                0.5
                                          RLHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                   0.5
                                                                                                                                RLHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RLHF (start from demonstration-sft model)
                                          AIHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                                             AIHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                                              AIHF (start from demonstration-sft model)
                                          AIHF (start from full-sft model)                                                      AIHF (start from full-sft model)                                                       AIHF (start from full-sft model)
                1.0                       SFT on top 10k demonstration                                1.0                       SFT on top 10k demonstration                                1.0                        SFT on top 10k demonstration
                                          SFT on full dataset                                                                   SFT on full dataset                                                                    SFT on full dataset
                1.5                                                                                   1.5                                                                                   1.5
                      0     2000   4000      6000    8000    10000   12000    14000                         0     2000   4000      6000    8000    10000   12000    14000                         0     2000    4000      6000    8000    10000   12000    14000
                          The Number of Policy Optimization Step                                                The Number of Policy Optimization Step                                                The Number of Policy Optimization Step
                               (a) Pythia-160M                                                                           (b) Pythia-1B                                                                         (c) Pythia-2.8B
Figure 2: Experiment results of Pythia-160M/1B/2.8B policy models, with the reward model trained
from Pythia-1.4B. We record the average scores (across three trials) of AIHF and RLHF on the
Anthropic-HH test dataset (See Tab. 5 in Appendix for more comparisons with other algorithms)
                                               .

Models and datasets. In the first setting, we test Alg. 1 on Anthropic-HH (Bai et al., 2022) dataset1
with (relatively small) Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023) models2 as policy models. Anthropic-HH is
a preference dataset collected from 52B LLMs that provide two continuations based on helpfulness
and harmlessness, and we pick 10k chosen/preferred continuation data to form the demonstration
dataset, while others serve as preference dataset and RL prompt dataset. For the HH dataset, We
first fine-tune the language models (Pythia-160M/1B/2.8B) through supervised fine-tuning over all
chosen responses from the HH dataset for 1 epoch, we call it full-SFT model and use it as our base
model. Moreover, we also SFT the language model using the selected top 10k chosen responses
and name it as demonstration-SFT model. For each policy model, we use the exact same model
Pythia-1.4B as the reward model.
The other setting we test is on 7B models. We use Ultrafeedback3 as our preference dataset (61.1k
preference data) and Ultrachat200k4 as the demonstration dataset (208k demonstration data), with
mistral-7b-sft-beta 5 (Jiang et al., 2023) as our base model. We use the same mistral-7b-sft-beta
model as the initialization of the reward model.
Evaluation. For the Anthropic-HH dataset, we present the reward evaluated by the PKU-
Alignment/beaver-7b-v3.0-reward model(Ji et al., 2024). In our 7B model experiments, we adopt the
widely recognized HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard framework (Beeching et al., 2023). This
evaluation suite measures LLM performance across six tasks: commonsense reasoning (Arc (Clark
et al., 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), Winogrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2021)), multi-task
language understanding (MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020)), mimicking human falsehoods (Truth-
fulQA (Lin et al., 2021)), and math problem-solving (GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)). Additional
implementation details can be found in Appendix A.2.
Results of small model (1B and 2.8B) experiments. We observe that the proposed AIHF per-
forms effectively when initiated from both the demonstration-SFT model and the full-SFT model.
As shown in Fig. 2, utilizing the same data, AIHF algorithm can eventually outperform RLHF irre-
spective of the initial model. Furthermore, according to the numerical results as shown in Fig. 3(a),
we see that the proposed AIHF algorithm has smaller deviation from the base model compared with
the RLHF algorithm. This benefit of the AIHF approach is due to the fact that we incorporate the
maximum likelihood IRL objective for both reward learning and policy learning. In this case, both
reward model and policy model will be trained to align with the demonstrations, which are also used
in the training process of the SFT stage. We also conducted a study on the demonstration/prefer-
ence data ratio in Fig. 3(b) and 3(c). We observe that AIHF consistently outperforms RLHF across
different demonstration/preference data ratio. Furthermore, we also record the performance of the
two variants, namely AIHF-DPO (10) and Self-Play-AIHF (11), also RLHF, DPO, IPO and SPIN in
Tab. 5. Our proposed AIHF still outperforms all these methods in this experiment setting.
Results of large model (7B) experiments. We run AIHF, AIHF-DPO, Self-Play-AIHF along with
other methods on the 7B experiment setting. The results are presented in Fig. 4 (the numbers are
            1
    Dataset available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/Anthropic/hh-rlhf.
            2
    Models available at https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI.
  3
    Available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/ultrafeedback_
binarized.
  4
    Available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceH4/ultrachat_200k.
  5
    Available at https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/mistral-7b-sft-beta.


                                                                                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                 2.0                                                                                    2.0

              20                                                      RLHF                       1.5                                                                                    1.5
                                                                      AIHF
                                                                                                 1.0                                                                                    1.0


                                                                                 Average Score


                                                                                                                                                                        Average Score
              15
                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                    0.5
KL( || ref)   10                                                                                 0.0                        RLHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                   0.0
                                                                                                                            AIHF (start from demonstration-sft model)                                                RLHF (start from demonstration-sft model)
                                                                                                                            ALHF (start from full-sft model)                                                         AIHF (start from demonstration-sft model)
                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                    0.5                          AIHF (start from full-sft model)
              5                                                                                                             SFT on top 10k demonstration                                                             SFT on top 10k demonstration
                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                            SFT on full dataset                                         1.0                          SFT on full dataset
                                                                                                                            AIHF-DPO                                                                                 AIHF-DPO
                                                                                                                            Self-Play AIHF                                                                           Self-Play AIHF
              0                                                                                  1.5                                                                                    1.5
                   0     2000   4000   6000   8000    10000   12000    14000                           0     2000   4000    6000    8000     10000    12000    14000                          0     2000   4000   6000    8000     10000     12000     14000
                       The Number of Policy Optimization Step                                              The Number of Policy Optimization Step                                                 The Number of Policy Optimization Step
(a) KL divergence to demonstration- (b) AIHF vs RLHF with 10k (c) AIHF vs RLHF with 10k
SFT policy                          demonstration, 5k preference demonstration, 10k preference
Figure 3: Experiment results on Pythia-1B policy models, where the reward model is trained from
Pythia-1.4B models. We record the average scores of AIHF and RLHF on the Anthropic-HH test
dataset, reporting the results across three different trials.
                                                                          Mistral-7B-SFT-Beta                              SPIN                IPO                                 Self-Play-AIHF
                                                                          Zephyr-7B-Beta                                   DPO                 AIHF-DPO                            AIHF
                                         90

                                         80

                                         70
                                  Scores


                                         60

                                         50

                                         40

                                         30          Arc Challenge TruthfulQA                          Winogrande             GSM8k                  HellaSwag                     MMLU                    Average
                                                                                                                             Tasks
Figure 4: Performance comparison between AIHF-DPO, Self-Play AIHF training across the six
benchmark datasets (See also Table 3 in the Appendix).
recorded in Tab. 3), where we can see that similar to the 1B setting, AIHF is consistently outper-
forming other methods. Additionally, both AIHF-DPO and Self-Play AIHF effectively outperform
RLHF model (zephyr-7b-beta). The success of AIHF, as well as Self-Play AIHF and AIHF-DPO
further suggests that joint learning from demonstration and preference is indeed beneficial for the
alignment. We also conduct ablation study with different choice of w1 in (10), as shown in Tab. 6,
the improvement of joint learning methods over baseline is robust. Furthermore,We also evaluate
the reward models estimated using different methods (DPO, standard preference learning and AIHF)
over the widely used RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2024). The results, illustrated in Tab. 4 in Ap-
pendix, show that the reward model trained through the AIHF can achieve significant improvement
(especially on reasoning tasks) compared to both standard BTL reward model in (3) and implicit
reward model in DPO.
Other Results. Due to the page limits, we leave two additional experiments in the appendix: 1)
movie review generation with positive sentiment on IMDb dataset (Maas et al., 2011), 2) experiment
on Robotics control tasks in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). For the result of MuJoCo Experiment
A.2.1, we observe that even though Behavior Cloning (BC)/SFT could provide a high-performing
initialization, RLHF still fails to improve policy quality in the following RL stage. In the contract,
AIHF can effectively integrate preferences and demonstrations, leading to a more robust reward
function and consequently, a high-quality policy. For the IMDB result (Fig. 6), We show that AIHF
is able to alleviate the distribution mismatch between the generated trajectories by the policy, and
the data that the learned reward model is able to rank.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this work, we study the alignment problem when diverse data sources from human feedback are
available. Furthermore, we have developed an algorithmic framework that can integrate both expert
demonstration and pairwise comparison data from human feedback to learn the reward functions
for further guiding policy learning/model fine-tuning in the alignment pipeline. Through extensive
evaluations on robotic control tasks and large language model alignment tasks, we demonstrate that
our proposed method can outperform existing benchmarks on alignment tasks and is able to recover
a better reward model to guide policy learning.


                                                                                                                            10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

M. Hong, S. Zeng and J. Li are supported partially by NSF under the grants EPCN-2311007, ECCS-
2426064 and CCF-2414372, also by Minnesota Supercomputing Institute. A. Garcia and C. Li are
partially supported by W911NF-22-1-0213, ECCS-2240789 and CCF-2414373.

R EFERENCES
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, Daniel Guo, Daniele Calandriello, Michal
 Valko, and Rémi Munos. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human
 preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12036, 2023.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022.
Edward Beeching, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Sheon Han, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Ra-
  jani, Omar Sanseviero, Lewis Tunstall, and Thomas Wolf. Open llm leaderboard. https:
  //huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard, 2023.
Marc G Bellemare, Salvatore Candido, Pablo Samuel Castro, Jun Gong, Marlos C Machado, Sub-
 hodeep Moitra, Sameera S Ponda, and Ziyu Wang. Autonomous navigation of stratospheric bal-
 loons using reinforcement learning. Nature, 588(7836):77–82, 2020.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large
  scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle OBrien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.
Erdem Bıyık, Dylan P Losey, Malayandi Palan, Nicholas C Landolfi, Gleb Shevchuk, and Dorsa
  Sadigh. Learning reward functions from diverse sources of human feedback: Optimally inte-
  grating demonstrations and preferences. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 41(1):
  45–67, 2022.
Pavlo R Blavatskyy and Ganna Pogrebna. Models of stochastic choice and decision theories: Why
  both are important for analyzing decisions. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(6):963–986,
  2010.
Michael Bloem and Nicholas Bambos. Infinite time horizon maximum causal entropy inverse re-
 inforcement learning. In 53rd IEEE conference on decision and control, pp. 4911–4916. IEEE,
 2014.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.
Daniele Calandriello, Daniel Guo, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Yunhao Tang, Bernardo Avila
  Pires, Pierre Harvey Richemond, Charline Le Lan, Michal Valko, Tianqi Liu, et al. Human
  alignment of large language models through online preference optimisation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2403.08635, 2024.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Christian Daniel, Malte Viering, Jan Metz, Oliver Kroemer, and Jan Peters. Active reward learning.
  In Robotics: Science and systems, volume 98, 2014.
Anthony V Fiacco and Garth P McCormick. Nonlinear programming: sequential unconstrained
  minimization techniques. SIAM, 1990.
Johannes Fischer, Christoph Eyberg, Moritz Werling, and Martin Lauer. Sampling-based inverse
  reinforcement learning algorithms with safety constraints. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
  ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 791–798. IEEE, 2021.
Drew Fudenberg, Ryota Iijima, and Tomasz Strzalecki. Stochastic choice and revealed perturbed
  utility. Econometrica, 83(6):2371–2409, 2015.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Inverse preference learning: Preference-based rl without a reward
  function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15363, 2023.
Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Inverse preference learning: Preference-based rl without a reward
  function. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Jiwoo Hong, Noah Lee, and James Thorne. Orpo: Monolithic preference optimization without
  reference model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07691, 2024.
Mingyi Hong, Hoi-To Wai, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. A two-timescale framework
 for bilevel optimization: Complexity analysis and application to actor-critic. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2007.05170, 2020.
Mingyi Hong, Hoi-To Wai, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. A two-timescale stochastic algorithm
 framework for bilevel optimization: Complexity analysis and application to actor-critic. SIAM
 Journal on Optimization, 33(1):147–180, 2023.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jiaming Ji, Mickel Liu, Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Chi Zhang, Ce Bian, Boyuan Chen, Ruiyang Sun,
   Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong Yang. Beavertails: Towards improved safety alignment of llm via a
   human-preference dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Kaiyi Ji, Junjie Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Bilevel optimization: Convergence analysis and enhanced
  design. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4882–4892. PMLR, 2021.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
  Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al.
  Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforce-
 ment learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp.
 651–673. PMLR, 2018.

Prashant Khanduri, Siliang Zeng, Mingyi Hong, Hoi-To Wai, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang.
  A near-optimal algorithm for stochastic bilevel optimization via double-momentum. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Jens Kober and Jan Peters. Policy search for motor primitives in robotics. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 21, 2008.

Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
 Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
 serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
 ciples, pp. 611–626, 2023.

Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
  Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward
  models for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13787, 2024.

Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable
  agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871,
  2018.

Sergey Levine, Zoran Popovic, and Vladlen Koltun. Nonlinear inverse reinforcement learning with
  gaussian processes. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.

Ziniu Li, Tian Xu, Yushun Zhang, Yang Yu, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Remax: A
  simple, effective, and efficient method for aligning large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.10505, 2023.

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.

Risheng Liu, Jiaxin Gao, Jin Zhang, Deyu Meng, and Zhouchen Lin. Investigating bi-level optimiza-
  tion for learning and vision from a unified perspective: A survey and beyond. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(12):10045–10067, 2021.

Risheng Liu, Pan Mu, Xiaoming Yuan, Shangzhi Zeng, and Jin Zhang. A general descent aggrega-
  tion framework for gradient-based bi-level optimization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 45(1):38–57, 2022.

Shicheng Liu and Minghui Zhu. Distributed inverse constrained reinforcement learning for multi-
  agent systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33444–33456, 2022.

Shicheng Liu and Minghui Zhu. Meta inverse constrained reinforcement learning: Convergence
  guarantee and generalization analysis. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2023.

Tianqi Liu, Yao Zhao, Rishabh Joshi, Misha Khalman, Mohammad Saleh, Peter J Liu, and
  Jialu Liu. Statistical rejection sampling improves preference optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.06657, 2023.

Zhihan Liu, Miao Lu, Shenao Zhang, Boyi Liu, Hongyi Guo, Yingxiang Yang, Jose Blanchet, and
  Zhaoran Wang. Provably mitigating overoptimization in rlhf: Your sft loss is implicitly an adver-
  sarial regularizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16436, 2024.

Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts.
  Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142–150, 2011.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Vivek Myers, Erdem Biyik, Nima Anari, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning multimodal rewards from
  rankings. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 342–352. PMLR, 2022.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Malayandi Palan, Nicholas C Landolfi, Gleb Shevchuk, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning reward func-
 tions by integrating human demonstrations and preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08928,
 2019.
Peter S Park, Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. Ai deception: A
  survey of examples, risks, and potential solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14752, 2023.
Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model
  behaviors with model-written evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09251, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory optimizations
  toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: International Conference for High Perfor-
  mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–16, 2020. doi: 10.1109/SC41405.
  2020.00024.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
  thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
  Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Winogrande: An adver-
  sarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the ACM, 64(9):99–106, 2021.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012.
Masatoshi Uehara, Nathan Kallus, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Refined value-based offline rl under
 realizability and partial coverage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02392, 2023.
Runzhong Wang, Zhigang Hua, Gan Liu, Jiayi Zhang, Junchi Yan, Feng Qi, Shuang Yang, Jun Zhou,
  and Xiaokang Yang. A bi-level framework for learning to solve combinatorial optimization on
  graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:21453–21466, 2021.
Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse reinforce-
 ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04888, 2015.
Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang.
 Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under
 kl-constraint. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shusheng Xu, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Wenjie Ye, Weilin Liu, Zhiyu Mei, Guangju Wang, Chao Yu,
  and Yi Wu. Is dpo superior to ppo for llm alignment? a comprehensive study. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.10719, 2024.
Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, and Yingbin Liang. Improving sample complexity bounds for (natural) actor-
  critic algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4358–4369, 2020.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf:
  Rank responses to align language models with human feedback without tears. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.05302, 2023.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. Hellaswag: Can a ma-
  chine really finish your sentence? arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07830, 2019.
Siliang Zeng, Mingyi Hong, and Alfredo Garcia. Structural estimation of markov decision processes
   in high-dimensional state space with finite-time guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01282,
   2022a.
Siliang Zeng, Chenliang Li, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong. Maximum-likelihood inverse re-
   inforcement learning with finite-time guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing
   Systems, 2022b.
Zhengyuan Zhou, Michael Bloem, and Nicholas Bambos. Infinite time horizon maximum causal
  entropy inverse reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(9):
  2787–2802, 2017.
Banghua Zhu, Hiteshi Sharma, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Shi Dong, Chenguang Zhu, Michael I Jordan,
  and Jiantao Jiao. Fine-tuning language models with advantage-induced policy alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02231, 2023.
Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
  entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Brian D Ziebart, J Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K Dey. The principle of maximum causal entropy for
  estimating interacting processes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 59(4):1966–1980,
  2013.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   LITERATURE REVIEW

A.1.1 R EWARD L EARNING USING D EMONSTRATION DATA
In the RL literature, a line of work referred to as Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) proposes
to jointly learn the reward and policy from expert demonstration data. Specifically, the target is to
find the parameterized reward function r(s, a; θ) (resp. an optimal polity π ∗ (s, a)) that best explains
(resp. mimics) an expert policy π E given the demonstration data D. For example, the well-known
maximum entropy IRL (MaxEnt-IRL) framework (Ziebart, 2010; Ziebart et al., 2013; Bloem &
Bambos, 2014; Zhou et al., 2017) finds a policy maximizing entropy subject to the expected features
that match the empirical averages in the experts observation dataset. However, this approach can
only be used to model linear rewards.
Subsequent works such as Levine et al. (2011); Wulfmeier et al. (2015); Zeng et al. (2022b) further
improve the MaxEnt-IRL method so that nonlinear reward can be used. For example, Zeng et al.
(2022a) proposed a maximum likelihood IRL (ML-IRL) formulation based on the Dynamic Discrete
Choice (DDC) model, and a nonlinear reward function is utilized. Additionally, some works Liu
& Zhu (2023; 2022) extend IRL to multi-agent settings, broadening its applicability to scenarios
involving multiple decision-makers.
It is also shown that when the reward function is linearly parameterized, then the MaxEnt is the
Lagrangian dual of the ML-IRL problem (Zeng et al., 2022a). On the other hand, it is worth men-
tioning that to our best knowledge, almost all IRL-based methods can only utilize demonstration


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


data, which can be problematic because a large amount of high-quality demonstration data is typi-
cally hard to obtain. Further, it is well-known that using demonstration only cannot extract precise
human preference, especially in safety-related tasks where the boundaries between permissible and
impermissible actions need to be precisely determined; see, e.g., Fischer et al. (2021) which shows
that insufficient demonstration dataset could lead to high generalization error.

A.1.2    J OINT L EARNING FROM DEMONSTRATION AND PREFERENCE
Combining data from demonstrations and human feedback to achieve alignment has also been stud-
ied in the robotics literature. In Ibarz et al. (2018), the authors first combine two approaches to learn
from human feedback: expert demonstrations and trajectory preferences. The addition of demon-
strations to learning from preferences typically results in substantial performance gains compared
with using either demonstrations or preferences in isolation. In Palan et al. (2019) and Bıyık et al.
(2022), the authors integrate diverse sources of human feedback including demonstrations and pair-
wise comparisons in a Bayesian approach to learn reward functions that are assumed to be linear in
carefully selected features and evaluate their proposed method on robot learning platform. More-
over, their proposed methods need to actively generate preference queries, which are expensive to
collect in practical applications. In contrast, the approach proposed in this paper is not Bayesian and
does not include the requirement that the reward model is linear in pre-selected features.

A.1.3    OTHER A PPROACHES TO A LIGNMENT
Other approaches to alignment include Direct Preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023)
and Inverse Preference Learning (IPL) (Hejna & Sadigh, 2023) both remove the need for explicit
reward modeling, and they directly extract the policy from preferences. This greatly reduced the
training complexity, but it has been observed that these algorithms can be unstable in the training
process (Azar et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). There is also a large number of works that aim to learn
reward functions from rating (Daniel et al., 2014) or ranking (Yuan et al., 2023; Myers et al., 2022).
Hong et al. (2024) proposed a single-stage supervised learning algorithm ORPO that can perform
supervised fine-tuning and preference alignment in one training session without maintaining. How-
ever, all of these works highly rely on high-quality human feedback, which is often more difficult
and expensive to obtain.
A.2     E XPERIMENT S ETUP AND A DDITIONAL R ESULT

A.2.1    M U J O C O TASKS
In MuJoCo, we consider several robotic control tasks with continuous action space. We evaluate the
performance of our proposed algorithm on aligning robot behaviors with provided demonstrations
and preference data. After the robot training stage, we leverage the ground-truth reward function
from the environment to evaluate the performance.
Data. Following the similar data generation pipeline in Brown et al. (2019), we generate the expert
demonstrations and preference dataset as follows. We first train an expert agent by leveraging the
ground-truth reward function and the popular Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm Haarnoja et al.
(2018), which is developed to solve policy optimization problems with continuous action space.
During the training process, we save the policy checkpoints and collect 30k samples from each
checkpoint. To achieve precise control of dataset quality, we categorize the data collected into three
different classes: low-, medium-, and high-quality datasets according to the performance of the
checkpoints. Then we combine the low- and medium-quality data as the preference dataset and use
high-quality as demonstration data.
Results. We show that AIHF is able to integrate (insufficient amount of) demonstration data and
(not-so-high-quality) preference data to generate high-quality policy, and it significantly outperforms
the RLHF and IPL. Note that IPL (Hejna & Sadigh, 2024) is actually the DPO-type algorithm
applied to multi-horizon MDP, therefore it is an ideal baseline for the MuJoCo setting (since it
the underlying problem is a multi-horizon MDP). In Figure 5, we can see that AIHF outperforms
both RLHF and IPL algorithms. We also observe that due to the limited number of demonstration
data, even BC could provide a high-performing initialization, RLHF still fails to improve policy
quality in the following RL stage Ross & Bagnell (2010); Zeng et al. (2022b). Moreover, since the
preference data quality is only of low-to-medium quality, the RL step based on the learned reward


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 3500                                                                          14000
                                                                                                                                                                                5000
                 3000                                                                          12000

                                                                                               10000                                                                            4000
Average Reward


                                                                                                                                                               Average Reward
                                                                              Average Reward
                 2500
                                                                                               8000
                 2000                                                                                                                                                           3000
                                                                                               6000
                 1500                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                         AIHF                                  4000                                                                                                                            AIHF
                 1000                                                                                                                     AIHF
                                                         RLHF                                                                             RLHF                                  1000                                           RLHF
                                                                                               2000
                 500                                     IPL                                                                              IPL                                                                                  IPL
                                                         Expert Level                             0
                                                                                                                                          Expert Level                            0                                            Expert Level
                    0.0         0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8           1.0                        0.0        0.5    1.0    1.5     2.0     2.5          3.0                      0.00    0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50   1.75      2.00
                          The Number of Policy Optimization Steps1e6                                     The Number of Policy Optimization Steps1e6                                     The Number of Policy Optimization Steps1e6

Figure 5: Top-Left: Hopper Environment; Top-Right: HalfCheetah Environment; Bottom:
Walker2d Environment; AIHF (orange) vs RLHF (blue) vs IPL (purple) (Hejna & Sadigh, 2024);
results are averaged over 3 independent runs. We use 10k demonstrations and 20k preferences.
The RLHF and IPL curve is initialized from a policy pre-trained by BC; the AIHF from a random
policy. The performance is compared against the # of SAC steps performed (for AIHF each policy
alignment performs 5k steps of SAC.)


model fails to significantly boost the fine-tuning performance. In contrast, clearly the proposed
AIHF can effectively integrate preferences and demonstrations, leading to a more robust reward
function and consequently, a high-quality policy.
In SAC, both the policy network and Q network are (64, 64) MLPs with ReLU activation function,
and the step size is set to 3 ∗ 10−3 , we parameterize the reward function by a (64, 64) MLPs with
ReLU activation function. For the reward network, we use Adam as the optimizer, and the step size
is set to be 1 ∗ 10−4 .
The quality of the preference dataset and demonstration dataset are listed in Tab. 1.

                                                 Dataset
                                                                        Non-prefer Data                                           Prefer Data                                          Demonstration Data
                                      Task
                                        Hopper-v2                  2345.20 ± 329.93                                          3024.63 ± 40.52                                            3559.61 ± 73.12
                                      HalfCheetah-v2               7226.37 ± 126.88                                        9434.42 ± 1315.13                                           11635.42 ± 236.51
                                       Walker2d-v2                 3952.60 ± 444.45                                         5091.71 ± 291.73                                            5453.41 ± 71.07

                                                       Table 1: The quality of preference and demonstration.



A.2.2                          S ENTIMENT-C ONTROLLED G ENERATION

Dataset Generation: In the IMDb sentiment completion task, we generate the demonstrations and
preference datasets using the following procedure. Initially, we train a Language Model by em-
ploying the ground-truth reward function DISTILBERT- IMDB and the Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm on 30% of the training dataset for IMDb. Throughout the training process, we save
the policy checkpoint every 500 PPO steps. Subsequently, we select an additional 40% of the train-
ing dataset and generate a response for each prompt for each checkpoint. According to the evaluation
score of each generation, we categorize the data collected into different classes: low-, medium-, and
high-quality datasets, then we combine low-quality and medium-quality as preference datasets, and
use high-quality as demonstration datasets.
Training: After acquiring the preference and demonstration datasets, we train the proposed algo-
rithm AIHF and baselines on the remaining 30% of prompts from the training dataset. We evaluate
the performance of each algorithm using the test datasets for IMDb and HH, along with their corre-
sponding ground truth reward functions. For the GPU resources, we use 8× A100 40G for all the
experiments.
Results: Policy Quality. We find that the proposed approach works well when either preference or
demonstration data, or both, are limited. From the 7, we see that by using the same amount of data
(10k preference, 10k demonstration), AIHF-based algorithms achieve faster convergence than their
RLHF and DPO counterparts.


                                                                                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results: Distribution Mismatch. We show that AIHF is able to alleviate the distribution mismatch
between the generated trajectories by the policy, and the data that the learned reward model is able
to rank. To evaluate the extend of such mismatch, we use the following three steps: (1) use 1k
preference, 1k demonstration to train policy and reward model for RLHF and AIHF ; (2) for a
given set of prompts from test dataset, use RLHF and AIHF to perform generation; (3) use the
trained reward models to rate the generation; (4) compare with the score generated by the ground
truth reward LVWERRA / DISTILBERT- IMDB. Fig. 6 illustrates that the reward score distribution
produced by AIHF aligns closely with that of the ground truth reward, whereas that generated by
RLHF exhibits a poor match. These results show that the reward model learned by AIHF is able to
correctly evaluate the generation produced by the final policy.


Figure 6: Comparison of the distribution of reward score generated by the trained reward models,
and the ground truth reward model. RLHF vs ground truth (left); AIHF vs ground truth (right).



From Fig.7, our proposed algorithm AIHF could obtain higher rewards than baseline methods in
the IMDb setting for almost all KL values. Although AIHF might get a low score from the ground
truth reward model in the earlier step, AIHF would get a higher reward with more iteration and
optimization steps. This indicates that with the mix of demonstration data and preference data, we
could prevent the policy from known issues of reward hacking, especially when the policy learned
more human-aligned features beyond base models (high KL value). Moreover, AIHF is persistent
in the number of preference data, presenting that AIHF could still gain benefit from the limited
preference data in more optimization steps as long as the demonstration data is high quality enough.



            2.5                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                           2.5

            2.0
                                                                    2.0                                                    2.0

            1.5
    Score


                                                            Score


                                                                                                                   Score


                                                                    1.5                                                    1.5

            1.0
                                                                    1.0                                                    1.0

            0.5                                      AIHF                                                   AIHF           0.5                                     AIHF
                                                                    0.5
                                                     RLHF                                                   RLHF                                                   RLHF
                  0    2   4     6    8    10   12   14                   0   2   4     6    8    10   12   14                   0   2   4     6    8    10   12   14
                               KL divergence                                          KL divergence                                          KL divergence


Figure 7: The frontier of expected reward vs KL to the reference policy in IMDB dataset. fix
the demonstration number to 3k Left: Using 1k preference; Middle: Using 2k preferences; Right:
Using 3k preference



A.2.3                 T HE RESULT OF 1B AND 2.8B EXPERIMENTS

Additional Results. We show here the distribution of the reward values of the continuation gener-
ated by the reward models trained by AIHF and RLHF. In Fig. 8, we can observe the distribution of
AIHF and RLHF have overlaps in low-quality continuation, however, AIHF can generate more high-
quality continuations compared to RLHF, which shows that joint optimization can more effectively
align the policy model with the demonstration distribution.


                                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                 RLHF
              160                                                RLHF                                                                            AIHF
                                                                 AIHF                      200
              140
              120
                                                                                           150


                                                                               Frequency
  Frequency
              100
              80
                                                                                           100
              60
              40                                                                           50
              20
               0                                                                            0
                       6   4       2         0      2       4         6                            7.5   5.0     2.5    0.0    2.5   5.0   7.5      10.0
                                 Normalized Score                                                                 Normalized Score

Figure 8: The Reward Distribution of Helpfulness-controlled Generation. Left: Result on
160m model, Right: Results on 1B model, This figure reports the reward distribution of generation
evaluated by PKU-Alignment/beaver-7b-v3.0-reward for AIHF and RLHF.


We record the performance of the two variants, namely AIHF-DPO (10) and Self-Play-AIHF (11),
also RLHF, DPO, IPO and SPIN in Tab. 5. Our proposed AIHF still outperforms all these methods
in this experiment setting.

A.2.4                T HE RESULT OF 7B EXPERIMENTS
We utilize DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 (Rajbhandari et al., 2020) to reduce the memory cost, and we use
VLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) for accelerate data generation/inference. We use eight NVIDIA A100-
40G to do the training with a per-device batch size of 1 for 7B model. We train all models with
bfloat16 precision. We set the learning rate to be 5e-7 for the 7B model with the cosine learning rate
scheduler, and the max sequence length is set to be 512.
Our device cannot conduct the implementation of the standard AIHF (5) using PPO. Therefore, we
employed an online DPO approach (Xiong et al., 2024) for the lower-level policy optimization: 1)
at each policy optimization iteration, we first generate multiple continuations from the current pol-
icy model over the given prompt dataset, 2) then we utilize our estimated explicit reward models to
score each continuation, 3) over each prompt, choose the generated continuation with the highest
reward score and the one with lowest reward score as a generated preference pair to run DPO algo-
rithm to fine-tune the policy model. For Self-Play AIHF (11) implementation, we adopt the same
strategy as Chen et al. (2024), at each epoch, we generate samples with picked 50k data and generate
continuation ã ∼ π(·|s) using the current model π, then optimize (11) with the sampled ã.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we assessed our fine-tuned models on the widely used
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) in Table 2. We also list the metric and
number of shots used for LLM evaluation on each dataset in Table 3. Moreover, in Tab. 4, we also
utilize the Reward-Bench (Lambert et al., 2024) to evaluate the explicit reward models (estimated by
standard preference learning in (3) and AIHF) and the implicit reward model (extracted from DPO).
The implicit reward is calculated by the policy model similar to what the DPO paper Rafailov et al.
(2023) proposed, i.e. r(a|s) := log( ππ(a|s)
                                        0 (a|s) ), the first explicit reward is estimated by BTL reward

model (3), and second explicit reward is estimated by AIHF. The evaluation results show that AIHF
can outperform the benchmark methods in terms of the performance for both policy models and
reward models. We also conduct ablation study with different choice of w1 in (10), as shown in Tab.
6, the improvement of joint learning methods over baseline is robust.

              Dataset          Arc Challenge            TruthfulQA MC2         Winogrande                      GSM8K          HellaSwag      MMLU
   Metric                              acc                      acc                          acc         strict-match         acc_norm           acc
 Num. of Shots                         25                        0                            5                5                 10               5

Table 2: A summarization of the benchmarks we use in this work. We list the metric and number of
shots used for LLM evaluation on each dataset.


A.3                 W HY AIHF C AN O UTPERFORM T WO -S TAGE A LIGNMENT A PPROACHES

In this section, we provide detailed analysis for Sec. 3.4.


                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Tasks           Arc Challenge    TruthfulQA MC2       Winogrande      GSM8k       HellaSwag    MMLU      Avg
 mistral-7b-sft-beta         54.69%               42.96%         77.27%         39.88%       82.23%      59.72%   59.46%
    zephyr-7b-beta           59.64%               55.18%         77.82%         33.51%       84.19%      59.76%   61.68%
         SPIN                58.45%              43.66%          78.30%        39.50%        83.59%      58.60%   60.35%
          DPO                62.80%              53.17%          79.40%        39.20%        85.13%      59.41%   63.19%
          IPO                58.02%              48.29%          79.24%        42.91%        83.93%      60.07%   62.08%
       AIHF-DPO              61.17%              60.03%          79.00%        39.80%        85.71%      60.02%   64.29%
    Self-play AIHF           61.77%              58.29%          78.53%        44.20%        85.53%      58.66%   64.50%
         AIHF                63.90%              58.38%          79.24%        40.56%        86.23%      60.18%   64.75%

Table 3: Test performance of AIHF-DPO and Self-Play AIHF based on mistral-7b-sft-beta across
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard datasets.

            Reward Model              Chat         Chat Hard         Safety          Reasoning          Average
         DPO Reward Model          37.43%            55.92%         64.14%            47.33%            51.21%
         BTL Reward Model          95.11%            56.58%         63.69%            69.22%            71.15%
         AIHF Reward Model         94.41%            55.37%         63.98%            76.75%            72.63%

                      Table 4: Evaluation of Reward Models in Reward-Bench.

A.3.1    SFT AND RLHF P OLICY
We revisit the RLHF pipeline in the context of a simple softmax choice model where τi ∈ A is
selected with probability
                                                   exp(Ri /β)
                                       πi∗ (R) = PN              .                                                   (21)
                                                  j=1 exp(Rj /β)

For simplicity, we have defined Ri := R(τi ). Using this policy model, below let us analyze different
policies according to different ways that the rewards are learned.
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT): Given a demonstration dataset D the goal is the find the policy
πSFT that maximizes likelihood, i.e.:
                                       N
                                       X                                            N
                                                                                    X
                  πSFT := arg max               Eτ` ∼D [log π`∗ (R)] ,       s.t.         π`∗ (R) = 1.               (22)
                                  π
                                          `=1                                       `=1

Next let us identify the optimal reward and its corresponding policy in this case. First, let us find the
reward function. Write (22) in terms of reward optimization, we have:
                                       N
                                       X                exp(R` /β)
                     R∗ = arg max          Eτ` ∼D log PN              =: L1 (R)                                      (23)
                                  R
                                       `=1             j=1 exp(Rj /β)

The partial derivative of the objective function w.r.t. a component Ri , i ∈ [1, · · · , N ] is given by:
                                 "                       #          "                                #
     ∂L1 (R)       X               1     exp(Ri /β)                   1     1      exp(Ri /β)
               =         Eτ` ∼D − PN                       + Eτi ∼D     − PN
       ∂Ri                         β j=1 exp(Rj /β)                   β    β j=1 exp(Rj /β)
                  `:`6=i
                                                  "                    #!
                   1 #{τi ∈ D} X                         exp(Ri /β)
               =                     −     Eτ` ∈D PN                       , i ∈ [1 : N ].             (24)
                  β          |P |                       j=1 exp(Rj /β)
                                            `

Setting the above partial gradient to zero, we obtain
                         #{τi ∈ D}     exp(RbD (τi )/β)
                                   = PN                                         i ∈ [1 : N ],                        (25)
                            |D|       j=1 exp(RD (τj )/β)
                                               b

where we used R bD (τi )’s to denote the optimal reward estimated from the set of SFT data D. Then
according to the definition of the policy given earlier, we obtain
                                                 #{τi ∈ D}
                               πi∗ (R
                                    bD ) =                 , ∀ i ∈ [1, · · · N ].
                                                    |D|

                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Dataset                      DPO             SPIN            IPO            RLHF         AIHF-DPO        Self-Play-AIHF      AIHF
  10k Demonstrations, 5k preferences   0.463 ± 0.093   0.625 ± 0.048   0.616 ± 0.076   0.710 ± 0.085   0.752 ± 0.036   0.640 ± 0.102    1.167 ± 0.157
 10k Demonstrations, 10k preferences   0.474 ± 0.052   0.625 ± 0.048   0.650 ± 0.017   0.896 ± 0.095   0.798 ± 0.026   0.674 ± 0.096    1.190 ± 0.069


Table 5: Evaluated reward scores of fine-tuned 1B Pythia models in HH dataset, evaluated by PKU-
Alignment/beaver-7b-v3.0-reward.

              Tasks                    Arc Challenge      TruthfulQA MC2         Winogrande        GSM8k       HellaSwag       MMLU          Avg
  AIHF-DPO(w1 = 0.01)                     61.86%                  57.55%           79.08%          36.61%        85.58%        60.09%      63.46%
 AIHF-DPO(w1 = 0.001)                     63.25%                  58.73%           79.16%          36.84%        85.59%        59.26%      63.80%
 AIHF-DPO(w1 = 0.0001)                    61.17%                  60.03%           79.00%          39.80%        85.71%        60.02%      64.28%

Table 6: Test performance of AIHF-DPO over different choices of the balancing coefficient across
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard datasets.


Note that the optimal reward learned from the SFT data R   bD should satisfy the system (25). It turns
out that there is a unique solution to the following system of equations:

                                 #{τi ∈ D}     exp(RbD (τi )/β)
                                           = PN                                                 i ∈ {2, . . . , N }                              (26)
                                    |D|       j=1 exp(RD (τj )/β)
                                                       b


with R
     bD (τ1 ) = R̄1 a fixed reference value. A simple argument is provided below. The system (26)
can be re-written as:

                        #{τi ∈ D}       #{τ1 ∈ D}   1 b
                  log             − log           =   RD (τi ) − R̄1                                          i ∈ {2, . . . , N }
                           |D|             |D|      β

Hence, rewards are uniquely determined by demonstration data with a fixed reference value
R
bD (τ1 ) = R̄1 .
It is important to note that, despite the fact that in the SFT we may not directly learn a reward
function, the above analysis says that we are implicitly learning a reward R  bD , assuming that the
policy is parameterized as (21). This implicit reward will be used later to analyze the RLHF policy.
Indeed, if we solve the following SFT policy optimization problem directly
                                                 X                                           X
                                          max           Eτ` ∈D log(π` ),           s.t.            πi = 1,                                       (27)
                                                   `                                         i∈D


                                                                    i ∈D}
one can easily obtain that the optimal policy is given by πi∗ = #{τ|D|    , ∀ i ∈ [1, · · · N ].
Reward Modeling with Preference Data: Now let us analyze the case where the reward is only
learned from a preference dataset. With preference data P := {(τi   τj )}, the BTL model is:

                                                           1                       π ∗ (R)
                                                             R(τi ) − R(τj ) = ∗ i

                                P (τi   τj ) = σ                                               .
                                                           β                  πi (R) + πj∗ (R)


The reward estimation problem is defined as:

                                                         X                     h  π`∗ (R)     i
             R
             bP = arg max L2 (R) :=                                E(τ`  τj )∼P log                                                              (28)
                                 R                                          π`∗ (R) + πj∗ (R)
                                                   `,j:`6=j

                                                    X                                  exp(R` /β)
                                                 =         E(τ`  τj )∼P log                                                                      (29)
                                                                             exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                                                       `,j:`6=j



                                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Take the gradient w.r.t. Ri , we obtain

               ∂`RM (R)         X                   1    1         exp(R` /β)
                           =           E(τi  τj )     −
                  ∂Ri                               β    β exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                               j:j6=i

                                   X                   1          exp(R` /β)
                               +          E(τj  τi ) −
                                                       β exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                                  j:j6=i

                               1 X |Pi j |                       exp(R` /β)
                           =                         1−
                               β             |P|           exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                                   j:j6=i

                                   1 X |Pj i |                   exp(R` /β)
                               +                      −
                                   β           |P|         exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                                      j:j6=i
                                                                                    
                               1  X |Pi j | |Pi,j |                exp(R` /β)
                           =                         −                               
                               β               |P|       |P| exp(R` /β) + exp(Rj /β)
                                      j:j6=i

                              1 X   |Pi j |        π ∗ (R)      |P |
                                                                  i,j
                            =                − ∗ i                                                 (30)
                              β      |Pi,j |  πi (R) + πj∗ (R) |P|
                                    j:j6=i

where in the above derivation we have defined |Pi j | := #{τi   τj in P} and |Pi,j | := |Pi j | +
|Pj i |. Setting the gradient to zero, we obtain
                           X   |Pi j |                  πi∗ (R
                                                             bP )         |P |
                                                                            i,j
                                               −                                = 0.               (31)
                                     |Pi,j |       πi∗ (R           bP ) |P|
                                                        bP ) + π ∗ (R
                                                                j
                           j:j6=i

We shall denote by R bP as a solution to the above system of equations. The first-order condition (31)
can be written in implicit form as:
                 P                                P                                P
 ∗ b                j:j6=i |Pi j |                 j:j6=i |Pi j |                    j:j6=i |Pi j |
πi (RP ) = P                |Pij |
                                      =P                   |Pij |
                                                                      := P
                                                                                                    ∗ b
              j:j6=i ∗ b          ∗ b
                     πi (RP )+πj (RP )      j:j6=i  P
                                                        1−        ∗ b       j:j6=i |Pij |ρ−(i,j) (π (RP ))
                                                              `∈A\{i,j} π` (RP )
                                                                                                   (32)
                                              P             −1
where we have defined ρ−(i,j) (π) := 1 − `∈A\{i,j} π`           as the expected number of times an
action other than τi or τj is selected when sampling actions from π infinitely many times.
RLHF Policy. Based on the above two analysis, we are ready to analyze the RLHF policy. The
RLHF policy is defined as follows:
                    π RLHF = arg max Eτi ∼π R bP (τi ) − βKL(π||π SFT )

                                         π∈∆N

      bP is the estimator obtained from preference data, π SFT is the SFT model trained with
where R
demonstration dataset D, and ∆N is the probability simplex.
It can be easily shown that the solution π RLHF is of the form:

                                   π SFT (τi ) exp β1 R
                                                      bP (τi )
                π RLHF (τi ) = P
                                  N     SFT (τ ) exp 1 R
                                  j=1 π         j       β P (τj )
                                                           b

                                   exp β1 R bD (τi ) exp 1 R
                                                             β
                                                               bP (τi )
                             =P                                                    (using (26))
                                  N           1 b                1 b
                                  j=1 exp       R
                                              β D j(τ )   exp       R
                                                                 β P j (τ )
                                         1 b

                                   exp β (RD (τi ) + R   bP (τi ))
                             = PN             1 b

                                  j=1 exp β (RD (τj ) + RP (τj ))
                                                             b

                             = πi∗ RbD + R bP .                                                    (33)


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3.2    T HE AIHF P OLICY
The AIHF Policy. The proposed AIHF estimation problem is
                        bAIHF = arg max `D+P (R) := |D|L1 (R) + |P|L2 (R)
                        R                                                                           (34)
                                         R
                                                                               π ∗ (R)
where L1 (R) := Eτi ∼D [log πi∗ (R)] and L2 (R) := E(τj ≺τi )∼P [log π∗ (R)+π
                                                                          i
                                                                              ∗     ], and πi∗ (R) is
                                                                      i       j (R)
given by (21).
Similarly as before, taking gradient w.r.t. Ri , and leverage (24) and (30), we obtain
                                                                                                 
                                                                                ∗
  ∂`D+P (R)      #{τi in D}                         X               X          πi (R)
              =               |D| − πi∗ (R)|D| +         |Pi j | −                        |Pi,j | (35)
     ∂Ri              |D|                                                πi∗ (R) + πj∗ (R)
                                                    j:j6=i             j6=i

Setting the above condition to zero, we obtain that the AIHF reward should satisfy the following
                        X                                   X                 |Pi,j |
         #{τi in D} +         |Pi j | = πi∗ (R
                                             bAIHF ) |D| +
                                                                    ∗ b AIHF ) + π ∗ (R  bAIHF )
                       j:j6=i                              j:j6=i πi (R               j
                                                            X
                                      = πi∗ (R
                                             bAIHF ) |D| +        |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j) π ∗ (R bAIHF )
                                                              j:j6=i

Or equivalently,
                                                              P
                                              #{τi in D} + j6=i |Pi j |
                        πi∗ (R
                             bAIHF ) =                                                              (36)
                                         |D| + j:j6=i |Pi,j |ρ−(i,j) π ∗ (R
                                              P                           bAIHF )
                                      bAIHF with a fixed reference value R
The system (36) has a unique solution R                                  bAIHF (τ1 ) = R̄1 .
Discussion. Now let us compare the RLHF policy (33) and AIHF policy (36). First, observe that
RLHF policy is a function of the sum of two reward functions, one learned from the demonstration
data and one learned from the preference data, while the AIHF policy takes a more complex form.
To have a better understanding about the two policies, let us consider the extreme cases where the
SFT and the preference datasets are unbalanced, where either |D|   |P| or |P|   |D|.

        • Case |D|   |P|. In this case, πi∗ (R    bAIHF ) ≈ #{τi in D} = π ∗ (R bD ), so the AIHF policy
                                                                 |D|          i
          will ignore the preference dataset, while focusing on the SFT policy; however, for the
          RLHF policy, one needs to first separately performs the reward estimation, but in this case
          R̂P can be very noisy due to lack of data; Then the RLHF policy will also be noisy since it
          will be influenced by the noisy reward function R̂P .
                                                                     P
        • Case |P|   |D|. In this case, let’s further assume that j:j6=i |Pi j |   #{τi in D}, ∀ i,
          that is, for each trajectory τi , the number of times it appears in the preference data is much
          larger than its appearance in the demonstration data. In this case, it is easy to see that
          πi∗ (R
               bAIHF ) ≈ π ∗ (R
                             i
                                bP ), while the RLHF policy will still be noisy as in the first case.

A.3.3    N UMERICAL E XAMPLES
Example 1: With β = 1 and only two actions τ1 and τ2 . Since ρ−(1,2) (π) = ρ−(2,1) (π) = 1, it
follows from equations (26), (32), (36) that:
                                  bAIHF ) = #{τ1 in D} + #{τ2 ≺ τ1 in P}
                   π1AIHF := π1∗ (R
                                                       |D| + |P|
                                               |D|                   |P|
                                          =           π1∗ (R
                                                           bD ) +          π ∗ (R
                                                                                bP ).
                                            |D| + |P|             |D| + |P| 1

Slightly abusing notations, let π1∗ := π1∗ (R∗ ) where R∗ is the ground-truth reward. It follows that
                  ∗      ∗                      ∗      ∗
         bD )) = π1 (1−π1 ) , Var(π ∗ (R
Var(π1∗ (R                             bP )) = π1 (1−π1 ) and
                     |D|           1               |P|

                                    π1∗ (1 − π1∗ )
                   Var(π1AIHF ) =                  < min{Var(π1∗ (R
                                                                  bD )), Var(π1∗ (R
                                                                                  bP ))}
                                     |D| + |P|

                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hence, the AIHF policy estimate has less variance than either the policy estimated obtained from
only demonstrations or preferences.

To further illustrate, suppose the ground truth is R∗ (τ1 ) = R∗ (τ2 ) and in the dataset there are more
demonstrations than preferences, i.e. |D|   |P|:
        #{τ1 in D} = #{τ2 in D} = 50,               #{τ1   τ2 in P} = 6,         #{τ2   τ1 in P} = 4.
                                  bD ) = #{τ1 in D} = 50 and the solution to (32) yields
With the given data, π1SFT = π1∗ (R         |D|       100

                                                      exp R
                                                          bP (τ1 )                6
                              π1∗ (R
                                   bP ) =                                    =      .
                                               exp R
                                                   bP (τ1 ) + exp R
                                                                  bP (τ2 )       10
                  100
Hence, π1AIHF = 10+100 π1∗ (R
                            bD ) + 10 π ∗ (R
                                  10+100 1
                                           bP ) = 56 . It follows from (33) that:
                                                  110

                                                  π1SFT exp RbP (τ1 )
                             π1RLHF =
                                        π SFT exp R
                                           1
                                                  bP (τ1 ) + π SFT exp rbP (τ2 )
                                                                     2
                                                    exp R
                                                        bP (τ1 )              6
                                    =                                    =      .
                                        exp R
                                            bP (τ1 ) + exp R
                                                           bP (τ2 )          10
 In this example, the RLHF policy estimator is the furthest away from ground-truth, because it does
not correctly use the information provided by the demonstration data which in this case happens by
chance to be correct π1SFT = π1∗ (R
                                  bP ) = 1 .
                                         2

As a second example, again suppose the ground truth is R∗ (τ1 ) = R∗ (τ2 ) and in the dataset there
are more preferences than demonstrations, |P|   |D|:
     {#τ1 in D} = 6,         {#τ2 in D} = 4,         {#τ1   τ2 in P} = {#τ2   τ1 in P} = 50.            (37)

In this case, π1SFT = π1∗ (R
                           bD ) = 6 and the solution to (32) yields
                                  10

                                                     exp R
                                                         bP (τ1 )                 50
                             π1∗ (R
                                  bP ) =                                     =       .
                                            exp R
                                                bP (τ1 ) + exp R
                                                               bP (τ2 )          100
It follows from (33) that:
                                                  π1SFT exp RbP (τ1 )
                         π1RLHF =
                                        π SFT exp R
                                           1
                                                  bP (τ1 ) + π SFT exp R
                                                                    2
                                                                       bP (τ2 )
                                         π SF T      6
                                    = SF T 1 SF T =    .
                                     π1     + π2    10
Hence, π1AIHF = 10+100 10
                            π1∗ (R
                                 bD ) + 100 π ∗ (R
                                       10+100 1
                                                  bP ) = 56 . In this example, the RLHF policy
                                                           110
estimator is again farthest from ground-truth, because it does not correctly dismiss the information
provided by the demonstration data which is less informative than preference.
Example 2: Let us use an illustrative example to show that RLHF method will result in signif-
icant data under-utilization when the demonstration coverage is limited. With β = 1, assume
that there are 50 actions, i.e. A = {1, 2, . . . , 50} and each with a ground-truth reward defined
                        ( i −µ)2
                         50
by R∗ (τi ) = σ√12π e− 2σ2 , where µ = 0.5 and σ = 2. Assume we can sample demonstra-
tion and preference from the ground truth reward distribution: demonstrations are sampled from the
multinomial distribution, while preferences are sampled from the BTL model.
In an extreme scenario, let demonstrations only include actions 1 through 45, i.e. D ∩
{45, 46, . . . , 50} = ∅, while preferences have full coverage across all actions. In the subse-
quent experiment, we initially sample 2000 demonstrations using the multinomial distribution πi∗ =
   exp R∗                                                                              exp Ri∗
Pj=45 i ∗ , and obtain 200 preferences for each preference pair with P (i   j) =
      exp R                                                                        exp R∗ +exp R∗ .
                                                                                                  j       i
  j=1       j
We then calculate the RLHF and AIHF policies as in in (33) and (36) to obtain the result depicted in
Figure 9:


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          AIHF
                                              0.030       RLHF
                                                          SFT
                                              0.028       Ground-Truth


                                Probability
                                              0.026

                                              0.024

                                              0.022

                                              0.020

                                              0.018
                                                      0          10          20       30   40    50
                                                                            Action Index

Figure 9: The optimal policy of RLHF, SFT, AIHF, and Ground-truth distribution. The left region of
the red dotted line is included in the demonstration, while the right region is uncovered. We report
the results with 100 random repeats.


From the result shown in Figure 9, we demonstrate that both SFT and RLHF transfer the weight
from uncovered action to covered actions when demonstration coverage is limited, as indicated by
πSF T (τi ) = 0, τi ∈ {45, 46, . . . , 50}. Consequently, the weight of covered actions is significantly
higher than the ground truth. However, this issue does not occur when jointly optimizing the demon-
stration and preference in the AIHF method.

A.4     P ROOFS

A.4.1    U SEFUL L EMMAS
Assumption 1 (Ergodicity) For any policy π, assume the Markov chain with transition kernel P is
irreducible and aperiodic under policy π. Then there exist constants κ > 0 and ρ ∈ (0, 1) such that
                          sup kP(st ∈ ·|s0 = s, π) − µπ (·)kT V ≤ κρt ,                          ∀t≥0
                          s∈S

where k · kT V is the total variation (TV) norm; µπ is the stationary state distribution under π.

Assumption 1 assumes the Markov chain mixes at a geometric rate. It is a common assumption in
the literature of RL, which holds for any time-homogeneous Markov chain with finite-state space or
any uniformly ergodic Markov chain with general-state space.

Assumption 2 For any s ∈ S, a ∈ A and any reward parameter θ, the following holds:
                                                                         ∇θ r(s, a; θ) ≤ Lr ,                   (38a)
                                   ∇θ r(s, a; θ1 ) − ∇θ r(s, a; θ2 ) ≤ Lg kθ1 − θ2 k                            (38b)
where Lr and Lg are positive constants.

2, we next provide the following Lipschitz properties:

Lemma A.1 Suppose Assumptions 1 - 2 hold. For any reward parameter θ1 and θ2 , the following
results hold:
                  |Qsof t            sof t
                    rθ ,πθ (s, a) − Qrθ ,πθ (s, a)| ≤ Lq kθ1 − θ2 k,                            ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A   (39a)
                      1     1                              2     2

                                     k∇L(θ1 ) − ∇L(θ2 )k ≤ Lc kθ1 − θ2 k                                        (39b)
where Qsof  t
        rθ ,πθ (·, ·) denotes the soft Q-function under the reward function r(·, ·; θ) and the policy πθ .
The positive constants Lq and Lc are defined in Appendix A.4.3.

A.4.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.1
Before we proceed to the proof of Lemma 4.1, we have the following remark.


                                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Remark: The KL-regularized MDP problem described by (5b) and (7) has a closed-form solution:
                                             π 0 (a|s) exp(Qθ (s, a)/β)
                                 πθ (a|s) = P 0                           ,                                  (40)
                                             ã π (ã|s) exp(Qθ (s, a)/β)

where the corresponding value function Vθ and the Q-function Qθ are defined as below:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                   Vθ (s) := Eτ ∼πθ R(τ ; θ) − β   γ t DKL π(·|st )kπ 0 (·|st ) s0 = s                       (41a)
                                                          t=0

                   Qθ (s, a) := r(s, a; θ) + γEs0 ∼P (·|s,a) Vθ (s0 ) .

                                                                                                             (41b)

Further, assuming that T = 1, i.e., τ = (s0 , a0 ), and considering the LLM alignment problem as
a sequence-level training problem (this is a popular simplification in language models, see, e.g.,
Rafailov et al. (2023)), the closed-form expression of πθ in (40) can be reduced to:

                                                     π 0 (a|s) exp( β1 r(s, a; θ))
                               πθ (a|s) = P                                                .                 (42)
                                                    a∈A   π 0 (a|s) exp( β1 r(s, a; θ))

Here, under a reward parameter θ and the corresponding optimal policy πθ of (40).
Moreover, under a fixed reward parameter θ, we have defined the optimal policy πθ as below:
                                  X∞
                                        t                                 0
          πθ := arg max Eτ A ∼π       γ r(st , at ; θ) − βDKL π(·|st )||π (·|st )     .
                           π
                                              t=0


According to Uehara et al. (2023), the optimal policy πθ of (7) has the closed form expression as
below:
                                 π 0 (a|s) exp Qθ (s,a;θ)

                                                   β
                 πθ (a|s) = P                      Qθ (s,ã;θ)
                                                                 , ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A.            (43)
                                       0
                               ã∈A π (ã|s) exp        β


Based on the closed form of πθ , we can also obtain the closed form of Vθ as following:
                                          X                   Qθ (s, a)
                         Vθ (s) := β log       π 0 (a|s) exp               .                                 (44)
                                                                 β
                                                      a∈A


Then we can re-write the demonstration loss L1 (θ) as below:
                   ∞
                   X
                        t
L1 (θ) = Eτ E ∼πE      γ log πθ (at |st )
                     t=0
                    ∞                                       Qθ (st ,at )
                                            π 0 (at |st ) exp
                    X
                                                                β
      = Eτ E ∼πE           γ t log       P                      Qθ (st ,ã)
                                                0
                     t=0                  ã∈A π (ã|st ) exp        β
                    ∞
                    X
                                                    Qθ (st , at )            X                          Qθ (st , ã)
      = Eτ E ∼πE      γ t log π 0 (at |st ) exp                      − log          π 0 (ã|st ) exp
                  t=0
                                                          β                                                   β
                                                                               ã∈A
                  X∞
                        t        0              Qθ (st , at )        X
                                                                              0                 Qθ (st , ã)
      = Eτ E ∼πE      γ log π (at |st ) +                     − log         π (ã|st ) exp
                  t=0
                                                    β                                               β
                                                                      ã∈A
                   X ∞
        1                                                                  X                         Qθ (st , ã)
      = Eτ E ∼πE         γ t β log π 0 (at |st ) + Qθ (st , at ) − β log          π 0 (ã|st ) exp
        β           t=0
                                                                                                           β
                                                                            ã∈A
                   X ∞
        1
      = Eτ E ∼πE         γ t β log π 0 (at |st ) + Qθ (st , at ) − Vθ (st )                                    (45)
        β           t=0


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we can take gradient of L1 (θ) w.r.t. the reward parameter θ, we have the following expression:

                               X ∞
                   1
        ∇L1 (θ) :=   Eτ E ∼πE       γ t ∇θ β log π 0 (at |st ) + ∇θ Qθ (st , at ) − ∇θ Vθ (st )
                   β            t=0
                              X ∞
                  1
                 = Eτ E ∼πE        γ t ∇θ Qθ (st , at ) − ∇θ Vθ (st )
                  β            t=0
                              X ∞
                  1                  t
                 = Eτ E ∼πE        γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) + γ∇θ Vθ (st+1 ) − ∇θ Vθ (st )
                  β            t=0
                              X ∞
                  1                  t                     1
                 = Eτ E ∼πE        γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) − Es0 ∼ρ ∇θ Vθ (s0 )                         (46)
                  β            t=0
                                                           β


In order to calculate the expression of ∇L1 (θ), we further derive the expression of ∇θ Vθ (s0 ):


                                          X                          Qθ (s0 , a)
               ∇θ Vθ (s0 ) = ∇θ β log              π 0 (a|s0 ) exp
                                                                           β
                                             a∈A

                                         π 0 (a|s0 ) exp Qθ (sβ0 ,a)

                               X                                              ∇θ Qθ (s, a)
                           =β                                    Qθ (s0 ,a)        β
                                    P            0
                              a∈A       a∈A π (a|s0 ) exp            β
                                          h                   i
                           = Ea∼πθ (·|s0 ) ∇θ Qθ (s0 , a)
                                                              h                                i
                           = Ea0 ∼πθ (·|s0 ),s1 ∼P (·|s0 ,a0 ) ∇θ r(s0 , a0 ; θ) + γ∇θ Vθ (s1 )
                                       X ∞
                                                t
                           = Eτ A ∼πθ         γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) | s0                              (47)
                                         t=0



By plugging (47) into (46), we obtain the following expression:

                                 X∞                                    X∞
                     1                                      1
         ∇L1 (θ) =     Eτ E ∼πE      γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) − Eτ A ∼πθ      γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ)    (48)
                     β           t=0
                                                            β          t=0



A.4.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA A.1

To prove Lemma A.1, we will prove the equality (39a) and the equality (39b) respectively. The
constants Lq and Lc in Lemma A.1 has the expression:

                                                          p
                              Lr                 2Lq Lr Cd |S| · |A|   2Lg
                       Lq :=     ,         Lc :=                     +     .
                             1−γ                        1−γ            1−γ


A.4.4    P ROOF OF I NEQUALITY (39 A )

In this subsection, we prove the inequality (39a) in Lemma A.1.
We show that Qsoft
                 rθ ,πθ has a bounded gradient with respect to any reward parameter θ, then the
inequality (39a) holds due to the mean value theorem. According to the soft Bellman equation,
we have shown the explicit expression of ∇θ Qsoft
                                               rθ ,πθ (s, a) for any s ∈ S and a ∈ A. Using this


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


expression, we have the following series of relations:
                                                                      h                               i
            k∇θ Qsoft
                 rθ ,πθ (s, a)k =   Ea0 ∼πθ (·|s0 ),s1 ∼P (·|s0 ,a0 )   ∇ θ r(s ,
                                                                               0 0a ; θ) + γ∇   V (s
                                                                                              θ θ 1  )
                                            X
                                (i)
                                = Eτ ∼πθ            γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) (s0 , a0 ) = (s, a)
                                                          t≥0
                                      (ii)
                                                           X
                                                                 t
                                      ≤ Eτ ∼πθ                  γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ)      (s0 , a0 ) = (s, a)
                                                          t≥0
                                      (iii)
                                                           X
                                                                  t
                                       ≤ Eτ ∼πθ                 γ Lr (s0 , a0 ) = (s, a)
                                                          t≥0
                                                Lr
                                      =                                                                                   (49)
                                               1−γ

where (i) is from the equality (47) in the proof of Lemma A.1, (ii) follows Jensen’s inequality and
(iii) follows the inequality (38a) in Assumption 2. To complete this proof, we use the mean value
theorem to show that

   |Qsoft             soft                       soft
     rθ ,πθ (s, a) − Qrθ ,πθ (s, a)| ≤ k max ∇θ Qrθ ,πθ (s, a)k · kθ1 − θ2 k ≤ Lq kθ1 − θ2 k                              (50)
        1     1                  2     2                    θ

                                                            Lr
where the last inequality follows (49) and we denote Lq := 1−γ . Therefore, we have proved the
Lipschitz continuous inequality in (39a).


A.4.5   P ROOF OF I NEQUALITY (39 B )

In this section, we prove the inequality (39b) in Lemma A.1.
According to Lemma A.1, the gradient ∇L1 (θ) is expressed as:
                                            X                                           X
                                                      t                                            t
              ∇L1 (θ) = Eτ ∼πE                       γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) − Eτ ∼πθ                 γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) .   (51)
                                               t≥0                                          t≥0



Using the above relation, we have

              k∇L1 (θ1 ) − ∇L1 (θ2 )k
                             X                                   X
               (i)                t                                 t
               =     Eτ ∼πE     γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πθ1    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) −
                                     t≥0                                              t≥0
                               X                                  X
                                  t                                  t
                       Eτ ∼πE    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 ) − Eτ ∼πθ2    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
                                     t≥0                                           t≥0
                               X                                                  X
                                           t                                            t
              ≤ Eτ ∼πE                γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πE                   γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 ) +
                                t≥0                                              t≥0
                  |                                      {z                               }
                                                     :=term A
                                   X                                  X
                                      t                                  t
                          Eτ ∼πθ1    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πθ2    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )                             (52)
                                     t≥0                                               t≥0
                      |                                                 {z                                          }
                                                                      :=term B


where (i) follows the exact gradient expression in equation (51). Then we separately analyze term
A and term B in (52).


                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For term A, it follows that
                         X                                    X
                 Eτ ∼πE     γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πE    γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
                                 t≥0                                       t≥0
                   (i)
                                  X
                                            t
                   ≤ Eτ ∼πE                γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
                                     t≥0
                   (ii)
                                   X
                   ≤ Eτ ∼πE                γ t Lg kθ1 − θ2 k
                                     t≥0
                    Lg
                =        kθ1 − θ2 k                                                                     (53)
                   1−γ
where (i) follows Jensen’s inequality and (ii) is from (38b) in Assumption 2.
For the term B, it holds that
          X                                    X
                t                                 t
 Eτ ∼πθ1      γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πθ2    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
            t≥0                                            t≥0
(i)
               X                                            X
≤ Eτ ∼πθ1                γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πθ2    γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 )
                  t≥0                                            t≥0
                   X                                          X
      + Eτ ∼πθ2            γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − Eτ ∼πθ2    γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
                   t≥0                                             t≥0
(ii)

     1
 ≤        E(s,a)∼d(·,·;πθ1 ) ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − E(s,a)∼d(·,·;πθ2 ) ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 )
   1−γ
             X
                  t
  + Eτ ∼πθ2      γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) − ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
                  t≥0
(iii)
                                                                                           X
    1             X
 ≤                          ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 ) d(s, a; πθ1 ) − d(s, a; πθ2 )   + Eτ ∼πθ2    γ k Lg kθ1 − θ2 k
   1−γ
              s∈S,a∈A                                                                        k≥0
(iv)    2Lr                                        Lg
 ≤           kd(·, ·; πθ1 ) − d(·, ·; πθ2 )kT V +     kθ1 − θ2 k                                   (54)
       1−γ                                        1−γ
where (i) follows the triangle inequality, (ii) is from Jensen’s inequality
                                                                         P and the definition of the
discounted state-action visitation measure d(s, a; π) := (1 − γ)π(a|s) t≥0 γ t P π (st = s|s0 ∼ η);
(iii) is from (38b) in Assumption 2;(iv) is from (38a) and the definition of the total variation norm.
Consider the L2 term:
                              L2 (θ) := E(τi ,τw )∼πP [log (σ (R(τw ; θ) − R(τi ; θ)))]
where σ(x) is sigmoid function defined by: σ(x) = 1+e1−x . We have
∇θ L2 (θ) = E(τi ,τw )∼πP [(1 − σ(R(τw ; θ) − R(τi ; θ))) · (∇θ R(τw ; θ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ))] .

= E(τi ,τw )∼πP (∇θ R(τw ; θ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ)) − σ(R(τw ; θ) − R(τi ; θ))(∇θ R(τw ; θ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ))
Using the triangle inequality, we obtain the following equation:
         k∇L2 (τw , τl ; θ1 ) − ∇L2 (τw , τl ; θ2 )k

       ≤ E(τi ,τw )∼πP (∇θ R(τw ; θ1 ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ1 )) − (∇θ R(τw ; θ2 ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ2 ))
          |                                          {z                                        }
                                                            :=term A

           + E(τi ,τw )∼πP σ(R(τw ; θ1 ) − R(τi ; θ1 ))(∇θ R(τw ; θ1 ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ1 ))
             |                                  {z                                     }

           −σ(R(τw ; θ2 ) − R(τi ; θ2 ))(∇θ R(τw ; θ2 ) − ∇θ R(τi ; θ2 ))                               (55)
           |                             {z                                 }
                                                :=term B



                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


First we bound the term A of (55)
               X                                                             X
term A =            γ t ∇θ r(sw
                              t , a w
                                    t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                                    ∇ θ r(sl
                                                             , a
                                                           t t 1
                                                                l
                                                                  ; θ )  −     γ t
                                                                                   ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                                          t , at ; θ2 ) − γ t
                                                                                                              ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                                       , a
                                                                                                                     t t 2
                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                            ; θ )
                        t≥0                                                                   t≥0
        X                                                                    X
≤             γ t ∇θ r(sw    w           t      w w
                        t , at ; θ1 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 ) +                    γ t ∇θ r(slt , alt ; θ1 ) − γ t ∇θ r(slt , alt ; θ2 )
        t≥0                                                                  t≥0
    2Lg
 ≤      kθ1 − θ2 k                                                                                                   (56)
   1−γ
Then we bounded term B of (55):
term B =
       X                                                      X
= σ        γ t r(sw
                  t , a w
                        t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                        r(sl
                                             , a
                                           t t 1
                                                 l
                                                   ; θ )        γ t
                                                                    ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                           t , a t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                                                                                 ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                          , a
                                                                                                        t t 1
                                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                ; θ )
           t≥0                                                         t≥0
         X                                                           X
−σ                  γ t r(sw    w           t   l    l
                           t , at ; θ2 ) − γ r(st , at ; θ2 )                γ t ∇θ r(sw    w           t      l    l
                                                                                       t , at ; θ2 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
           t≥0                                                         t≥0
         X                                                         X
= σ                 γ t r(sw
                           t , a w
                                 t ; θ1 ) − γ t
                                                r(sl
                                                     , a
                                                   t t 1
                                                         l
                                                           ; θ )     γ t
                                                                         ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                                t , a t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                                                                                      ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                               , a
                                                                                                             t t 1
                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                     ; θ )
              t≥0                                                  t≥0
       X                                                      X
−σ              γ r(sw
                    t     w           t   l    l
                     t , at ; θ1 ) − γ r(st , at ; θ1 )                γ ∇θ r(sw
                                                                         t          w           t      l    l
                                                                               t , at ; θ2 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
         t≥0                                                     t≥0
       X                                                      X
+σ              γ r(sw
                    t     w           t   l    l
                     t , at ; θ1 ) − γ r(st , at ; θ1 )                γ ∇θ r(sw
                                                                         t          w           t      l    l
                                                                               t , at ; θ2 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
         t≥0                                                     t≥0
     X                                               X
            t   w w              t   l    l             t      w w              t      l    l
σ          γ r(st , at ; θ2 ) − γ r(st , at ; θ2 )     γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ2 )
     t≥0                                                    t≥0
         X                                                           X
≤ σ                 γ t r(sw
                           t , a w
                                 t ; θ1 ) − γ t
                                                r(sl
                                                     ,
                                                   t t a l
                                                           ; θ 1 )     γ t ∇θ r(sw    w           t      l    l
                                                                                 t , at ; θ1 ) − γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ1 )
              t≥0                                                  t≥0
        X                                                              X
    +         γ t ∇θ r(sw
                        t , a w
                              t ; θ 2 ) − γ t
                                              ∇ θ r(sl
                                                       , a
                                                     t t 2
                                                           l
                                                             ; θ )  +    γ t
                                                                             ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                                    t , a t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                                                                                          ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                                   , a
                                                                                                                 t t 1
                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                         ; θ )
        t≥0                                                                     t≥0
       X                                                            X
     σ   γ t ∇θ r(sw
                   t , a w
                         t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                         ∇ θ r(sl
                                                  , a
                                                t t 1
                                                      l
                                                        ; θ )  − σ    γ t
                                                                          ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                                 t , a t ; θ 1 ) − γ t
                                                                                                       ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                                , a
                                                                                                              t t 1
                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                      ; θ )
           t≥0                                                                     t≥0
     2Lg               Lg              3Lg
≤        kθ1 − θ2 k +     kθ1 − θ2 k =     kθ1 − θ2 k                                                                              (57)
     1−γ              1−γ              1−γ
Plugging the inequalities (53), (54) to (52), it holds that
                k∇L(θ1 ) − ∇L(θ2 )k
                       2Lr                                         6Lg
                 ≤          kd(·, ·; πθ1 ) − d(·, ·; πθ2 )kT V +        kθ1 − θ2 k
                     1−γ                                          1−γ
                 (i) 2L C                                     6Lg
                         r d
                 ≤           kQsoft            soft
                                 rθ1 ,πθ1 − Qrθ2 ,πθ2 k +          kθ1 − θ2 k
                       1−γ                                   1−γ
                              p
                          r d |S| · |A|
                 (ii) 2L C                                                 6Lg
                  ≤                        kQsoft            soft
                                              rθ1 ,πθ1 − Qrθ2 ,πθ2 k∞ +         kθ1 − θ2 k
                             1−γ                                           1−γ
                                     p
                 (iii)   2Lq Lr Cd |S| · |A|           6Lg
                  ≤                                +           kθ1 − θ2 k.                                                         (58)
                                 1−γ                  1−γ
                                               p
                                      2Lq Lr Cd |S|·|A|   5L
Define the constant Lc :=                    1−γ        + 1−γg , we have the following inequality:
                             k∇L(θ1 ) − ∇L(θ2 )k ≤ Lc kθ1 − θ2 k.
Therefore, we complete the proof of the inequality (39b) in Lemma A.1.


                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

In this section, we prove (20a) and (20b) respectively, to show the convergence of the lower-level
problem and the upper-level problem.

A.5.1            P ROOF OF (20 A )
In this proof, we first show the convergence of the lower-level variable {πk }k≥0 . Recall that we
approximate the optimal policy πθk by πk+1 at each iteration k. We first analyze the approximation
error between πθk and πk+1 as follows. For any s ∈ S and a ∈ A, we have the following relation:

       log πk+1 (a|s) − log πθk (a|s)
                π 0 (a|s) exp Qsoft (s, a)                  π 0 (a|s) exp Qsoft
      (i)                          rθk ,πk                                         rθk ,πθk (s, a)
      = log P                                        − log P
                           0         soft                            0                soft
                   ã exp π (ã|s) Qrθk ,πk (s, ã)              ã π (ã|s) exp Qrθk ,πθk (s, ã)
      (ii)
                                                        X
                                                            0
       ≤ Qsoft                soft                                            soft

            rθ ,πk (s, a) −  Qrθ ,πθ  (s,  a) +    log    π   (ã|s) exp   Q  rθ ,πk (s,  ã)
                        k                            k     k                                                k
                                                                                       ã
                         X
                                   π 0 (ã|s) exp Qsoft

             − log                                 rθ ,πθ (s, ã)                                                       (59)
                                                                   k       k
                              ã

where (i) follows (40); (ii) is by the triangle inequality. We further analyze the second term in (59).
                                                                    P
We first denote the operator log(kw exp(v)k1 ) := log(k ã∈A w exp(vã )k1 ), where the vector
w, v ∈ R|A| and v = [v1 , v2 , · · · , v|A| ], w = [w1 , w2 , · · · , w|A| ]. Then for any v 0 , v 00 ∈ R|A| , we
have the following relation:
                                                      (i)
   log kw0 exp(v 0 )k1 − log kw00 exp(v 00 )k1 = v 0 − v 00 , ∇v log kw exp(v)k1 |v=vc


                                                      ≤ kv 0 − v 00 k∞ · k∇v log kw exp(v)k1 |v=vc k1


                                                                               (ii)
                                                = kv 0 − v 00 k∞                                   (60)
where (i) follows the mean value theorem and vc is a convex combination of v 0 and v 00 ; (ii) follows
the following equalities:
                                  wi exp(vi )
                                                  , k∇v log kw exp(v)k1 k1 = 1, ∀v ∈ R|A| .

[∇v log kw exp(v)k1 ]i = P
                              1≤a≤|A| wa exp(va )

Through plugging (60) into (59), it holds that

           log πk+1 (a|s) − log πθk (a|s)
                       ≤ Qsoft             soft                 soft              soft
                          rθ ,πk (s, a) − Qrθ ,πθ (s, a) + max Qrθ ,πk (s, ã) − Qrθ ,πθ (s, ã)                        (61)
                                   k                           k       k           ã∈A         k               k   k


Taking the infinity norm over R|S|·|A| , the following result holds:
                       k log πk+1 − log πθk k∞ ≤ 2kQsoft             soft
                                                         rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞                                            (62)
                                                                                            k       k   k

where k log πk+1 − log πθk k∞ = maxs∈S,a∈A | log πk+1 (a|s) − log πθk (a|s)| and kQsoft
                                                                                   rθk ,πk −
Qsoft   k
 rθ ,πθ ∞   = max s∈S,a∈A   |Qsoft
                              rθ ,πk (s, a) − Qsoft
                                               rθ ,πθ (s, a)|.
    k        k                                             k                       k    k


Based on the inequality (62), we analyze kQsoft           soft
                                               rθk ,πk − Qrθk ,πθk k∞ to show the convergence of the
policy estimates. It leads to the following analysis:
 kQsoft         soft
     rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞
         k                     k       k

  = kQsoft      soft      soft
      rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ + Qrθ
                                                                          soft            soft         soft
                                                                ,πθk−1 − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 + Qrθk−1 ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πk k∞
                  k                    k     k            k−1

  ≤ kQsoft      soft
      rθ ,πθ − Qrθ
                                                               soft         soft                soft       soft
                                                 ,πθk−1 k∞ + kQrθk−1 ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + kQrθk ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πk k∞
                  k     k                  k−1

  (i)
  ≤ Lq kθk − θk−1 k + kQsoft
                        rθ
                                                                 soft                soft       soft
                                                          ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + kQrθk ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πk k∞
                                                    k−1

  (ii)
   ≤ kQsoft
       rθ
                                   soft
                            ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 2Lq kθk − θk−1 k                                                   (63)
                      k−1


                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where (i) is from (39a) in Lemma A.1; (ii) follows (39a). Based on (63), we further analyze the two
terms in (63) as below.
Recall we have the soft Bellman operator expressed as below:
                                                                                       !
                                                            X
                                                               0 0 0           0 0

        Tθ (Q)(s, a) = r(s, a; θ) + γEs0 ∼P (·|s0 ,a0 ) log   π (a |s ) exp Q(s , a )                                             (64)
                                                                                     a0


According to the soft Bellman operator, it holds that
                                                              0
Qsoft                                               soft
 rθ ,πk+1 (s, a) = r(s, a; θk ) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) [Vrθ ,πk+1 (s )]
    k                                                               k

                                                                                             log πk+1 (a0 |s0 )                0 0
                   = r(s, a; θk ) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a),a0 ∼πk+1 (·|s0 ) [−                                          + Qsoft
                                                                                                                   rθk ,πk+1 (s , a )]
                                                                                               log π0 (a0 |s0 )
                   (i)                                                 log πk+1 (a0 |s0 )                  0 0
                   ≥ r(s, a; θk ) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a),a0 ∼πk+1 (·|s0 ) [−                      + Qsoft
                                                                                                 rθk ,πk (s , a )]
                                                                         log π0 (a0 |s0 )
                                                    "                                                       #
                   (ii)                                     X
                                                                   π 0 (a0 |s0 ) exp Qsoft        0 0

                    = r(s, a; θk ) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) log                                  rθ ,πk (s , a )      k
                                                                                a0
                   (iii)
                    = Tθk (Qsoft
                            rθ ,πk )(s, a)                                                                                        (65)
                                       k



where (i) follows the  policy improvement result(ii) follows the definition πk+1 (a|s)                                             :=
 π 0 (a|s) exp Qsoft
                 rθ ,πk (s,a)
                   k              (iii) follows the definition of the soft Bellman operator in (64).
P
     π     ˜ exp Qsoft
       0 (a|s)
  ã                r
                   θk  ,π (s,ã)
                           k


For any s ∈ S and a ∈ A, it holds that
             (i)                                                   (ii)
          0 ≤ Qsoft             soft               soft                  soft
               rθ ,πθ (s, a) − Qrθ ,πk+1 (s, a) ≤ Qrθ ,πθ (s, a) − Tθk (Qrθ ,πk )(s, a)                                           (66)
                     k         k                   k                            k        k                     k

where (i) is due to the fact that πθk is the optimal policy under reward parameter θk ; (ii) is from (65).
Hence, it further leads to
                                                           (i)
                   kQsoft      soft            soft           soft
                     rθ ,πθ − Qrθ ,πk+1 k∞ ≤ kQrθ ,πθ − Tθk (Qrθ ,πk )k∞
                           k       k         k                          k       k                     k

                                                           (ii)
                                                           = kTθk (Qsoft               soft
                                                                    rθk ,πθk ) − Tθk (Qrθk ,πk )k∞
                                                           (iii)
                                                            ≤ γkQsoft      soft
                                                                 rθ ,πθ − Qrθ ,πk k∞                                              (67)
                                                                            k        k            k

where (i) is from (66); (ii) is from the fixed-point property in (83); (iii) is from the contraction
property in (82). Therefore, we have the following result:
                         kQsoft      soft
                           rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞
                                   k              k    k

                         (i)
                           ≤ kQsoft         soft
                               rθk−1 ,πk − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 2Lq kθk − θk−1 k
                         (ii)
                           ≤ γkQsoft
                                rθ
                                                          soft
                                                 ,πk−1 − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 2Lq kθk − θk−1 k                                      (68)
                                           k−1

where (i) is from (63); (ii) is from (67).
To show the convergence of the soft Q-function based on (68), we further analyze the error between
the reward parameters θk and θk−1 . Recall in Alg.1, the updates in reward parameters (19):
                                                       θk = θk−1 + αgk−1

where we denote τ = {(st , at )}∞                         t
                                                    P
                                  t=0 , h(θ, τ ) :=  t≥0 γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θ) and gk−1 is the stochastic
                                                 E
gradient estimator at iteration k − 1. Here, τk−1   denotes the trajectory sampled from the expert’s
                                   A
dataset D at iteration k − 1 and τk−1 denotes the trajectory sampled from the agent’s policy πk at


                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


time k − 1,τw , τi denote the trajectory sampled from the preference dataset. Then according to the
inequality (38a) in Assumption 2, we could show that
                             E                 A                   W                 L
        kgk−1 k ≤ kh(θk−1 , τk−1 ) − h(θk−1 , τk−1 )k + kh(θk−1 , τk−1 ) − h(θk−1 , τk−1 )k
                  2Lr      2Lr
               ≤       +          = 4Lq                                                                   (69)
                 1−γ     1−γ
                                                                                  Lr
where the last equality follows the fact that we have defined the constant Lq := 1−γ . Then we could
further show that
                      kQsoft      soft
                        rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞
                              k                 k   k

                      (i)
                         ≤ γkQsoft
                              rθ
                                                       soft
                                              ,πk−1 − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 4Lq kθk − θk−1 k
                                        k−1

                      (ii)
                         = γkQsoft
                              rθ
                                                       soft
                                              ,πk−1 − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 4αLq kgk−1 k
                                        k−1

                      (iii)
                                                                             2
                         ≤ γkQsoft
                              rθ
                                                        soft
                                               ,πk−1 − Qrθk−1 ,πθk−1 k∞ + 8αLq                            (70)
                                         k−1


where (i) is from (68); (ii) follows the reward update scheme; (iii) is from (69).
Summing the inequality (70) from k = 1 to k = K, it holds that
             K
             X                                                  K−1
                                                                X
                                                                                                      2
                   kQsoft      soft
                     rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ ≤ γ                              kQsoft      soft
                                                                            rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ + 8αKLq   (71)
                         k                k     k                             k          k   k
             k=1                                                 k=0

Rearranging the inequality (71) and divided (71) by K on both sides, it holds that
       K
1 − γ X soft                           γ
                        soft
          kQrθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ ≤          kQrθ ,π0 − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ − kQrθ ,πK − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ + 8αL2q
                                              soft      soft              soft     soft
  K            k          k   k        K        0         0  0              K        K  K
      k=1
                                                                                          (72)
Dividing the constant 1 − γ on both sides of (72), it holds that
                           K
                         1 X soft                        γC0     8L2q
                             kQrθ ,πk − Qsoft
                                         rθk ,πθk k∞ ≤         +      α
                         K       k                     K(1 − γ) 1 − γ
                             k=1

where we denote C0 := kQsoft      soft
                        rθ ,π0 − Qrθ ,πθ k∞ . We could also write the inequality above as
                                    0               0       0

                         K−1
                     1   X
                                  kQsoft      soft
                                    rθ ,πk − Qrθ ,πθ k∞
                     K                   k              k        k
                          k=0
                                                                soft              soft
                         γC0      C0   kQrθ ,πK − Qrθ ,πθ k∞   8L2q
                     ≤          +    −     K         K   K
                                                             +      α
                       K(1 − γ)   K              K             1−γ
                          C0      8L2q
                     ≤          +      α.
                       K(1 − γ) 1 − γ
                                      α0
Recall the stepsize is defined as α = K σ where σ > 0. Then we have the following result:


                             K−1
                      1 X                                −1
                          kQsoft       soft
                            rθk ,πk − Qrθk ,πθk k∞ = O(K    ) + O(K −σ ).                                 (73)
                      K
                             k=0

With the inequality (62), it follows that
      K−1                                               K−1
   1 X                           2 X                                −1
       k log πk+1 − log πθk k∞ ≤     kQsoft       soft
                                       rθk ,πk − Qrθk ,πθk k∞ = O(K    ) + O(K −σ ).
   K                             K
      k=0                                               k=0

Therefore, we complete the proof of (20a) in Theorem 4.1.


                                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.5.2    P ROOF OF (20 B )


In this part, we prove the convergence of reward parameters {θk }k≥0 .
We have the following result of the objective function L(θ):


                      (i)                                         Lc
           L(θk+1 ) ≥ L(θk ) + h∇L(θk ), θk+1 − θk i −               kθk+1 − θk k2
                                                                  2
                      (ii)                                 Lc α2
                       = L(θk ) + αh∇L(θk ), gk i −              kgk k2
                                                            2
                                                                                            Lc α2
                      = L(θk ) + αh∇L(θk ), gk − ∇L(θk )i + αk∇L(θk )k2 −                         kgk k2
                                                                                             2
                      (iii)
                       ≥ L(θk ) + αh∇L(θk ), gk − ∇L(θk )i + αk∇L(θk )k2 − 8Lc L2q α2                             (74)


where (i) is from the Lipschitz smooth property in (39b) of Lemma A.1; (ii) follows the update
scheme (19); (iii) is from constant bound in (69). Taking an expectation over the both sides of (74),
it holds that


E [L(θk+1 )]

≥ E [L(θk )] + αE h∇L(θk ), gk − ∇L(θk )i + αE k∇L(θk )k2 − 8Lc L2q α2

= E [L(θk )] + αE h∇L(θk ), E gk − ∇L(θk ) θk ]i + αE k∇L(θk )k2 − 8Lc L2q α2


                                   X                                       X
=E [L(θk )] + αE ∇L(θk ), Eτ ∼πθk      γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) − Eτ ∼πk+1    γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk )
                                                t≥0                                         t≥0
                 X
+ E(τl ≺τw )∼πP   (1 − σ(γ t r(sw
                                t , a w
                                      t ; θ k ) − γ t
                                                      r(sl
                                                           , a
                                                         t t k
                                                               l
                                                                 ; θ ))(γ t
                                                                            ∇ θ r(sw w
                                                                                   t , a t ; θ k ) − γ t
                                                                                                         ∇ θ r(sl
                                                                                                                  , a
                                                                                                                t t k
                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                        ; θ ))
                    t≥0

+ αE k∇L(θk )k − 8Lc L2q α2
                2


(i)
                               X                                   X
                                  t                                   t
≥ E [L(θk )] − 4αLq E Eτ ∼πθk    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) − Eτ ∼πk+1    γ ∇θ r(st , at ; θk )
                                          t≥0                                         t≥0
                            |                                      {z                                         }
                                                                 term A

+ αE k∇L(θk )k − 8Lc L2q α2
              2
                                                                                                                  (75)


(i) is due to the fact that k∇L(θ)k ≤ 4Lq and E[gk,2 − ∇θ L2 (θk )|θk ] = 0.


                                                         34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then we further analyze the term A as below:
                                                                                
             X                                        X
E  Eτ ∼πθk       γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) − Eτ ∼πk+1    γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) 
                t≥0                                                  t≥0

(i)        1                                             1
=E             E(s,a)∼d(·,·;πθk ) ∇θ r(s, a; θk ) −         E(s,a)∼d(·,·;πk+1 ) ∇θ r(s, a; θk )
         1−γ                                           1−γ
(ii)   2
 ≤         · max k∇θ r(s, a; θk )k · E kd(·, ·; πθk ) − d(·, ·; πk+1 )kT V
     1 − γ s∈S,a∈A
(iii) 2L
         r
 ≤         E kd(·, ·; πθk ) − d(·, ·; πk+1 )kT V
      1−γ
                       π 0 (a|s) exp Qsoft                        π 0 (a|s) exp Qsoft
              "                                                                                         #
(iv)                                    rθk ,πθk (s, a)                            rθk ,πk+1 (s, a)
 ≤ 2Lq Cd E k log P 0                     soft
                                                          − log P 0                  soft
                                                                                                      k
                        ã π (ã|s) exp Qrθk ,πθk (s, ã)          ã π (ã|s) exp Qrθk ,πk+1 (s, ã)
             "                                                                                                                 #
(v)                                               X                                        X
                  soft          soft                    0             soft                        0           soft
≤ 2Lq Cd E kQrθ ,πθ − Qrθ ,πk k + k log               π (ã|s) exp Qrθ ,πθ (s, ã) − log        π (ã|s) exp Qrθ ,πk+1 (s, ã)k
                      k    k          k                                                k   k                                      k
                                                         a                                                    a
(vi)         p             h                                                       i
  ≤ 2Lq Cd |S| · |A|E kQsoft                  soft          soft         soft
                                 rθk ,πθk − Qrθk ,πk k∞ + kQrθk ,πθk − Qrθk ,πk k∞
            p            h                            i
 = 4Lq Cd |S| · |A|E kQsoft                 soft
                               rθk ,πθk − Qrθk ,πk k∞                                             (76)

where (i) follows the definition d(s, a; π) = (1 − γ)π(a|s) t≥0 γ t P π (st = s|s0 ∼ η);
                                                                      P
(ii) is due to distribution mismatch between two visitation measures; (iii) follows the inequal-
ity (38a) in Assumption 2;  the inequality (iv) follows Lemma A.2  and the fact that πθk (·|s) ∝
                                                                                                  Lr
π 0 (·|s) exp Qsoft                                0         soft
               rθk ,πθk (s, ·) , πk+1 (·|s) ∝ π (·|s) exp Qrθk ,πk (s, ·) and the constant Lq := 1−γ ;
(v) follows the (60);(vi) follows the conversion between Frobenius norm and infinity norm.
Through plugging the inequality (76) into (75), it leads to
E [L(θk+1 )]
                                                                                                                             
                                           X                                                    X
                                                 γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) − Eτ ∼πk+1                  γ t ∇θ r(st , at ; θk ) 

 ≥ E [L(θk )] − 2αLq E  Eτ ∼πθk
                                           t≥0                                                 t≥0

       + αE k∇L(θk )k − 8Lc L2q α2
                     2


 (i)                                          h                     i
                                p
 ≥ E [L(θk )] − 8αCd L2q            |S| · |A|E kQrθ ,πθ − Qrθ ,πk k∞ + αE k∇L(θk )k − 8Lc L2q α2
                                                 soft      soft                    2
                                                     k       k             k


where (i) follows the inequality (76).
                                                         p
Rearranging the inequality above and denote C1 := 8Cd L2q |S| · |A|, it holds that
                                          h                       i
   αE k∇L(θk )k2 ≤ 8Lc L2q α2 + αC1 E kQsoft             soft

                                              rθ ,πθ −  Qrθ ,πk ∞ + E L(θk+1 ) − L(θk )
                                                               k
                                                                 k     k           k

Summing the inequality above from k = 0 to K − 1 and dividing both sides by αK, it holds that
   K−1                                 K−1
 1 X                2
                               2    C1 X h soft               soft
                                                                       i       L(θK ) − L(θ0 )
       E k∇L(θk )k ≤ 8Lc Lq α +             E kQrθ ,πθ − Qrθ ,πk k∞ + E
K                                   K              k   k        k                    Kα
   k=0                                  k=0
                                                                                           (77)
Note that the log-likelihood function L(θK ) is negative and L(θ0 ) is a bounded constant. Then we
could plug (73) into (77), it holds that
                     K−1
                   1 X
                         E k∇L(θK )k2 = O(K −σ ) + O(K −1 ) + O(K −1+σ )

                                                                                                                           (78)
                   K
                          K=0
which completes the proof for the inequality (20b).


                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.6   AUXILIARY L EMMAS

Lemma A.2 ((Xu et al., 2020, Lemma 3)) Consider the initialization distribution η(·) and transition
kernel P(·|s, a). Under η(·) and P(·|s, a), denote dw (·, ·) as the state-action visitation distribution
of MDP with the Boltzman policy parameterized by parameter w. Suppose Assumption 1 holds, for
all policy parameter w and w0 , we have
                              kdw (·, ·) − dw0 (·, ·)kT V ≤ Cd kw − w0 k                                         (79)
where Cd is a positive constant.

Next, to facilitate analysis for KL-regularized MDPs, we introduce a soft Bellman optimality oper-
ator T : R|S|×|A| → R|S|×|A| as follows:
                                                                             log π(a0 |s0 )

    T (Q)(s, a) := r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) max Ea0 ∼π(·|s0 ) Q(s0 , a0 ) −                      . (80)
                                              π(·|s)                        log π 0 (a0 |s0 )
In the following lemma, the properties of KL-regularized MDPs are characterized.

Lemma A.3 (The operator T as defined in (80) satisfies the properties below:

       • T has the following closed-form expression:
                                                  "                                                     !#
                                                             X
                                                                       π 0 (a0 |s0 ) exp Q(s0 , a0 )

             T (Q)(s, a) = r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) log                                                      .   (81)
                                                                  a0


       • T is a γ-contraction in the `∞ norm, namely, for any Q1 , Q2 ∈ R|S|×|A| , it holds that
                                   kT (Q1 ) − T (Q2 )k∞ ≤ γkQ1 − Q2 k∞ .                                         (82)

       • Under a given reward function r(·, ·), the corresponding optimal soft Q-function Qsoft
                                                                                           r,π ∗ is
         a unique fixed point of the operator T , namely,
                                              T (Qsoft       soft
                                                  r,π ∗ ) = Qr,π ∗                                               (83)

We refine its analysis as below.
We first show that
                                    X               0                           X
                     log π(a|s)                    π (a|s) exp(Q(s, a)) (i)        0

Ea∼π(·|s) Q(s, a) −                =   π(a|s) log                        ≤ log    π (a|s) exp Q(s, a)
                    log π 0 (a|s)    a
                                                          π(a|s)                a
                                                                                     (84)
where (i) is from Jensen’s inequality. Moreover, the equality between both sides of (i) holds when
the policy π has the expression π(·|s) ∝ π 0 (a|s) exp(Q(s, ·)). Therefore, through applying the
inequality (84) to (80), it obtains that
                                                 "                                  !#
                                                        X
                                                              0              0 0

           T (Q)(s, a) = r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) log       π (a|s) exp Q(s , a )       ,      (85)
                                                             a0
which proves the equality (81).
We define kQ1 − Q2 k∞ := maxs∈S,a∈A |Q1 (s, a) − Q2 (s, a)| and   = kQ1 − Q2 k∞ . Then for
any s ∈ S and a ∈ A, it follows that
                                         !                                     !
              X                                  X
                   0                                0

         log      π (a|s) exp Q1 (s, a)    ≤ log   π (a|s) exp Q2 (s, a) +
                 a                                       a
                                                                                                        !
                                                                   X
                                                                                0

                                               = log exp( )                    π (a|s) exp Q2 (s, a)
                                                                       a
                                                                                                  !
                                                             X
                                                                           0

                                               =   + log               π (a|s) exp Q2 (s, a)
                                                              a



                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                    P 0
Similarly, it is easy to   obtain that log             a π (a|s) exp Q1 (s, a)                     ≥       −  +
    P 0
log    a π (a|s) exp Q2 (s, a) . Hence, it leads to the contraction property that

                              kT (Q1 ) − T (Q2 )k∞ ≤ γ  = γkQ1 − Q2 k∞                                      (86)
which proves the contraction property (82). Moreover, we have
                                           "                                      !#
    soft         (i)                            X
                                                      0 0 0        soft   0 0        (ii)
                                                                                      = Qsoft

T (Qr,π∗ )(s, a) = r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) log     π (a |s ) exp Qr,π∗ (s , a )          r,π ∗ (s, a)
                                                         a0
                                                                                                            (87)
where (i) follows the equality (85). Based on the definition of the soft Q-function Qsoft
                                                                                     r,π ∗ , we have

                                                                  log π ∗ (a0 |s0 )            0 0
     Qsoft                                                                          + Qsoft

      r,π ∗ (s, a) = r(s, a) + γEs0 ∼P(·|s,a) Ea0 ∼π ∗ (·|s0 ) [−                      r,π ∗ (s , a )] .    (88)
                                                                  log π 0 (a0 |s0 )
We prove the equality (ii) in (87) through combining (88)      and the fact that the optimal soft policy
has the closed form π ∗ (·|s) ∝ π 0 (·|s0 ) exp Qsoft
                                                 r,π ∗ (s, ·) . Suppose two different fixed points of the
soft Bellman operator exist, then it contradicts with the contraction property in (86).
Hence, we proved the uniqueness of the optimal soft Q-function Qsoftr,π ∗ . Moreover, the optimal soft
            soft
Q-function Qr,π∗ is a fixed point to the soft Bellman operator T in (83).


                                                       37
