Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C ONFORMAL R EASONING : U NCERTAINTY
E STIMATION IN I NTERACTIVE E NVIRONMENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                    A BSTRACT

             Effectively balancing uncertainty and decision-making is critical in real-world rea-
             soning tasks. Split conformal prediction (SCP)—a popular statistical framework
             for uncertainty quantification that constructs prediction sets using a calibration
             set of interactions—is significantly limited in multi-turn interactive settings. In
             particular, collecting calibration data requires the interaction trajectories to be de-
             termined a priori, inducing a heuristic bias that weakens coverage. Moreover,
             SCP cannot leverage the model’s own uncertainty to better guide its decision-
             making without breaking coverage guarantees. To address these limitations, we
             propose C ONFORMAL R EASONING, a novel offline conformal framework built
             upon adaptive conformal inference methods that 1) is robust to distribution shift,
             2) allows for flexible score function design, and, most importantly, 3) leverages
             the prediction set into the model’s future decision making, all while preserving
             marginal coverage guarantee. On three real-world tasks including medical diag-
             nosis, embodied question-answering, and twenty questions, we show that confor-
             mal reasoning empirically achieves theoretical coverage guarantees while showing
             improved accuracy and efficiency.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Model (Brown et al., 2020, LLM) agents are increasingly deployed for complex
decision-making tasks in the wild (Bommasani et al., 2021). In particular, agents must frequently
interact with different aspects of the environment. A crucial component of interactive decision-
making is an agent’s uncertainty over its actions. Robust uncertainty estimation provides a heuristic
for agents to abstain from making a decision and instead gather more information; this process
can continue iteratively until the agent is confident enough to make a decision, or might require
human assistance. This balance between uncertainty and decision-making is essential in high-stakes
settings, such as medical diagnosis (Li et al., 2024).
Traditional methods such as post-hoc calibration and prompting have been used to improve LLM
confidence estimation (Geng et al., 2024), but these techniques lack the formal guarantees necessary
for reliable abstention decisions. Conformal prediction (Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Angelopoulos et al.,
2023) fills this gap by providing statistically valid prediction sets with formal confidence guarantees
based on a user-defined threshold. This framework ensures that the correct answer is included
within a set of plausible options with high probability, offering a principled approach to confidence
estimation and has been proven effective in LLMs for multiple-choice tasks (Kumar et al., 2023).
However, existing applications of conformal prediction in interactive scenarios leave significant
room for improvement. Traditional split conformal prediction (SCP) requires a fixed calibra-
tion set of trajectories to be determined upfront, each coming with an associated noncomformity
score (Ren et al., 2023; 2024; Xu & Xie, 2021). This collection of a calibration set requires several
design decisions that are difficult to make a priori. For instance, the trajectories may be collected
until a policy—here, an AI agent interacting with its environment—concludes, or to a fixed time cut-
off. Neither of these calibration approaches is robust to the intricacies of the interactive multi-turn
setting. A policy-dependent approach that relies on a threshold for termination might be used for
tractable collection of a calibration set; yet, in turn, the conformal threshold q̂α generates trajectories
    *
        Equal contribution in alphabetical order.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Standard Single-turn Task                          Interactive Multi-turn Task                        Termination Criteria: |C | = 1.
                                                                                                           : conformal threshold collected
                                                                                                           from interactive calibration set.
                                                       Hi doctor, I am 35 y.o., female, and I have
      A 35-year-old female presents with                                                             Two runs with different conformal thresholds:
                                                     fatigue and night sweats. What is happening,
 complaints of fatigue, nocturnal diaphoresis,
                                                                    what should I do?
      intermittent headaches, and muscle
  aches… She denies recent respiratory or
                                                                                                        A B C D                  A B C D
    gastrointestinal symptoms… Currently                          What is your temperature?           C = {A, B, C, D}         C = {B, C, D}
   afebrile with a temperature of 98°F, she
                                                                                                      → ask question           → ask question
    reports a fever of 102°F last night. She         My temperature is 98°F now, but
  returned from Africa one month ago and                  it was 102°F last night.
     admits to inconsistent use of malaria
          prophylaxis during her trip.                                  ...
                                                                                                         A B C D                 A B C D
     Which of the following is correct?                 Have you traveled anywhere recently?                                      C = {B}
                                                                                                        C = {A, B, D}
     A: XXX, B: XXXX, C: XX, D: XXX.                                                                   → ask question         → return option B
                                                      I am a travel blogger, just came
           Conformal threshold from
                                                        back from Africa last month.                                           Note: threshold
            a static calibration set.
                                                                        ...                                                     for termination
                                                                                                                              affects calibration
                                                          Based on the information provided,            A B C D
                                                                                                                                  trajectories,
                                        C = {A, B}         you might have either A or B.                  C = {A, B,}          inducing circular
                                                                                                      Max depth reached,          dependency.
                                                                                                     return prediction set.
                 A B C D

Figure 1: Single vs. multi-turn conformal prediction. In single-turn question-answering tasks (left),
conformal prediction involves obtaining a conformal threshold from a fixed set of calibration points,
providing robust coverage guarantees. However, in interactive multi-turn tasks (right), the confor-
mal threshold collected multi-turn calibration trajectories is often subject to a maximum sequence
length. This dependence on this initial condition induces heuristic bias, which breaks traditional
split conformal prediction (SCP) coverage guarantees. Note that in the right trajectory, option A is
eliminated in turn 1 but its probability exceeds the threshold in turn 2: our proposed Refresh Predic-
tion technique can recover this option while standard set construction techniques cannot.

distributed differently from that of the calibration set, creating a circular dependency. On the other
hand, a fixed time cutoff might create finite-sample in differences scores collected in a calibration
set versus those seen at test time, inducing a heuristic bias that causes conformal guarantees to fail.
Moreover, SCP prevents the conformal set—i.e., the measure of the agent’s uncertainty—from being
used in the decision-making policy; otherwise, the calibration set would also need to use conformal
sets in its own decision-making policy, creating a circular dependency.
To address these limitations, we propose a new framework, C ONFORMAL R EASONING, which en-
ables the use of conformal prediction in interactive reasoning tasks as demonstrated in Figure 1.
C ONFORMAL R EASONING builds upon adaptive conformal inference (Gibbs & Candes, 2021, ACI),
a variant of conformal prediction designed to construct valid prediction sets in response to arbitrary
distribution shifts by updating its quantile parameter based on the outcome of each sample in a se-
quential manner. An ACI-based approach is able to preserve guarantees despite the circular depen-
dency and heuristic bias issues in interactive setups. We propose a novel train-test offline adaptation
paradigm, in which we can learn the quantile parameter from the train set and eliminate the need
for sample-wise feedback at test time. Our novel application of ACI expands the design space of
score and prediction set formulation and leverages the model’s uncertainty to guide decision mak-
ing. Overall, our approach introduces three key components that extend the capabilities of conformal
reasoning for interactive tasks: 1) Offline Adaptation (OA) paradigm that applies ACI’s robustness
to distribution shifts to the multi-turn interactive setting without test-time sample-wise feedback, 2)
expanding the OA framework with flexible prediction set construction, noted as Refresh Prediction
(RP), and 3) incorporating uncertainty into subsequent actions, noted as Guided Reasoning (GR),
all while preserving conformal guarantees.
We validate our method across three tasks: interactive medical diagnosis, embodied question an-
swering, and open-ended twenty questions. Our results demonstrate that Conformal Reasoning
significantly improves prediction accuracy, interaction efficiency, and the specificity of prediction
sets compared to standard SCP, making it a practical and robust solution for real-world applications.
To summarize, the key contributions of this work are:
1. We introduce C ONFORMAL R EASONING, a framework that adapts adaptive conformal infer-
   ence (ACI) to interactive reasoning tasks, enabling models to dynamically adjust prediction sets
   during multi-turn interactions while maintaining robust coverage guarantees.
2. We propose two novel conformal techniques: Refresh Prediction (RP), which refines prediction
   sets over the course of the interaction to improve the model’s efficiency, and Guided Reasoning
   (GR), which leverages the model’s uncertainty in the next action to improve accuracy.


                                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3. Our proposed Init-Train-Test paradigm—Offline Adaptation (OA)—is the first to eliminate the
   need for step-wise feedback during inference by learning a prediction threshold during training,
   simplifying deployment in real-world interactive systems where immediate correctness feedback
   may not be available.
4. We empirically validate our method across three challenging domains—interactive medical di-
   agnosis, embodied question answering, and open-ended twenty questions—demonstrating
   significant improvements in prediction accuracy, interaction efficiency, and prediction set speci-
   ficity compared to traditional split conformal prediction (SCP) methods.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Interactive Reasoning and LLM Uncertainty Estimation. The integration of LLMs into interac-
tive systems has opened new avenues for complex decision-making tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023). These systems, however, often lack robust and calibrated uncertainty quantification,
which are crucial for reliable decision-making. Desai & Durrett (2020) found that larger models are
not necessarily better calibrated, highlighting the need for methods that provide reliable confidence
estimates. Srivastava et al. (2022) and Geng et al. (2023) have shown that LLMs struggle at produc-
ing numerical confidence scores (Srivastava et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2023). To this end, other works
have explored confidence calibration in LLMs via temperature scaling (Xie et al., 2024), prompting
(Tian et al., 2023), and multi-agent deliberation (Yang et al., 2024). For high-stakes applications
such as medical diagnosis, interactive reasoning becomes critical. Li et al. (2024) proposed MediQ,
a framework that simulates clinicians interactively gathering patient information to make accurate
diagnoses; there, better confidence estimation leads to higher diagnostic performance.
Online Conformal Prediction. Methods in adaptive conformal prediction were originally designed
to provide coverage in adversarial online settings. The primary method for adapting to online dis-
tribution shifts is via online gradient descent, first proposed in Gibbs & Candes (2021); successive
work has similarly used online subgradient updates with respect to tracking the quantile (Angelopou-
los et al., 2024a; Bhatnagar et al., 2023; Angelopoulos et al., 2024a). Many of these works have
focused on responsiveness to distribution shifts and characterizations of validity of prediction sets,
such as bounds on measures of regret and techniques from online learning (Gibbs & Candès, 2024;
Bastani et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2022; Zhang et al.). Our work builds upon existing approaches in
online conformal prediction, but applies these techniques in a fundamentally different setting: our
approach applies an online algorithm to data collected offline, allowing for adaptation to distribu-
tional heterogeneity in the calibration set while learning a quantile that attains marginal coverage.
Conformal Prediction in Interactive Environments. Conformal prediction has been used for tra-
jectory prediction and planning within dynamic environments; these approaches generally leverage
online technique (Gibbs & Candes, 2021; Gibbs & Candès, 2024; Angelopoulos et al., 2024b) or
attain marginal coverage over the distribution of trajectories (Xu & Xie, 2021; Stankeviciute et al.,
2021; Zaffran et al., 2022). Alternatively, a related line of work has characterized conformal predic-
tion under feedback shifts, largely through the perspective of reweighting under induced covariate
shifts (Fannjiang et al., 2022; Prinster et al., 2024). Recently, split conformal prediction has also
been applied for robot decision-making under uncertainty, using conformal prediction sets as indi-
cators for human-in-the-loop correction or as exploration stopping times (Ren et al., 2023; Liang
et al., 2024). Our work is most similar to Ren et al. (2024), though with notable exceptions: our
method of online adaptation to offline data enables using techniques that are incompatible with the
approaches used in Ren et al. (2024) but enable empirical improvement.
Conformal Prediction and Abstention. Recent work has explored using conformal-style tech-
niques for abstention, which requires controlling uncertainty over the selective classification er-
ror (Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Gui et al., 2024). These approaches are generally framed through
risk control, where with high probability the selective classification error is controlled below a user-
selected threshold using a calibration set. While these approaches successfully control the selective
classification error and thereby give guarantees (w.h.p.) of the form P(y ∈ C(x) | |C(x)| = 1) ≥
1 − α, in a naive implementation they do not provide meaningful prediction sets. In contrast, we
hope to attain marginal coverage guarantees typical in the conformal prediction literature.
Our approach interpolates between Angelopoulos et al. (2021) and Ren et al. (2024) to achieve a
correct 1 − α coverage guarantee. Ren et al. (2024) requires the interactions to terminate at the
maximum allowed timestep for their specific scenario; while not achieving conditional coverage,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


this approach would provide a marginal guarantee at the expense of the efficiency. In contrast, the
aformentioned risk control approaches ensure that terminating at a prediction set of size one would
provide a valid conditional coverage guarantee at the cost (in a naive implementation) of not offering
any terminal prediction set. In particular, both Angelopoulos et al. (2021) and Gui et al. (2024)
compute conformal p-values for each test point and use these p-values to determine whether the
model’s prediction should be used and elicited or abstained from. Here, we empirically demonstrate
that we retain marginal coverage for the final prediction set at termination time. Moreover, our
approach offers a more efficient alternative to the approach of Ren et al. (2024) that goes to the
maximum sequence length, as we enable the agent to either terminate at a prediction set of size one
or offer a terminal prediction set that can be used to aid a human practitioner.

3       P ROBLEM FORMULATION
Consistent with the notation used in Ren et al. (2024), we consider a distribution over scenarios,
ξ ∼ D, for an agent to interact with. Each scenario, ξ, is a tuple ξ := (e, y, T, x0 ), where e
represents the environment, y ∈ Y is the ground truth categorical answer to the posed question,
T ∈ Z+ is the maximum number of times the agent is allowed to interact with the the environment
to find y, and x0 is the agent’s initial state. Our goal is to design an agent that sequentially interacts
with the environment, e, to predict the hidden answer, y, within T steps of interactions. We model
the agent as a policy π̂(·), that, at each step t ∈ [T ], takes as input the current state xt−1 , and then
takes an action, at , drawn from the policy: at ∼ π̂(xt−1 ). The environment provides a feedback,
e(at |a1 , . . . , at−1 ), based on the current action given all previous actions, which in turn contributes
to updating the state, xt , that is then fed back into the agent. This updated state represents the refined
knowledge the agent has about the state of the environment and the answer. For example, a state xt
can be the complete transcript of all interactions so far, i.e. xt = (x0 , a1 , e(a1 ), a2 , . . . , e(at−1 )).
To make this concrete, we describe three tasks (Table 1) that we consider in our later experiments:
Proactive Medical Information Seeking (MediQ). In medical diagnosis, a clinician typically be-
gins with an initial complaint and gathers further information (e.g., patient history, symptoms, lab
results) before reaching a diagnosis. We use the MediQ benchmark (Li et al., 2024), an interactive
version of the MedQA dataset (Jin et al., 2021) that presents some initial information x0 that is
the patient’s demographic information and the chief complaint, and a medical question κ and tests
a model’s ability to take actions a by asking relevant questions to the patient until it has enough
information to make a diagnosis y.
Embodied Question Answering (EQA). The Embodied Question Answering (EQA) task assesses
a model’s ability to actively explore a 3D environment, gather visual and spatial information, and
answer questions about the scene. We use the HM-EQA dataset (Ren et al., 2024), which focuses on
human-robot scenarios within photo-realistic 3D indoor environments constructed from the Habitat
Matterport 3D dataset (HM3D) (Ramakrishnan et al., 2021). The agent controls a robot to navigate
a habitat e starting from an initial position x0 that is the robot’s initial pose and current RGB image
observed on the onboard camera. The dataset consists of questions requiring the agent to locate
objects, understand room layouts, or explore areas that may not be immediately visible; an example
is “Where did I leave my red jacket?” with possible answers Y = “a) On the couch, b) On the
kitchen table, c) In my office, or d) On the coat rack.” The agent can take actions a to move the
robot to a different location and observe a new image e(at ) from the environment e.
Open Ended 20 Questions (20Q) The 20 Questions task involves two roles: the Answerer, who
selects a target word, and the Guesser, who asks Yes/No questions to identify the target. This
interactive game evaluates the model’s ability to ask strategic, information-seeking questions and
make accurate guesses based on partial information. In contrast to MediQ and EQA, where the
answer space is constrained, the 20 Questions task involves an open-ended answer space. We use
two datasets for this task: (1) Original—a hand-curated dataset of 340 target words from Hu et al.
(2024), which is sourced from the BIG-bench 20 Questions task (BIG-bench collaboration, 2021),
the 20 Questions official website1 , and an object concept database (Hebart et al., 2019); and (2)
Auto20Q—a larger dataset of 2,000 target words automatically generated using GPT-4, covering a
broad range of object categories to simulate more varied and challenging interactions. The training,
validation, and test sets are partitioned accordingly to ensure balanced coverage across categories.
    1
        https://blog.prepscholar.com/20-questions-game


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Task            MediQ (Li et al., 2024)      EQA (Ren et al., 2024)           20Q
     Scenario        ξ        Clinical interaction          Assistant robot         Word guessing
   Environment       e          Medical inquiry          Household simulation       Objects (nouns)
      Answer         y       Multiple choice option      Multiple choice option      Target word
    Max Turns        T                 15                          30                     20
    Initial Info     x0      Age, gender, complaint       Pose, RGB image          Game description
                                              Example Step
                            What is the most               What color is                Is X a
     Question        κ      likely diagnosis              the curtain in                living
                            for this patient?               the bedroom?                thing?
                             She has vomited
                               3 times and
    Incremental
                     xt       progressively
        Info                                                                              No
                               became more
                                 confused.
                              Elicited patient info      Picture of living room    Answerer response
                               The confusion,                                     Out of the rem-
                            with symptoms like                                    aining options,
   Intermediate              vomiting, points                                      X1:fits desc.;
                     π
    Reasoning                to hypoglycemia,                                      X2:fits desc.;
                              consistent with                                      X3:doesn’t fit
                           insulin overdose...                                       desc. ...
                                Clinical rationale        Semantic value repr.    Option set partition

   Episode-level τ τ
                  C (x )
   Prediction Set

                            Ask follow-up question.                               Ask follow-up que-
   Agent Action      at     E.g. "What is your           Navigate to bedroom.     stion. E.g. "Is X
                            medical history?"                                       man-made?"
          Table 1: Examples of MediQ, EQA, and 20Q task scenarios and their elements.
Metrics. At any tans ≤ T , the agent can choose to stop interacting and output a set of answers
C ⊆ Y that we call a prediction set. Given a target α, our aim is to achieve (1 − α) marginal
coverage as closely as possible, while using minimum number of queries , and aiming for minimum
size prediction set. Concretely, we aim to optimize the following metrics:
1. Coverage := P(y ∈ C); this evaluates the reliability of the prediction set. The goal is to ensure
   that the true answer is included with a probability of at least 1 − α, i.e., Coverage ≥ 1 − α.
2. % Answered := P(|C| = 1); this measures the probability the agent outputs a single answer.
3. Specificity := 1 − E[|C|/|Y|]; a higher specificity indicates that the model produces tighter pre-
   diction sets. This evaluates how well the model narrows down its prediction set (and uncertainty),
   reflecting its ability to focus on a smaller, more precise set of potential answers.
4. Efficiency := 1 − E[tans /T ]; a more efficient agent has smaller stopping time, tans , i.e., the
   number of conversational turns required for the model to confidently produce a final prediction.
The probability and expectation are defined over the randomness in the distribution of the scenarios,
the feedback and the evolution of the environment, and the internal randomness in the agent.
Single-turn vs. multi-turn settings. Traditional conformal prediction assumes a single-turn setting
without interactions (Figure 1, left), where the goal is to construct prediction sets, C(x), for fresh
inputs, x ∈ X , at test time satisfying the target coverage of P(y ∈ C(x)) ≥ 1 − α. To this end,
the goal of conformal prediction is to use the calibration set, denoted Dcal = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 , and the
model, denoted fˆ, to design a scheme that constructs small prediction sets at test time.
Our proposed C ONFORMAL R EASONING applies to a multi-turn setting (Figure 1, right), where
the goal is to construct prediction sets, C(x̄), about the hidden answer y to a question for a fresh
scenario ξ = (e, y, T, x0 ) at test time by interacting with the test scenario to get a sequence of


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


states x̄ = (x0 , x1 , . . . , xtans ) for some tans ≤ T . These sequence of interactions refine our belief
about the answer, in order to construct a prediction set that satisfies the target coverage of P(y ∈
C(x̄)) ≥ 1 − α. We interact with each scenario to get a calibration sequence, x̄i = (x0i , x1i , . . .), of
evolving states. The goal of Conformal Reasoning is to design a scheme that guides the interactions
to construct minimal size prediction sets using the scenarios in the calibration set.

4    BACKGROUND ON C ONFORMAL P REDICTION
Split Conformal Prediction (SCP) for single-turn settings. In a non-interactive scenario, we are
given a calibration set of paired examples, Dcal = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 ∈ X n × Y n , drawn i.i.d. and a
model, fˆ, to predict y given x. Given a new input x and a target confidence level 1 − α ∈ [0, 1],
uncertainty quantification aims to produce a statistically valid prediction set, C(x), of minimal size
satisfying, P(y ∈ C(x)) ≥ 1 − α, where the pair (x, y) is drawn from the same distribution as Dcal .
To achieve this goal, SCP uses the model to define a nonconformity score function, s : X × Y → R.
This measures the disagreement between the prediction fˆ(x) and the true label y. For example,
s(x, y) = ∥y − fˆ(x)∥ in regression and s(x, y) = 1 − fy (x) in classification, where fy (x) is the
softmax score for class y predicted from input x.
SCP calculates scores Scal := {si = s(xi , yi )}(xi ,yi )∈Dcal on the already-collected cal-
ibration dataset and computes the (1 − α)(1 + 1/n)-th empirical quantile q̂, i.e. q̂ :=
Q(1−α)(1+1/n) (S1 , . . . , Sn ). Finally, the prediction set for a fresh input x is the collection of outputs
with small nonconformity scores defined as
                                 Cα (x) = { ŷ ∈ Y | s(x, ŷ) ≤ q̂α } ,
and provably achieves the desired coverage guarantee; see Angelopoulos et al. (2023, Theorem D.1).
Split Conformal Prediction (SCP) for multi-turn settings. When considering split conformal
prediction in an interactive environment, prediction sets must be constructed more delicately, espe-
cially at test time. First, recall from our interactive framework that each scenario, ξ, results in a
sequence, x̄ = (x0 , x1 , . . . , xtans ), for some tans ≤ T ; accordingly, since each scenario, ξ, is drawn
i.i.d. from some distribution D, this, along with the exploration policy, induces a distribution over
input sequences x̄. Let x̄i denote the i-th trajectory drawn from this induced distribution for the
scenario ξi . Ren et al. (2024) apply standard conformal prediction to these trajectories by defining
nonconformity scores at each time step t within a given trajectory as sti := s(xti , y), where xti is the
state that is fed into the model fˆ at time t + 1.
As a baseline, we compare against a slight variation of the interactive SCP algorithm intro-
duced in Ren et al. (2024). This SCP chooses the episode-level nonconformity score to be
s̄i := maxt∈[T ] sti , or the worst-case nonconformity score across all time steps in the trajectory.
These episode-level scores can then be used for the standard approach in split conformal prediction;
denote q̂α as the 1 − α empirical quantile over s̄i . At test time, because the agent only observes the
trajectory up to current time t, the prediction sets must be causally constructed. In particular, the
prediction set at time t is defined as
      C(xt ) := ∩tτ =0 C(xτ ) , where C(xτ ) := {ŷ ∈ Y | s(xτ , ŷ) ≤ q̂α } , for all τ ≤ t ,
for a fresh trajectory (x0 , . . . , xt ) on a test scenario ξ. If |C(xt )| = 1, the agent halts exploration
and returns the singleton set as its choice. If |C(xt )| = 0 or t = T is reached without a singleton
prediction set, we need not return a prediction. This is in contrast with the version of SCP proposed
in Ren et al. (2024), which output the most likely answer when |C(xt )| = 0 or t = T ; we make this
change to emphasize our design choice of abstaining or requesting help from a human until accurate.

5    M ETHODS
While SCP attains marginal validity, it requires strong design choices that might not be desirable in
general. We focus on three critical constraints of SCP—termination criteria, prediction set construc-
tion, and using the conformal sets in the policy—and propose C ONFORMAL P REDICTION consisting
of three novel conformal techniques—offline adaptation, refresh prediction, and guided reasoning—
to address each of the constraints.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1    O FFLINE A DAPTATION (OA)
SCP requires the termination criteria of the calibration trajectories to be made a priori. Practically,
existing work collect the calibration scores with a termination criterion (TC1) of a fixed trajectory
length T and select a quantile q̂ to be the threshold for creating turn-level prediction sets at test
time, but vary the termination criterion at test time (TC2) to be either reaching the max length T
or reaching a prediction set size of 1 dependent on the selected q̂, causing a distribution shift in
the score functions that is hard to avoid in practice2 (Ren et al., 2024). Given the strict (and often
impractical) constraints under SCP in multi-turn interactive settings, we propose offline adaptation
to address the distribution shift issue by dynamically updating the parameter αt using a training set
with the same score functions and data distribution as the test set. The learned αt determines a new
threshold q̂αt from the calibration scores to provide marginal coverage guarantees on the test set.
Offline Adaptation is inspired by Adaptive Conformal Inference (Gibbs & Candes, 2021; An-
gelopoulos et al., 2024b, ACI), which addresses online uncertainty quantification in settings where
arbitrary distribution shift might occur over time. In particular, at each time t, we consider a time-
dependent bounded score function st : X × Y → [0, B] defined similarly to before (see §4), but
allowing for the score to evolve over time. Given st , the prediction set is defined as
                                     Ct (x) = {y ∈ Y : st (x, y) ≤ q̂αt },
where q̂αt is the 1 − αt empirical quantile over the collection of prior scores. The parameter αt is
updated according to
                                 αt+1 = αt + ηt (α − 1y∈C / t (xt ) ),

where ηt ∝ t−1/2−ϵ for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2). If Yt is not covered at time t, then αt is increased, which
in turn decreases the magnitude of q̂αt+1 . A strength of ACI is its ability for αt to converge almost
surely to α∗ when the data is i.i.d. but the score function is evolving over time. In particular, we
appeal to the following theorem:
                                                                  i.i.d.
Theorem 1 (Angelopoulos et al. (2024b)). Let (Xt , Yt ) ∼ D for some distribution D, and assume
the
P∞score functions P st are trained online. Assume that ηt is a fixed nonnegative step size satisfying
                       ∞     2
   t=1  ηt = ∞  and    t=1 ηt < ∞. Let s : X × Y → [0, B] be a fixed score function, and assume
       ∗
that α is unique as giving 1−α coverage of s(X, Y ). Then online conformal prediction satisfies the
                                           d
following statement almost surely: If st → s, then αt → α∗ . In other words, if the score functions
converge in distribution to some fixed score function, αt will converge to α∗ , where α∗ corresponds
to attaining 1 − α coverage on the distribution of scores.

5.2    R EFRESH P REDICTION (RP)
The construction of the prediction sets in SCP is hyperspecific: choosing a different trajectory-
level score function or set construction method does not give statistical validity. SCP requires that a
prediction set at time t be constructed by the intersection of all previous prediction sets of time j < t;
accordingly, if the true answer falls out of the prediction early in the calibration or inference trajec-
tory, the set loses coverage no matter what. We emphasize that Theorem 1 holds for an arbitrary
score function: as long as it converges in distribution, αt will converge to α∗ . This enables conformal
sets to be constructed flexibly using ACI, rather than through the restrictive and potentially conser-
vative method required by SCP. Accordingly, we propose an alternative score function and method
                                                                                        1            min(tans ,T )
for constructing a conformal set. In particular, for a calibration
                                                   min(tans ,T )
                                                                      trajectory x̄ = (x , . . . , x               ),
we define the score function as s(x̄, y) = s x                   , y , where T is the maximum depth of the
trajectory. I.e., only the nonconformity scores of each option at the current step are used to construct
the prediction set, rather than using the intersection with all prior prediction sets. Thus, if an option
is excluded from the prediction set in a previous step, it could still be included in a subsequent pre-
diction set. We denote this approach for computing the prediction sets as Refresh Prediction (RP),
referring to the ability of the prediction set of being refreshed at each timestep.
   2
     In an effort to unify the termination criteria for the calibration and test sets to eliminate the distribution
shift, we explore the following two scenarios. Using TC1 for both calibration and test sets will result in the
system being hypersensitive to the choice of T a priori—small T values result in insufficient exploration
and large prediction sets, and large T values result in inefficient and wasteful algorithms not customized to
each environment—rending the set-up brittle and impractical. Using TC2 for both calibration and test sets
will require the q̂ value—needed to determine the turn-level prediction set—to be determined before iterating
through the calibration set, causing a circular dependency.


                                                         7
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    Algorithm 1: Conformal Reasoning
    Input: an exploration policy π̂(·); a calibration set Dcal = {ξi }ni=1 of size n; initialization size
           ninit ; a nominal error level α ∈ (0, 1); and learning rate schedule with ηj ∝ j −1/2−ϵ for
           ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2), nonconformity score function s(·, ·)
    /* Collect an initial set of scores using ninit sample sequences.                                 */
1 for i ∈ [ninit ] do
2      x̄i ← sequence of states from scenario ξi = (ei , Ti , x0i , yi ) run with policy π̂
3      si = s(x̄i , yi )
4 S := {si }i∈[ninit ]
                            P
5 q̂αn
      init+1
             ← Q1−α δ∞ + si ∈S δsi
6 αninit+1 ← α
    /* Use S to find α̂                                                                               */
7  for j ∈ {ninit + 1, . . . , n} do
 8     x̄j ← sequence of states from scenario ξj = (ej , Tj , x0j , yj ) run with policy π̂
 9     αj+1 ← αj + ηj (1yj ∈C   / j (x̄j ) − α).
10     S ← S ∪ {s(x̄j , yj )}
                                      P
11     q̂αj+1 ← Q1−αj+1 δ∞ + si ∈S δsi
   Output: q̂αn+1


    5.3   G UIDED R EASONING (GR)
    SCP prevents using the conformal set—i.e., the measure of the agent’s uncertainty—in the
    decision-making policy; otherwise, the calibration set would also need to use conformal sets in
    its own decision-making policy, creating another circular dependency. Guided Reasoning enables
    the agent to use the conformal set in its exploration policy. In turn, this strategy aims to improve ex-
    ploration quality by leveraging the model’s uncertainty to guide subsequent actions. More formally,
    the agent takes action at ∼ π̂(xt−1 , C(xt−1 ), where C(xt−1 ) is the conformal set at time t−1. This
    creates an explicit dependence of the agent’s action—and consequently, its subsequent state xt —on
    the construction of the conformal set and therefore αt . Here, the use of OA is critical—because the
    calibration set was collected without using the conformal set in the exploration policy, it no longer
    provides marginal coverage over data collected with a policy that does leverage the conformal set.
    Notably, OA enable the model to adapt to the distribution shift while enabling use of the conformal
    set in the exploration procedure.
    Conformal Reasoning. To this end, we introduce a novel approach, C ONFORMAL R EASONING,
    for maintaining coverage in interactive environments while leveraging conformal prediction sets in
    exploration; see Alg. 1 for further details. First, we partition a calibration dataset Dcal = {ξi |ξi ∼
    D}ni=1 into two distinct subsets: Dinit and Dtrain . The subset Dinit , where the policy runs until
    length T , is used for providing a warm start for OA. If the dataset is known ahead of time, this
    allows for additional efficiency through offline computation of α0 using traditional split conformal
    prediction. After α0 is initialized, we run adaptive conformal inference with a decreasing learning
    rate, where our update is only dependent on the last prediction set at tans . This allows us to use
    potentially non-causal methods for constructing our prediction set during exploration.

    6     E XPERIMENTS
    We compare the performance of our proposed techniques—Offline Adaptation (OA) with Refresh
    Prediction (RP) and Guided Reasoning (GR), collectively termed C ONFORMAL R EASONING—
    to the baseline of Split Conformal Prediction (SCP) on the medical diagnosis (MediQ), embod-
    ied question answering (EQA), and 20 Questions (20Q) tasks described in §3. We defer more
    detailed description of the tasks to Appendix A. We experiment with target coverage values in
    {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9} to evaluate how varying coverage levels affect the key metrics for each task.
    Evaluation Metrics. As described in §3, we measure the Coverage:= P(y ∈ C) of each method; %
    Answered—the rate at which the agent arrives at a single confident answer; Specificity—how well
    the model narrows down its prediction sets; and Efficiency—the speed at which the agent ends its
    exploration to produce a single confident answer.


                                                        8
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Empirical vs. Target Coverage on MediQ                                         Empirical vs. Target Coverage on EQA
                     0.9        Expected Coverage                                                              Expected Coverage
                                SCP                                                                0.9         SCP
Empirical Coverage   0.8        SCP+RP                                                                         SCP+RP


                                                                              Empirical Coverage
                                OA                                                                 0.8         OA
                                OA+RP                                                                          OA+RP
                     0.7                                                                           0.7

                     0.6                                                                           0.6

                                                                                                   0.5
                     0.5
                           0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90                                  0.5       0.6      0.7       0.8   0.9
                                         Target Coverage                                                                 Target Coverage
                                (a) Coverage Rates on MediQ                                                    (b) Coverage Rates on EQA
 Figure 2: The proposed approaches of ACI and ACI+RP closely match the target coverage for both
 MediQ and EQA. The baseline of SCP and SCP+RP, on the other hand, fail to meet the target
 coverage. See Table 2 for exact values with standard errors.

 Models. We rely on open models rather than proprietary black-box models, as we require probability
 outputs from our models. For MediQ and 20Q, we use the L LAMA-3-8B model (Dubey et al., 2024).
 For EQA, we use Prismatic VLM (Karamcheti et al., 2024), an open vision model that achieve strong
 performance on question-answering and spatial reasoning. See §A.2 for implementation details.

  7                    R ESULTS
 Offline Adaptation (OA) maintains coverage. A fundamental requirement of the conformal pre-
 diction framework is to ensure coverage, i.e., the prediction set consistently includes the correct
 answer with high enough probability. As expected, our Offline Adaptation technique ensures the
 coverage guarantee across all tasks by utilizing adaptive conformal inference, closely aligning em-
 pirical coverage with the target coverage level. In contrast, SCP, while theoretically sound in single-
 turn settings, struggles to maintain this guarantee in multi-turn settings (Figure 2). In particular, the
 draw of the calibration set and the corresponding conformal threshold influences the policies of the
 inference-time tasks, creating a distribution shift. In contrast, OA adjusts its prediction thresholds
 dynamically throughout the sample scenarios in the calibration set, ensuring that coverage remains
 close to the target level, even as the data distribution changes with the prediction thresholds. Upon
 further analysis, the deviation of SCP methods away from the target coverage is particularly pro-
 nounced when the trajectory lengths of the test set differ from that of the calibration set. More
 results on SCP across all three tasks can be found in Appendix B.
 Refresh Prediction (RP) increases percent answered and efficiency. Refresh Prediction, a key
 part of our contribution, improves the model’s ability to confidently select a single correct answer by
 the end of the interaction, which we measure using the percent answered metric. Using prediction
 sets constructed through RP, C ONFORMAL R EASONING is able to refine the model’s final output,
 improving the frequency of the model outputting one single option by 42.7% across tasks and target
 coverage levels (Table 2). Overall, RP improves the exploration efficiency by 20.7%, 20.9%, 55.1%
 on MediQ, EQA, and 20Q, respectively, effectively reducing the number of steps needed to achieve
 the target coverage while improving percent answered. This is particularly crucial in high-stakes
 or high-cost applications to ensure timely and resource-effective decisions. In medical diagnosis,
 this means that the model can confidently reach a conclusion after fewer questions, which is highly
 desirable in real-world applications where asking unnecessary questions can waste time or resources.
 Guided Reasoning (GR) improves accuracy for open-ended tasks. Guided Reasoning enables
 the model to leverage its own uncertainty to produce the next best action. This is achieved by
 adding the prediction set from each turn to the prompt, guiding it to ask a question that would best
 distinguish the remaining options in the narrowed-down prediction set, rather than starting from the
 whole solution space. Intuitively, guided reasoning is the most helpful when the size of the solution
 space is large, as it helps the model focus on a subset of options only. On the 20Q task, GR not only
 improves efficiency and specificity, it significantly improves the accuracy by an average of 12.4%
 across target coverage levels with and without RP (figure 3). On the multiple-choice tasks, GR
 improves efficiency and specificity, though to a lesser degree than that of 20Q. Additional results on
 GR is reported in Appendix D.


                                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      Target   Refresh                    Empirical
            Task                                                        % Answered ↑               Specificity(%)↑       Efficiency(%)↑
                     Coverage Prediction                  Coverage
                                             ✗             89.7±0.7        26.8±1.3                    30.0±1.1                 22.9±1.0
                            0.9
                                             ✓             89.2±0.8        34.4±1.2                    27.9±0.9                 28.9±0.7
           MediQ                             ✗             79.9±1.1        44.4±1.5                    46.1±1.4                 38.1±1.5
                            0.8
                                             ✓             79.1±1.1        55.2±2.5                    45.0±1.7                 47.7±2.2
                                             ✗             53.1±0.3        94.4±0.4                    75.1±0.0                 91.1±0.1
                            0.5
                                             ✓             48.8±0.9        99.6±0.5                    74.9±0.1                 96.7±1.6
                                             ✗             90.3±0.6        13.1±1.2                    30.5±0.8                 14.4±3.7
                            0.9
                                             ✓             89.8±1.6        14.5±1.1                    32.2±1.4                 17.0±2.8
            EQA                              ✗             81.3±1.8        34.5±1.1                    33.7±1.2                 29.6±3.3
                            0.8
                                             ✓             79.7±1.4        42.9±2.7                    39.8±1.5                 42.2±4.1
                                             ✗             51.0±2.5        83.2±2.2                    75.2±2.1                 77.5±3.1
                            0.5
                                             ✓             48.1±2.3        83.7±1.8                    84.0±2.6                 79.2±2.9
                                             ✗             90.5±1.1          0.1±0.2                   52.6±1.4                     4.0±0.4
                            0.9
                                             ✓             88.4±2.0          5.7±1.4                   67.6±1.4                     7.9±0.8
            20Q                              ✗             83.2±3.1        0.5±0.4                     62.4±2.1                     4.6±0.5
                            0.8
                                             ✓             82.7±4.6        10.8±2.1                    77.5±2.5                     8.9±1.1
                                             ✗             53.4±3.8        2.5±0.5                     79.5±0.4                 4.8±0.5
                            0.5
                                             ✓             52.5±3.6        38.9±4.5                    93.7±0.2                 14.3±1.2
Table 2: Conformal Reasoning results on MediQ, EQA, and 20Q, with depth limit 15, 30, and 20
respectively. Conformal Reasoning employs adaptive conformal prediction to ensure that empirical
coverage matches the target coverage, while adding refresh prediction (RP) further improves percent
answered and exploration efficiency without significantly sacrificing output specificity.
                             Accuracy w. and w/o. GR                                               Accuracy w. and w/o. GR
           50                                                                       50

           40                                                                       40
Accuracy


                                                                         Accuracy


           30                                                                       30

           20                                                                       20
                          OA                                                                    OA
           10             OA + GR                                                   10          OA + GR
                          OA + RP                                                               OA + RP
                          OA + RP + GR                                                          OA + RP + GR
            0                                                                        0
                    0.5           0.6         0.7         0.8     0.9                     0.5         0.6         0.7         0.8         0.9
                                        Target Coverage                                                     Target Coverage
                (a) GR improves accuracy on the 20Q task.                            (b) GR improves accuracy on the MediQ task.
Figure 3: Guided Reasoning (GR) significantly improves accuracy on tasks with a larger solution
space (20Q) while maintaining performance on others. More results in Appendix D.

8           D ISCUSSION
In this work, we introduce C ONFORMAL R EASONING—extending adaptive conformal inference
to interactive environments. We first propose a novel offline adapataion paradigm where the need
for sample-wise feedback is eliminated, allowing practical deployment in real-world scenarios. We
present 1) Refresh Prediction for constructing flexible prediction sets in multi-turn settings and 2)
Guided Reasoning for leveraging the prediction set in the decision-making process. Our results
demonstrate strong empirical performance in domains like medical diagnosis, embodied question
answering, and open-ended 20 questions, showing more reliable coverage rate and improved explo-
ration efficiency. However, there are still various important considerations to explore in the space of
conformal prediction for multi-turn interactions. While Conformal Reasoning addresses the heuris-
tic bias between calibration trajectories and termination criteria, we encourage future research to
focus on optimizing reasoning abilities of agents with episode-level prediction sets and understand-
ing trade-offs among coverage, efficiency, and specificity.


                                                                         10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L IMITATIONS

While Conformal Reasoning maintains coverage and improves performance relative to split confor-
mal prediction, our approach nonetheless has some limitations. First, convergence and stability of
Conformal Reasoning is dependent on the choice of learning rate in adapting αt , requiring some
hyperparameter tuning for the best performance. Moreover, if the calibration set for tuning alpha is
too small, Conformal Reasoning might not converge to the optimal α∗ value.

E THICS S TATEMENT

While the Conformal Reasoning framework shows potential, several risks must be addressed before
real-world deployment.
Bias and Fairness. Calibration sets can introduce biases, which may result in unequal outcomes
across different demographics, especially in medical applications. Future work should assess these
risks through fairness evaluations to ensure equitable outcomes across all groups.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios Angelopoulos, Emmanuel Candes, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Conformal pid control for
  time series prediction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2024a.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J Candès, Michael I Jordan, and Lihua
  Lei. Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.01052, 2021.
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, et al. Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction.
  Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 16(4):494–591, 2023.
Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Rina Barber, and Stephen Bates. Online conformal prediction
  with decaying step sizes. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller,
  Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), Proceedings of the 41st Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1616–1630. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/
  angelopoulos24a.html.
Osbert Bastani, Varun Gupta, Christopher Jung, Georgy Noarov, Ramya Ramalingam, and Aaron
  Roth. Practical adversarial multivalid conformal prediction. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:29362–29373, 2022.
Aadyot Bhatnagar, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Improved online conformal prediction
  via strongly adaptive online learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2337–2363. PMLR, 2023.
BIG-bench collaboration. Beyond the imitation game: Measuring and extrapolating the capabilities
  of language models. In preparation, 2021. URL https://github.com/google/BIG-bench/.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
Tejas Desai and Greg Durrett. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 295–302, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,
  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vı́tor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Clara Fannjiang, Stephen Bates, Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Jennifer Listgarten, and Michael I Jor-
  dan. Conformal prediction under feedback covariate shift for biomolecular design. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(43):e2204569119, 2022.

Jiahui Geng, Fengyu Cai, Yuxia Wang, Heinz Koeppl, Preslav Nakov, and Iryna Gurevych. A survey
   of language model confidence estimation and calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08298, 2023.

Jiahui Geng, Fengyu Cai, Yuxia Wang, Heinz Koeppl, Preslav Nakov, and Iryna Gurevych. A survey
   of confidence estimation and calibration in large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024
   Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
   Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6577–6595, 2024.

Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel Candes. Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift. Ad-
   vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1660–1672, 2021.

Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal inference for online prediction with arbitrary
   distribution shifts. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(162):1–36, 2024.

Yu Gui, Ying Jin, and Zhimei Ren. Conformal alignment: Knowing when to trust foundation models
  with guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10301, 2024.

Martin N Hebart, Adam H Dickter, Alexis Kidder, Wan Y Kwok, Anna Corriveau, Caitlin Van Wick-
 lin, and Chris I Baker. Things: A database of 1,854 object concepts and more than 26,000 natu-
 ralistic object images. PloS one, 14(10):e0223792, 2019.

Zhiyuan Hu, Chumin Liu, Xidong Feng, Yilun Zhao, See-Kiong Ng, Anh Tuan Luu, Junxian He,
  Pang Wei Koh, and Bryan Hooi. Uncertainty of thoughts: Uncertainty-aware planning enhances
  information seeking in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03271.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What dis-
  ease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical
  exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.
Christopher Jung, Georgy Noarov, Ramya Ramalingam, and Aaron Roth. Batch multivalid confor-
  mal prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15145, 2022.
Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Percy Liang, Thomas Kollar, and Dorsa
  Sadigh. Prismatic vlms: Investigating the design space of visually-conditioned language models.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Bhawesh Kumar, Charlie Lu, Gauri Gupta, Anil Palepu, David Bellamy, Ramesh Raskar, and An-
  drew Beam. Conformal prediction with large language models for multi-choice question answer-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18404, 2023.
Shuyue Stella Li, Vidhisha Balachandran, Shangbin Feng, Jonathan Ilgen, Emma Pierson, Pang Wei
  Koh, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Mediq: Question-asking llms for adaptive and reliable clinical reason-
  ing, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00922.
Kaiqu Liang, Zixu Zhang, and Jaime Fernández Fisac. Introspective planning: Guiding language-
  enabled agents to refine their own uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06529, 2024.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Drew Prinster, Samuel Stanton, Anqi Liu, and Suchi Saria. Conformal validity guarantees exist for
  any data distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06627, 2024.
Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan, Aaron Gokaslan, Erik Wijmans, Oleksandr Maksymets, Alex Clegg,
  John Turner, Eric Undersander, Wojciech Galuba, Andrew Westbury, Angel X. Chang, Manolis
  Savva, Yili Zhao, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000 large-scale 3d
  environments for embodied ai, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.08238.
Allen Z. Ren, Anushri Dixit, Alexandra Bodrova, Sumeet Singh, Stephen Tu, Noah Brown, Peng
  Xu, Leila Takayama, Fei Xia, Jake Varley, Zhenjia Xu, Dorsa Sadigh, Andy Zeng, and Anirudha
  Majumdar. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment for large language model planners,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.01928.
Allen Z. Ren, Jaden Clark, Anushri Dixit, Masha Itkina, Anirudha Majumdar, and Dorsa Sadigh.
  Explore until confident: Efficient exploration for embodied question answering, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15941.
Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 9(3), 2008.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Kamile Stankeviciute, Ahmed M Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Conformal time-series fore-
  casting. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:6216–6228, 2021.
Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
  Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated
  confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14975, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Johnathan Xie, Annie S Chen, Yoonho Lee, Eric Mitchell, and Chelsea Finn. Calibrating language
  models with adaptive temperature scaling. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Secure and Trustworthy
  Large Language Models, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BgfGqNpoMi.
Chen Xu and Yao Xie. Conformal prediction interval for dynamic time-series. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11559–11569. PMLR, 2021.
Ruixin Yang, Dheeraj Rajagopa, Shirley Anugrah Hayati, Bin Hu, and Dongyeop Kang. Con-
  fidence calibration and rationalization for llms via multi-agent deliberation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.09127, 2024.
Margaux Zaffran, Olivier Féron, Yannig Goude, Julie Josse, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Adaptive
 conformal predictions for time series. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 25834–25866. PMLR, 2022.
Zhiyu Zhang, David Bombara, and Heng Yang. Discounted adaptive online learning: Towards better
  regularization. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.


A     D ETAILED TASK D ESCRIPTIONS
A.1    M EDI Q

We now include details about how the agent performs clinical reasoning using the MediQ frame-
work (Li et al., 2024). The MediQ framework comprises two components: a Patient system that
simulates a patient and responds to follow-up questions, and an Expert system that serves as a doc-
tor’s assistant and asks questions to the patient before making a medical decision. We MediQ to
explore how conformal prediction can guide the Expert System’s interactive medical diagnosis ca-
pabilities. Specifically, in this interactive clinical reasoning task, a successful information-seeking
Expert should decide, at each turn, whether it has enough information to provide a confident answer;
if not, it should ask a follow-up question.
The dynamic medical consultation task simulates the iterative nature of real-world clinical interac-
tions. This task starts by providing an initial patient description k0 of their conditions to the Expert
system. The initial information typically contains the patient’s age, gender, and chief complaint
for the visit. The Patient system has access to the entire patient record K = {k0 , k1 , . . . , kn }, and
the necessary information to answer the multiple choice question is K∗ ⊆ K. At the start of the
t-th turn, the knowledge available to the Expert system is denoted as Kt−1 = {k0 , . . . , ki }. Given
follow-up question qt , the Patient system responds with rt = {k|k ∈ K}. The Expert knowledge is
then updated as Kt = Kt−1 ∪ rt . The main challenge of the task is for the Expert system to ask
information-seeking questions to expand Kt until the Expert system is sufficiently, at which point
the Expert system is asked to make a final decision. The decision to either ask another follow-up
question or to provide the final diagnosis is made through the episode-level prediction set generated
by the conformal prediction process (C(xt ))—when there are more than one option remaining in
the prediction set, more information is needed to rule out the wrong answers, so the model should
abstain from answering, whereas when there is only one option in the prediction set, we deem the
model confident enough to provide the final answer.
Nonconformity Scores At each step of the interaction, the model outputs logit scores for the pos-
sible letter choices—A, B, C, D—which are conditioned on the preceding conversation context
and the given question. We apply a softmax function to these logits to derive normalized probabili-
ties, which we use as nonconformity scores for each option.

A.2    EQA

Here, we provide additional details on how exploration and question-answering takes place in
our embodied question answering tasks. We focus on two parts in particular: how EQA per-
forms targeted exploration and the scores used as the stopping criterion in the conformal predic-
tion subroutine. We closely follow the approach described by Ren et al. (2024); we restate this
approach here briefly for further detail but refer the reader in search of full implementation details
to ren2024exploreconfident.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.2.1    TARGETED E XPLORATION
In EQA, we would like the robot to explore areas that are useful in answering the desired question.
To do so, we create a 3D voxel representation for the scene, where each voxel corresponds to a
cube of fixed side length. At a given state of the robot—that is, a pose and location within the
environment—and associated depth image, we apply volumetric truncated signed distance function
(TSDF) to update the occupancy of the voxels and their presence in the current image. At each
time step, the 3D voxel map is projected onto a 2D map M , where each 2D point is determined
as occupied or unoccupied based on the occupancy of voxels within a 1.5m radius and as explored
or not if the voxels have been marked as explored. Based on the constructed 2D map, we then use
a heuristic-based 2D planner based on Frontier-Based Exploration (FBE). This approach looks for
locations at the boundary of explored and unexplored areas, samples one, and uses the normal vector
from the current location to the selected region boundary as the target orientation.
While naive frontier-based exploration can yield efficient exploration of an environment, it fails to
leverage the prior knowledge stored within the VLM for determining the most relevant areas for
exploration. Here, we characterize the VLM’s uncertainty using visual prompting. For a given
image, we identify three points in free space within the image and annotate them on the image with
the letters A, B, and C. We then use this image for visual prompting using the prompts identified
in Figure 4. The normalized output probability can be used to construct the local semantic value of
each of the three points as follows:
                            LSVp (xt ) = fˆyp (xt ) = fˆyp (Ict , sLSV,q ) ∈ [0, 1]
where Ict is the current RGB image, q is the question to be answered, fˆy (·) is the (normalized)
softmax score associated with token y, and sLSV,q is the prompt from Figure 4 with the question
filled in. In particular, fˆyp (·) is the softmax score associated with the letter for a given point p, i.e.
if p is annotated with the letter A, then fˆyp (·) is the normalized softmax score associated with the
token A.
While LSV captures the local score associated with each point, it does not capture the value of
different points seen in alternate poses of the robot. To help address this problem, we determine
whether we should navigate to other poses in the first place. We can again prompt the VLM using
prompt in Figure 5. This captures the global semantic value of moving to point p, and is formulated
as
                          GSVp (xt ) = fˆYes (xt ) = fˆYes (Ict , sGSV,q ) ∈ [0, 1]
In other words, we characterize the the value in moving to point p by the normalized softmax score
of the VLM predicting “yes.” Together, we compute the overall semantic value as
                        SVp (xt ) = exp(τLSV · LSVp (xt ) + τGSV · GSVp (xt ))
where τLSV and τGSV are temperature-scaling parameters. We then use this semantic value map
weighting our frontier-based exploration value map.

A.2.2    N ONCONFORMITY S CORES
Here, we also characterize the nonconformity scores used in conformal reasoning. First, we can
characterize the VLM’s confidence in the current image being relevant for answering the target
question through direct prompting. In particular, we define the the question-image relevance score
as
                                    Rel(xt ) = fˆYes (Ict , (q, sRel, q ))
where sRel,q is the prompt in Figure 6 with the question filled in. Finally, we determine the relevance-
weighted confidence score at time t as
                                    ρty (xt ) := Rel(xt )(fˆy (xt ) − 1).
We use this as our nonconformity score for our EQA task.

A.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

At each step of the interaction, the model outputs logit scores for the possible choices—A,B,C,D
for multiple choice and yes,no for open-ended questions—which are conditioned on the preceding


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Consider the question: {question}, and you will explore the scene for
answering it. Which direction (black letters on the image) would you
explore then? Answer with a single letter.

                         Figure 4: EQA local semantic value (LSV) prompt.

Consider the question: {question}, and you will explore the scene for
answering it. Is there any direction shown in the image worth exploring?
Answer with Yes or No.

                        Figure 5: EQA global semantic value (GSV) prompt.

Consider the question {question}.                Are you confident about answering the
question given the current view?

                                Figure 6: EQA relevance score prompt.


conversation context and the given question. We apply a softmax function to these logits to derive
normalized probabilities, which we use as nonconformity scores for each option. In the open-ended
setting, we use a preset list of 26 options consisting of the correct answer and in-category and out-
of-category terms to simulate a large solution space. In our EQA task, we weight the normalized
probabilities by a question-image relevance score; see Appendix A for task-specific details.

B    SCP R ESULTS

                         Task     Method     Avg. Deviation    Avg. Efficiency
                                   SCP+X        5.70±5.33         62.07±23.98
                        MediQ
                                   OA+X         1.38±1.09         53.86±24.35
                                   SCP+X         90.2±0.7          21.4±2.0
                         EQA
                                   OA+X          89.2±0.8          31.0±1.8
                                   SCP+X        3.50±2.72          7.43±3.14
                          20Q
                                   OA+X         3.42±2.86          7.30±3.13

            Table 3: SCP on multi-turn interactive tasks weakens coverage guarantees.


C    A BLATIONS
Depth Limit In this ablation study, we control for the lengths of the trajectories to highlight the
heuristic bias introduced by the calibration set and train-test sets not having the same termination
criteria. By shortening the maximum number of turns in each trajectory, we reduce the variations
between the lengths in the calibration set and the train-set sets. As shown in Table 5, after increasing
the maximum depth of the trajectories, the distribution, both in mean and standard error, changes
relative to trajectories with shorter depth limit. These differences are particularly noticeable with
respect to efficiency.



Online Conformal Algorithm While ACI is the most basic form of base algorithm to use for
offline adaptation (OA), more modern approaches to online conformal inference exist, particularly
with respect to controlling different measures of regret. Here, we compare our results against two
more recent online conformal techniques: MVP from Bastani et al. (2022) and MagL-D from Zhang
et al.. Our results on the EQA are available in Table 4. Broadly, we demonstrate that our approach
is agnostic of the specific online conformal algorithm used; that is, our approach still maintains cov-
erage across our design choices. Moreover, while using the improved online conformal algorithms


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Empirical OA convergence on EQA task across coverage levels. Despite some variation
in αt and empirical coverage level, OA tends to converge relatively quickly despite its guarantees
primarily being asymptotic.


improves our downstream metrics, they do so relatively marginally compared to ACI, which is sim-
pler to implement. Characterizing the tradeoffs in downstream metrics between these methods is
interesting future work.



Empirical Convergence of αt While the theoretical guarantees for using offline adaptation come
asymptotically, we characterize the empirical convergence of αt for our EQA task in Figure 7.
Here, we see that across coverage levels, OA empirically converges reasonably quickly despite being
applied on a relatively small calibration set size.



Tradeoffs Between Efficiency and Specificity in Refresh Prediction Here, we characterize the
tradeoffs between specificity and efficiency, particularly in the context of RP. Our results are visible
in Figure 8. Broadly speaking, we see that in many cases, using RP improves the Pareto frontier
relative to OA alone. Additionally, the degree to which the Pareto frontier changes under RP strongly
depends on the task that Conformal Reasoning is applied to.

D    G UIDED R EASONING R ESULTS
Experimental results find that Guided Reasoning (GR) is particularly helpful when the size of the
solution space is large. However, we also show that for multiple choice tasks containing only 4
options, addiing GR still maintains robust performance on both the MediQ (Figure 3b) and EQA
(Figure 9) tasks.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Tradeoffs between specificity and efficiency across tasks and target coverage levels. In
general, using RP improves the Pareto frontier between specificity and efficiency.


Figure 9: GR Performance on EQA. Relative to OA and OA+RP, adding GR improves accuracy on
EQA.


                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Target   Refresh      Empirical
  OA Alg.                                       % Answered ↑      Specificity(%)↑     Efficiency(%)↑
            Coverage Prediction    Coverage
                         ✗          90.3±0.6          13.1±1.2        30.5±0.8           14.4±3.7
              0.9
                         ✓          89.8±1.6          14.5±1.1        32.2±1.4           17.0±2.8
    ACI
                         ✗          81.3±1.8          34.5±1.1        33.7±1.2           29.6±3.3
              0.8
                         ✓          79.7±1.4          42.9±2.7        39.8±1.5           42.2±4.1
                         ✗          90.1±0.7          14.2±1.1        32.1±0.9           15.8±3.5
              0.9
                         ✓          89.5±1.5          15.8±1.2        33.9±1.3           18.5±2.9
    MVP
                         ✗          81.0±1.7          36.2±1.2        35.4±1.3           31.8±3.4
              0.8
                         ✓          79.4±1.5          44.5±2.5        41.6±1.6           44.7±4.0
                         ✗          90.2±1.0          14.8±1.3        33.2±1.1           16.5±3.6
              0.9
                         ✓          89.3±1.7          16.4±1.2        34.8±1.4           19.2±2.7
  MagL-D
                         ✗          80.8±1.9          37.8±1.3        36.9±1.4           33.5±3.5
              0.8
                         ✓          79.1±1.6          46.2±2.4        43.3±1.7           46.8±3.9

Table 4: Conformal Reasoning results on EQA using different online conformal algorithms. Broadly
speaking, we see that using more advanced forms of online conformal algorithms yield benefits
across our downstream metrics while retaining coverage.


              Target    Max       Empirical
     Exp.                                      % Answered ↑      Specificity(%)↑    Efficiency(%)↑
             Coverage   Depth     Coverage
     OA         0.9      10        89.3±0.7      17.2±0.9           29.2±1.2           09.6±1.1
     OA+RP      0.9      10        89.5±1.4      18.4±1.3           28.9±1.7           12.1±0.8
     OA         0.9      30        90.3±0.6      13.1±1.2           30.5±0.8           14.4±3.7
     OA+RP      0.9      30        89.8±1.6      14.5±1.1           32.2±1.4           17.0±2.8
     OA         0.8      10        80.2±1.0      24.4±1.1           32.2±1.5           15.9±1.8
     OA+RP      0.8      10        80.9±0.9      24.1±1.6           32.1±1.7           16.1±1.4
     OA         0.8      30        81.3±1.8      34.5±1.1           33.7±1.2           29.6±3.3
     OA+RP      0.8      30        79.7±1.4      42.9±2.7           39.8±1.5           42.2±4.1
     OA         0.5      10        43.9±8.3      81.3±2.6           84.0±1.2           74.2±1.5
     OA+RP      0.5      10        45.7±7.2      85.1±2.1           80.2±2.9           75.4±1.1
     OA         0.5      30        51.0±2.5      83.2±2.2           75.2±2.1           77.5±3.1
     OA+RP      0.5      30        48.1±2.3      83..7±1.8          84.0±2.6           79.2±2.9

Table 5: Ablation study on depth limit on the EQA task. While coverage remains essentially the
same, changing the depth limit in EQA affects other downstream metrics, particularly efficiency.


                                                 20
