Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K I VA: K ID - INSPIRED V ISUAL A NALOGIES
FOR T ESTING L ARGE M ULTIMODAL M ODELS

 Eunice Yiu1 Maan Qraitem2 Anisa Noor Majhi1 Charlie Wong1 Yutong Bai1
 Shiry Ginosar3,4 Alison Gopnik1 Kate Saenko2
 1
   University of California, Berkeley 2 Boston University 3 Google DeepMind
 4
   Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago



                                                 A BSTRACT

            This paper investigates visual analogical reasoning in large multimodal models
            (LMMs) compared to human adults and children. A “visual analogy” is an abstract
            rule inferred from one image and applied to another. While benchmarks exist for
            testing visual reasoning in LMMs, they require advanced skills and omit basic
            visual analogies that even young children can make. Inspired by developmental
            psychology, we propose a new benchmark of 4,300 visual transformations of
            everyday objects to test LMMs on visual analogical reasoning and compare them
            to children (ages three to five) and to adults. We structure the evaluation into three
            stages: identifying what changed (e.g., color, number, etc.), how it changed (e.g.,
            added one object), and applying the rule to new scenarios. Our findings show that
            while GPT-o1, GPT-4V, LLaVA-1.5, and MANTIS identify the “what” effectively,
            they struggle with quantifying the “how” and extrapolating this rule to new objects.
            In contrast, children and adults exhibit much stronger analogical reasoning at all
            three stages. Additionally, the strongest tested model, GPT-o1, performs better in
            tasks involving simple surface-level visual attributes like color and size, correlating
            with quicker human adult response times. Conversely, more complex tasks such as
            number, rotation, and reflection, which necessitate extensive cognitive processing
            and understanding of extrinsic spatial properties in the physical world, present
            more significant challenges. Altogether, these findings highlight the limitations of
            training models on data that primarily consists of 2D images and text. 1


1       I NTRODUCTION
What is visual cognition? Humans make countless visual inferences everyday from observing objects
and scenes, quickly detecting even subtle visual changes. We generalize common patterns about
changes from different observations and use these insights to solve new problems. If we put a wool
sweater in the washing machine and it comes out smaller, we might infer that the wash shrinks wool
and avoid washing wool coat in the future. If cookies disappear, we might infer that someone is
eating our treats and and proceed to hide the chocolate elsewhere. This ability to draw parallels
between situations and apply learned patterns to a new scenario is known as analogical reasoning.
Formally defined, an analogy is a systematic comparison between structures that uses the properties
and relations of objects in a source structure to infer properties and relations of objects in a target
structure (Mitchell, 2021; Schunn & Dunbar, 1996). Analogical reasoning is a hallmark of human
intelligence and learning (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak, 2012; Mitchell, 2021; Sternberg, 1977). It is
what enables us to be flexible, adaptive and robust learners across a wide variety of settings, finding
meaning in patterns and making out-of-distribution generalizations (Chollet, 2019; Mitchell, 2021).
Analogical reasoning is already available to young children (Goddu et al., 2020; Goswami, 2013;
Sternberg & Rifkin, 1979), and is crucial for human problem-solving in various contexts, from
building scientific models to appreciating metaphors to formulating legal arguments.
Today, large multimodal (LMMs) have made significant progress, but they remain data-hungry and
require substantial human effort to adapt to new contexts (Chollet, 2019; Reizinger et al., 2024).
As analogical reasoning is instrumental for general-purpose and adaptive machines, it is crucial to
    1
        Benchmark (code, data, models) is available at: https://github.com/ey242/KiVA


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Example Transformation      KiVA              KiVA-adults   Predicting the “?” in the transformations



       Color                                         ?                   ?    KiVA
                                                                                               Color


        Size                                         ?                   ?     Size                               Reflection


     Rotation                                        ?                   ?            Number

                                                                              KiVA-adults
                                                                                                       Rotation


                                                                                               Color


     Reflection                                      ?                   ?     Size                               Reflection


     Number                                          ?                   ?
                                                                                      Number           Rotation

                              (a) Visual analogy domains.                      (b) Extrapolation accuracy.

Figure 1: KiVA: Kid-inspired Visual Analogies. (a) 5 visual analogy domains examined in KiVA
and KiVA-adults (see Figure 3 for the full task format). Unlike KiVA, the starting color, size,
orientation and number of test objects in KiVA-adults further differ from the starting values of the
given transformations. (b) Performance of children, adults & LMMs in extrapolating a transformation
rule to a novel object in KiVA (top) and KiVA-adults (bottom).

examine whether current models have such capabilities. Critically, examining analogical capabilities
does not permit models to “cheat” by merely depending on their training data because it requires
context-dependent abstraction beyond general object recognition. In KiVA, the same object may
undergo different kinds of transformations, requiring models to combine familiar elements in new,
trial-specific ways. Reasoning about analogies involves first classifying relationships between object
characteristics, specifying similarities and differences, then extrapolating the same relationship to
new objects. This paper focuses on visual analogies, testing models’ ability to reason abstractly about
visual observations. See Figure 1 for a summary of the KiVA benchmark and results.
There is a growing body of work examining visual reasoning and generalization capabilities in large
multimodal models (Ahrabian et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Moskvichev et al., 2023; Petersen
& van der Plas, 2023; Webb et al., 2023). Existing benchmarks of visual analogies include (a)
ARC (Chollet, 2019) and ConceptARC (Mitchell et al., 2023; Moskvichev et al., 2023), (b) variations
of Raven’s Progressive Matrices (Huang et al., 2024) and (c) abstract spatial reasoning (Ahrabian
et al., 2024) (see prior benchmarks in Figure 2). These prior benchmarks all have several critical
limitations. First, they rely on abstract shapes and grids, lacking real-world relevance. This abstraction
of stimuli neither aligns with the training data of large multimodal models nor effectively mimics the
complexity and variability found in everyday visual tasks, making it less suitable for assessing how
well AI models can perform analogical reasoning in practical contexts. Second, the transformations
examined involve conjunctions of visual concepts such as extracting and transposing pixels according
to some arbitrary rule, which do not tap into basic visual cognition. Humans do not require the ability
to solve these specific tasks to function effectively in their daily lives nor to demonstrate their capacity
for visual analogical reasoning. Third, while we know that models often perform poorly on these
benchmarks, where they fail in the reasoning process needs to be clarified since existing evaluations
focus solely on prediction accuracy rather than the reasoning approach or what is perceived.
We propose a Kid-inspired Visual Analogies (KiVA) benchmark founded on developmental psychol-
ogy (Figure 1 (left)) (Goddu et al., 2020; Lehmann et al., 2014). We focus our analysis on basic
visual analogical capabilities that are present early in human development and are important for
understanding the physical world. KiVA isolates the following fundamental capabilities that emerge
early in human development: detecting changes in color (Ross-sheehy et al., 2003; Wang & Goldman,
2016) and size (Day & McKenzie, 1981; Wang & Goldman, 2016), changes that involve rotation
and reflection (Frick et al., 2013; Quaiser-Pohl, 2003), and changes in small numbers of objects
(Cherian et al., 2023; Levine et al., 1992). It is solvable by a three-year-old child. KiVA-adults serves


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     I.                  II.


                         III.



                                                                                             ?
                       (a) Prior benchmarks.                              (b) Our benchmark.

Figure 2: Prior benchmarks versus KiVA for visual analogies. (a) Prior benchmarks like I.
ConceptARC, II. Raven’s Progressive Matrices, and III. CCSE Reasoning involve arbitrary changes
of abstract shapes and grids. (b) KiVA examines basic changes that even three-year-olds can solve.
as a more challenging version of KiVA that is not solvable by young children but by adults, requiring
deeper generalization from given transformations (the starting values of objects in the given and
test transformations are not aligned) and featuring more variations in the above visual domains (see
details in Section 3.2). Refer to Figure 1 for sample test trials of KiVA and KiVA-adults. KiVA stands
out in the following ways:
First, our dataset utilizes real-world, physically grounded objects curated from established 3D
datasets of common household items (Downs et al., 2022) and toys that are familiar to human
children (Stojanov et al., 2021), which align more with the training distribution of computer vision
models and visual data of humans more than other visual analogical reasoning datasets (Figure 2).
Second, our approach is inspired by developmental psychology, specifically how children learn to
perform analogical reasoning not abstractly, but from simple objects in grounded contexts (Christie
& Gentner, 2010; Gentner, 1983; Goddu et al., 2020). We propose a similar approach for large
multimodal models, investigating if they can perform like children on basic visual analogical reasoning
tasks related to color, size, orientation, and number – as already reported in child development
journals Coates et al. (2023); Goddu et al. (2020; 2025). Starting with simple, real-world relevant
tasks in child development allows models to develop robust reasoning abilities before tackling more
advanced tasks, providing a clearer pathway for evaluating and improving cognitive functions in AI.
Third, we break down our evaluation to examine the different steps involved in analogical reasoning
to determine which steps a model can perform and where it may fail: 1) classifying the domain of a
visual transformation, 2) specifying the transformation rule, and 3) extrapolating the inferred rule to a
new item. This three-stage evaluation (Figure 3) gives us insights into models’ reasoning processes
beyond simply selecting a correct or incorrect response at the end.
Results from KiVA and KiVA-adults demonstrate that state-of-the-art large multimodal models, i.e.,
GPT-o1 (OpenAI, 2024), GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023), LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024) and MANTIS (Jiang
et al., 2024a), still cannot solve visual analogies like humans can. These models do not match even
the capabilities of a three-year-old child in reasoning about number and reflection (Figure 1). While
LMMs can categorize some transformations, they still struggle to extrapolate those transformations
to new objects. In particular, GPT-o1 and GPT-4V outperform LLaVA-1.5 and MANTIS but also
demonstrates weaker performance in orientation and number changes than in size and color changes
which are processed more quickly by humans, at an earlier age (Slater et al., 1990; Wang & Goldman,
2016), and in a more primary region of the visual cortex (Zeki et al., 1991; Zeng et al., 2020).
Taken together, KiVA and KiVA-adults not only mirror the natural progression of human cognitive
development, but also provides a more structured and comprehensive framework for evaluating the
capabilities and growth of LMMs. We also release in our project page code for KiVA-compositionality,
which combines multiple object transformations to probe even more complex compositional reasoning.
This serves as the next benchmark for models to surpass after KiVA and KiVA-adults.


2    R ELATED W ORK
Evaluating human visual analogical reasoning. There is a variety of tasks designed in Devel-
opmental Psychology to examine human visual analogical reasoning early on in life. Children are


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


asked to compare simple object and relational matches (Christie & Gentner, 2010; Goddu et al.,
2020; Kuwabara & Smith, 2012) along dimensions such as color (Milewski & Siqueland, 1975;
Ross-sheehy et al., 2003), number (Cherian et al., 2023; Levine et al., 1992), size (Day & McKenzie,
1981; Slater et al., 1990) and spatial orientation (Frick et al., 2013; Quaiser-Pohl, 2003). Older
children and adults are evaluated on Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) (Carpenter et al., 1990;
Lovett & Forbus, 2017; Raven & Court, 1938) and Bongard Problems (Bongard, 1970; Weitnauer
et al., 2023). Even though they tend to be the most representative and largest testbeds for testing
advanced visual analogical reasoning, RPMs and Bongard problems use abstract geometric shapes
and test recognition of arbitrary patterns that (1) cannot be solved by children before the age of 6
and (2) are not critical to everyday visual processing. KiVA is the first visual analogical reasoning
benchmark that includes common real-world objects and more natural visual cognition skills such
as counting and spatial transformations — tasks that even a three-year-old child can handle (Goddu
et al., 2020). We also examine where people and models fail with more fine-grained evaluation.
Evaluating visuo-linguistic reasoning in AI models. Several proposals for evaluating modern AI
systems’ visuo-linguistic reasoning capabilities followed the recent successes of large multimodal
models. Many concentrate on a narrow, isolated set of tasks for detecting object properties like
size estimation (Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2022), color perception (Abdou et al., 2021; Samin
et al., 2024), counting objects (Liang et al., 2023; Paiss et al., 2023), object viewpoint/pose and
chirality (Kapelyukh et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024) and visuo-linguistic composi-
tionality (Thrush et al., 2022; Kamath et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Typically, the objective of these
tasks is to evaluate models’ ability to report a correct property about objects in an image. They lack
the depth to probe pattern abstraction and generalization involved in visual analogical reasoning.
Broader benchmarks, such as visual question answering setups (Antol et al., 2015; Goyal et al.,
2017), attempt to investigate the models’ understanding of various visual concepts. One approach
taken by (Bubeck et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) was to try and push the envelope on various tasks
to capture anecdotal and qualitative observations regarding the performance of GPT-4. Perception
Test (Pătrăucean et al., 2023) proposed a second approach: a visual video-based benchmark including
developmentally-inspired tasks such as object permanence, object tracking, spatial relations, etc.
Recently, the BLINK benchmark was introduced to show that core visual perception tasks, easily
solvable by humans "within a blink," remain challenging for large multimodal models due to their
resistance to language-based mediation (Fu et al., 2024). However, all these benchmarks fall short in
evaluating the deeper, more complex aspects of visual analogical reasoning and generalization.
Another specific class of benchmarks tests generalization and reasoning within abstract puzzle
grids. These include the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) (Chollet, 2019) and Con-
ceptARC (Moskvichev et al., 2023; Mitchell et al., 2023); a direct translation of RPMs-based
human evaluation has previously been applied to models by (Ahrabian et al., 2024) and (Huang et al.,
2024) (see these prior benchmarks in Figure 2). However, the stimuli are simple, monotonic shapes
like squares and circles, lacking real-world complexity and variability. Moreover, they emphasize
complex pattern recognition and logical sequencing without real-world context—neglecting basic
visual cognition skills even children possess—and this limited scope may render them unsuitable for
training data that typically covers a much broader range of real-world visuals.
In summary, although many benchmarks assess advanced visual capabilities in large multimodal
models, none evaluate visual cognition that is clearly exhibited by young children—such as predicting
simple transformations of real-world objects—or use children as a baseline for comparison.


3    T HE K I VA B ENCHMARK FOR V ISUAL A NALOGICAL R EASONING
We introduce KiVA, a Kid-inspired Visual Analogies benchmark, wherein real-world objects undergo
common transformations necessary for everyday visual cognition. We focus on isolating and testing
basic visual transformations that even a three-year-old child understands (Goddu et al., 2020). As
we show in Figure 1, we examine noticing color changes (Ross-sheehy et al., 2003; Milewski
& Siqueland, 1975), size changes (Day & McKenzie, 1981; Slater et al., 1990), rotation, reflec-
tion (Quaiser-Pohl, 2003; Frick et al., 2013), and number changes such as addition and subtraction
of a small number of objects (Cherian et al., 2023; Levine et al., 1992). We then build upon this bench-
mark by proposing KiVA-adults, which involves a greater variety of transformations and demands
more abstract forms of generalization. It is solvable by adults but not by children under five.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1. Verbal Classification:                                2. Verbal Specification:                    3. Visual Extrapolation:
   what changed                                             how it changed                           applying the same change to a new object


 Which one of the following rules {(1)                   Which one of the following rules {(1)
 change in orientation of objects (where                 objects become smaller, (2) objects
 things face), (2) change in number of                   become bigger, (3) no change, (4) doesn’t
                                               correct
 objects, (3) change in size of objects, (4)             apply} best describes the left-to-right
 no change, (5) doesn’t apply} best                      transformation in the top of the puzzle     Which one of three left-to-right object
 describes the left-to-right transformation              where the picture on the left transforms    transformations (marked by either (A), (B) or (C)) on
 on top of the puzzle where the picture on               to the picture on the right?. Answer with   the bottom of the puzzle is the same as the left-to-
 the left transforms to the picture on the               the correct rule number surrounded by       right transformation on the top of the puzzle?
 right? Answer with the correct rule                     parentheses. Then provide a "step-by-       Answer with the correct letter surrounded by
 number surrounded by parentheses,                       step" reasoning for your choice.            parentheses (or (D) if none of the options apply),
 then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning                                 incorrect                   then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning for your
 for your choice.                                                                                    choice.



Figure 3: An example of a trial in KiVA. Models and humans are first asked to classify a given
transformation (left). If the classification is correct (green arrow), humans and models are further
evaluated on their verbal specification of the transformation (middle) and then on visual extrapolation
(right). Otherwise, humans and models skip to make a visual extrapolation (yellow arrow).

3.1      A T HREE -S TAGE E XPERIMENTAL PARADIGM

We use our proposed dataset to benchmark computational models’ and human subjects’ visual
analogical reasoning capabilities. We utilize the same testing procedure (Figure 3) for both kinds of
subjects. In each trial, we start by presenting a given transformation of an object that changes by
a specific rule, following the experimental paradigm of other analogical reasoning benchmarks for
humans and computational models (Moskvichev et al., 2023; Bongard, 1970; Goddu et al., 2020).
Inspired by the component processes model of analogical reasoning (Sternberg, 1977), we evaluate
the subject’s ability to determine what changed (Verbal Classification) how it changed (Verbal
Specification), and apply the the same transformation rule to predict the outcome of a new object—
i.e., a Visual Extrapolation. We break the question down into these three steps to test the different
cognitive processes involved in analogical reasoning. The first two assess the necessary prerequisites
for accurate analogical reasoning, while the last step represents the core visual analogy task. Critically,
KiVA retains the core nonverbal extrapolation task (last step) from previous benchmarks and the
verbal questions do not replace the core nonverbal tasks. Even without correct verbal responses,
humans and models can still tackle the independently-assessed visual extrapolation tasks. Thus,
KiVA doesn’t require specific language skills but provides a window into the analogical reasoning
process of humans and models in reaching their final solutions. The first two verbal questions were
further paraphrased by developmental psychologists so that it is comprehensible to a three-year-old
child (Appendix A.3); models and adults did not benefit from the child-appropriate prompting so
the original prompt in Figure 3 was preserved. We pose all questions in a multiple-choice format
for human children, adults and models, which enables automatic scoring. Option labels for correct
responses were randomized such that LMMs’ option label bias does not correlate with task accuracy.
Furthermore, we provided the opportunity to select “Doesn’t apply” to accommodate responses that
the provided choices may not cover. Excluding the “Doesn’t apply” option, chance level is 25%
for Verbal Classification (4 choices) and 33% for Verbal Specification and Visual Extrapolation (3
choices). Refer to Figure 3 for the three-stage query pipeline and Appendix A.2 for specific prompts.
Verbal classification of transformation (“what”). We first evaluate if the model or human can
detect what changed in a given transformation and classify it in the correct visual domain, such as
size or number (see Figure 3). We randomly sample incorrect multiple-choice options from other
possible transformation domains. “No change” and “Doesn’t apply” are always included as options
to accommodate for alternative forms of reasoning that are not covered by the choices. Suppose the
model fails to identify basic changes, such as distinguishing a numerical change from a color change.
It will be unable to predict how new objects change based on the given transformations. This is an
inadequacy of existing visual analogical reasoning benchmarks (Moskvichev et al., 2023; Mitchell
et al., 2023; Ahrabian et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024), which focus solely on advanced predictions
without ensuring fundamental change detection capabilities.
Verbal specification of transformation (“how”). If a subject correctly classifies the transformation,
we ask them to further specify also in the form of multiple-choice the transformation (see green arrow
in 3). This step is crucial because it ensures the subject can accurately specify the rule governing the


                                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


transformation before extrapolating it to a new object. If they fail to identify the specific change, any
attempt at extrapolation would more likely be incorrect (see Figure 12 in Appendix B.2 for evidence
in models). By pinpointing where reasoning fails, we can better understand models’ and humans’
limitations and improve their analogical reasoning capabilities.
Visual Extrapolation of transformation. Finally, we proceed to the step captured by other bench-
marks: presenting a new image and asking the model to extrapolate how it will change based on the
previously identified transformation (see Figure 3 and other extrapolation examples of other visual
domains in Appendix A.1). We ask models to visually extrapolate independent of their performance in
verbal change identification to account for the possibility that models may engage in visual analogical
reasoning separately from verbal reasoning and can, therefore, perform well in visual tasks even
if they struggle with the prior verbal descriptions. This approach helps us determine if a model’s
visual reasoning can function independently of its verbal reasoning skills. It provides a more nuanced
evaluation of its cognitive capabilities and identifies specific areas for improvement.


3.2   A DATASET OF V ISUAL A NALOGIES

We create a dataset of stimuli using everyday objects that better represent real-world visual data
and better match the training data of computer vision models (and humans). We take 3D models
of household objects from Downs et al. (2022) and objects commonly encountered by infants and
children from Stojanov et al. (2021). To set up the dataset, we perform five basic visual transformation
domains: changing the size, color, and number of objects, rotating and reflecting the objects along
different axes (see Figure 1 for the transformation domains examined). Our project page includes
code allowing users to perform these transformations on any object image, enabling infinite expan-
sion of the benchmark. Our five types of object transformations are crucial for object and scene
recognition, (e.g., Diwadkar & McNamara (1997); Gevers & Smeulders (1999)), scene segmentation
(e.g., Chattopadhyay et al. (2017)), and detecting significant changes in the environment (Hatfield &
Allred, 2012; Duh & Wang, 2014). Other visual properties, such as depth (Chen et al., 2016), spatial
compositionality (Jiang et al., 2022; Thrush et al., 2022), and physical affordances (Jiang et al., 2023;
Sawatzky et al., 2019) are also crucial for such purposes, but we prioritized these five domains for our
benchmark in particular because young children can solve these visual analogies, as already shown
in developmental psychology literature (Goddu et al., 2020; Harris et al., 2013). Below, we outline
the five visual transformation domains. There are 100 object transformations for each subdomain of
transformation, totaling 1,400 object transformations in KiVA and 2,900 in KiVA-adults.
Color changes. Noticing color changes can signal alterations in an object’s state or presence, which
is essential for tasks like identifying ripe fruit or detecting hazards (Maule et al., 2023). The general
transformation rule for color is that input objects change to a single color (Goddu et al., 2020), namely
red, green and blue. KiVA-adults also includes yellow and grey.
Size changes. Size perception allows individuals to understand and interact with their environment
accurately, guiding tasks like identifying objects, planning actions, navigating spaces, and avoiding
obstacles (Giudice, 2018). In KiVA, objects undergo transformations in two subdomains: they turn
bigger or smaller (in both height and width) as in (Goddu et al., 2020) by a factor of 2. KiVA-adults
also includes object stretching (changing height or width independently by a factor of 2).
Number changes. Accurately monitoring and comparing quantities is essential in economics and
science; it is also important in daily life activities like shopping, cooking, caching and rationing (Chat-
topadhyay et al., 2017; Cohen, 2005). Transformations in this domain reflect basic mathematical
operations over the number of objects in an image. KiVA contains object addition (+1, +2) and
subtraction (−1, −2), whereas KiVA-adults includes multiplication (×2, ×3) and division (÷2, ÷3)
as well. We restrict the number of objects in an input or output image to under 8.
Rotation. Mental rotation is the ability to recognize and map different views of the same ob-
ject (Shepard & Metzler, 1971). This is essential for object manipulation, spatial orientation and
navigation (Pinto et al., 2008). KiVA adapts from human psychometric studies (e.g., (Bodner & Guay,
1997; Quaiser-Pohl, 2003)), featuring 2D rotation by 90 degrees (clockwise or counterclockwise) or
180 degrees. KiVA-adults also includes 45-degree and 135-degree rotations.
Reflection. Reflection aids in appreciating object symmetry and chirality, essential for distinguishing
left and right shoes or gloves, etc. Chiral objects cannot be rotated or translated to align with their


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


reflections, making them non-superimposable (Lin et al., 2020). Chiral objects are reflected along the
x-axis or y-axis (Goddu et al., 2020) in KiVA and along both in KiVA-adults.

4     C OMPARING A NALOGICAL R EASONING IN LMM S AND H UMANS
Evaluating Large Multimodal Models. We test several LMMs: 1) GPT-o1 (o1-2024-12-17), 2)
GPT4-V (gpt-4-vision-preview) (OpenAI, 2023), 3) LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2024): an open-source
model that integrates a vision encoder with a language model, specifically designed to enhance
general-purpose visual and language understanding, 4) MANTIS (Jiang et al., 2024a) which builds
on modified architectures from notable models like LLaVA to support interleaved multi-image input.
We combine the given transformation with the three choices of new object transformations at the
extrapolation step into a single composite image for LLaVA-1.5 (limited to processing a single image),
but present the given transformation and three choice transformations as four separate images to
MANTIS and the GPT models as proposed in Campbell et al. (2025) to reduce the chance of visual
binding errors. For all models, the temperature is set to 1 and the maximum token size is set to 300
(no cap for GPT-o1). We randomize each experiment over three seeds and run each trial (Figure 3) on
a model three times with test choices shuffled in order. We score correct choices as 1 and incorrect
choices as 0. We calculate the mean score across its three seeds. To evaluate the performance per
transformation domain, we calculate the overall mean and standard error for the average scores of
all trials. GPT-o1, GPT-4V, LLaVA-1.5, and MANTIS complete the entire KiVA and KiVA-adult
benchmarks. Open-source models ran on an A6000 48 GB single GPU for under 12 hours.
Evaluating Humans. A corresponding visual analogies task, developed using JsPsych (De Leeuw,
2015), was administered to two groups of human participants. All methods were approved by IRB
(protocol 2020-10-13755) prior to testing both child and adult participants. We recruited 250 adults
(21 to 40 years old) on Prolific (Prolific) to complete the benchmark such that every trial was annotated
by 3-13 adults. We recruited 42 children (aged 3 to 5 years, mean = 4.07 years, se = 0.11 years)
from early childhood centers and ChildrenHelpingScience (Science) to complete a random subset of
10 trials (2 trials per transformation domains), totaling 420 responses. We evaluated an additional
10 children and 40 adults on KiVA-adults and found that none of the children performed better than
chance. All participants completed a practice trial with an “unrelated” transformation (adding a dot
to geometric shapes) and received feedback to ensure understanding. Participants who failed within
three attempts were excluded. Those who succeeded proceeded to test trials without feedback, and
were told that rewards depended on their performance. Adults were paid at least $12/hour with a
bonus of $0.01 per correct response, while children received stickers based on their performance.

4.1   R ESULTS
Models get worse with increasing reasoning complexity from verbal description to visual
extrapolation, unlike humans. Overall, LMMs can detect transformations and identify the general
visual domain of the transformations (e.g., color vs. size), as indicated by the blue bars labeled


Figure 4: Human and model performance in KiVA sorted by Transformation Domain and color
coded by Question Type in samples annotated by children (top figure) and in the full benchmark
annotated by adults (bottom figure). Error bars represent standard errors across object variations.
Chance level is 25% for Verbal Classification; 33% for Verbal Specification and Visual Extrapolation.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Adult and model performance in KiVA-adults sorted by Transformation Domain and
color coded by Question Type. Error bars and chance levels are as described in Figure 4.


“Verbal Classification” in Figure 4 for KiVA and in Figure 5 for KiVA-adults. In KiVA, GPT-o1,
GPT-4V and MANTIS even outperform children in categorizing rotation and color changes. However,
performance generally declines when the models are asked to further specify the transformation within
the correctly identified visual domain (e.g., rotating 90 degrees or 180 degrees if spatial orientation
is the correctly identified domain), as reflected by the orange bars labeled “Verbal Specification.”
Performance for visual extrapolation declines even more, as illustrated by the green bars labeled
“Visual Extrapolation.” In other words, models’ success in verbally describing transformations does
not guarantee their success in extrapolation. Part of the models’ failure in analogical reasoning is an
inability to correctly recognize the given transformation. Another part of the model’s failure lies in
extrapolating the correctly identified transformation to a novel object and predicting the corresponding
outcome. Even when given the correct verbal specification of the transformation, models still fail to
solve extrapolation in different visual domains (Appendix B.3). By contrast, even young children
tested in KiVA can verbally describe the transformations as reflected by their significantly-above-
chance performance in verbal classification and verbal specification, and can then use their selected
verbal descriptions to extrapolate the visual transformations to new objects. Adults show near-perfect
performance from verbal classification to visual extrapolation in both KiVA and KiVA-adults.
Model performance depends on the visual domain and correlates with human performance.
Overall, models are better at classifying and describing color and size transformations than transfor-
mations in other domains (Figures 4 and 5), which involve more discrete and local processing than
the other domains (Zeki et al., 1991; Zeng et al., 2020). In KiVA-adults, the best-performing model
GPT-o1 nears adult performance only in the color domain (Figure 5). Models are less able to specify
what changed within the visual domains of rotation, reflection, and number and consequently also
did not perform well in extrapolations for those domains. In contrast, children and adults generally
show similar performance across visual domains, with children performing slightly worse on rotation
compared to other domains. Children’s error scores (1-Accuracy) and adults’ response times correlate
with GPT-o1’s error scores in the visual extrapolation of KiVA, as demonstrated in Figure 6. What is
cognitively demanding to humans is also more computationally challenging for GPT-o1.
Models hallucinate where there is no change. For each type of transformation, we randomly sample
10% positive transformation trials, and reassign transformations that involve no change. Only GPT-o1
correctly selects "no change" in both classification and specification across all visual domains, though
it struggles to extrapolate this to new objects when distractors involve reflection or number change
(Figure 7). GPT-4V only accurately identifies "no change" in the verbal classification stage in the
size domain. That said, when it does classify a trial as having no change, it consistently specifies that
no change is involved (as reflected by the tall orange bars). In contrast, LLaVA-1.5 and MANTIS

                                                  Y                                                       Y


                        X                    -1       180°                                    -1   180°   X
              +1                                                                         +1
                                                                                                              -2
                              -2                                                    +2
                              +2
                                                         -90°                                                             -90°
                                              +90°                                                                 +90°


        Red        Blue                                             Red Blue
     Bigger           Green        Smaller                           Green Bigger
                                                                                    Smaller


Figure 6: Positive correlations between mean error scores of GPT-o1 and mean error score of
children (left) and mean response times of adults (right) in KiVA visual extrapolation.

                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Model performance on trials involving no change. Error bars and chance levels are as
described in Figure 4.

"hallucinate" a change in 100% of the no-change trials during verbal classification; although they can
visually extrapolate the absence of change to some new objects, they are no better than chance.
Models are inconsistent within the same trials and across reasoning steps. We measured model
choice inconsistency by quantifying how often a model selects different responses in identical
repeated trials in KiVA (Figure 8). Models are the most consistent in Verbal Classification and least
consistent in Visual Extrapolation, particularly when reasoning about number, rotation and reflection.
GPT-o1 and GPT-4V, but not LLaVA-1.5 and MANTIS, show higher extrapolation performance when
they can verbally identify the transformation (Appendix B.2). When models are given the correct
verbal specification in their weaker domains (number, rotation and reflection), they still fail visual
extrapolation (Appendix B.3). This underscores a key limitation in the visual analogical reasoning of
LMMs: knowing the correct rule does not reliably translate to extending that rule to a new context.
Verbal questions facilitate visual extrapolation in humans but the effects are less clear in GPT-
o1. We included verbal questions to reveal the step in the reasoning process where models might
fail when making visual analogies. To assess the effects of verbal questions on subsequent visual
extrapolation, we tested another 200 adults, 20 children and the best-performing model, GPT-o1, on
a visual-extrapolation-only version of KiVA, removing the verbal questions to replicate previous
visual analogy benchmarks. We focused on testing the three more challenging visual domains of
KiVA, number, rotation and reflection.Without verbal questions, adults demonstrated similar accuracy
but significantly slower response times, whereas children performed worse in extrapolation. The
effects are less clear for GPT-o1: it performed equally well in the number domain, it is better at
extrapolating object rotations but worse at extrapolating reflections when asked to reason about what
changed and how it changed beforehand (Figure 9). While our verbal questions facilitate humans’
visual extrapolation performance, it is possible that reasoning models like GPT-o1 already reason
about “what changed” and “how it changed” independently of our verbal queries. Future work should
further explore the effects of guiding questions and chain-of-thought on reasoning models. At the
same time, it may also be possible to solve KiVA without language, as in the case of a Large Vision
Model (Bai et al., 2024) that is trained in the complete absence of linguistic data (see Section B.4).
In-context learning and prompt engineering did not improve model performance. We explore
whether model performance improves through careful prompt engineering (Appendix A), which has
shown promising results on various tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Qin & Eisner, 2021). We consider four
different prompt engineering methods: 1) Reasoning through code (Sharma et al., 2024): We first
prompt the model to generate code snippets describing each transformation in the task, then rephrase
the task question to incorporate the generated code. 2) Reasoning after Reflection (Valmeekam et al.,
2023): We ask the model to reflect on its answers two times for each question in the task. 3) Reasoning
through instruction: inspired by Wei et al. (2022), which shows that chain-of-thought reasoning is
more effective on several benchmarks, we prompt the model to generate step-by-step instructions
on how to answer each question, then use the instructions to generate an answer. 4) In-Context


Figure 8: Proportion of model consistent responses within repeated trials. Each model was
evaluated on how many times out of the three repeated trials they did not select the same choice. The
heat map shows choice inconsistency broken down by model, visual domain, and question type.

                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Adults’ Mean Response Times, Children’s and GPT-o1’s Mean Accuracy in Visual
Extrapolation with and without the three-step query.

Learning (Dong et al., 2022): We give the model two randomly sampled examples with solutions
for each concept before displaying the task. Apart from text prompt engineering, we experiment
with different visual prompting for LLaVA-1.5. Recent works (Bai et al., 2023; Bar et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023) show that visual model performance is sensitive to the alterations in color and
size of the visual input. We apply two visual prompting approaches: 1) Color: we alter the image
background color (initially transparent) into black and white (Bai et al., 2023). 2) Size: we apply
a center crop to the images, varying the image size between 0.9 and 1. None of these approaches
improve performance, which points to the challenging nature of our benchmark.


4.2   D ISCUSSION

Despite extensive training on image and text data, GPT-o1, GPT-4V, LLaVA-1.5, and MANTIS still
cannot reason about spatial and numerical visual analogies like young children can. Although GPT-o1
outperforms the other models, it falls short of child performance in reflection and number domains in
KiVA and remains far from adult performance—except in the color domain of KiVA-adults. More-
over, model performance declines markedly from verbal description to visual extrapolation, unlike
human performance, where even correct transformation recognition does not guarantee successful
extrapolation to a new object. This points to a fundamental challenge: mapping a transformation
from a source object to a target while preserving relational structure (Gentner, 1983). Future research
should explore how vision and language each contribute to visual analogical reasoning.
Human perception of feature-level changes like color or size is relatively straightforward, whereas
appreciating reflection, rotation, and numerical changes requires active engagement, sequential
tracking, and mental manipulation. Our findings align with prior studies showing that LMMs struggle
with spatial reasoning (Rahmanzadehgervi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024) and
counting (Jiang et al., 2024b; Rahmanzadehgervi et al., 2024). For humans, size and color changes
are processed earlier in the visual pathway and in development (Zeki et al., 1991; Zeng et al., 2020;
Day & McKenzie, 1981; Milewski & Siqueland, 1975; Ross-sheehy et al., 2003; Slater et al., 1990),
while spatial and numerical changes are more cognitively demanding. Although this convergence
in performance between LMMs and human children does not imply that they are built or function
identically, it is intriguing that similar trends emerge from such fundamentally different systems.
KiVA is designed to assess visual change detection and analogical reasoning—the kinds of skills
that children as young as three demonstrate. Our results show that LMMs underperform compared
to humans, even with in-context learning and prompting, and future improvements may require
approaches such as symbolic visual vocabularies and Bayesian inference (Depeweg et al., 2024).


5     C ONCLUSION
Overall, large multimodal models remain less capable than humans at visual analogical reasoning.
They can classify changes in images, but their ability to specify and extrapolate these changes to
novel objects diminishes sharply. GPT-o1 performs best—especially for color and size, which are
surface features—but struggles with spatial and numerical analogies that likely require a deeper
understanding of the 3D world. In contrast, humans excel at interpreting diverse object relations and
transformations (Goddu et al., 2020; Mitchell et al., 2023).
As models improve, our extended benchmarks (KiVA-adults and KiVA-compositionality) will probe
more advanced analogical reasoning. So far, GPT-o1 only reaches adult-level reasoning in the color
domain, highlighting the need for further research into the complexities of visual cognition.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Joe Heyward, Viorica Patraucean, Mariel Goddu, Jefferson Ortega and the par-
ticipants of the AI, Psychology, and Neuroscience workshop at the Simons Institute for discussion,
to participants and their parents, local early childhood centers, and UC Berkeley undergrads who
assisted in human data collection: Alexis Davis, Janna Umagat, Kate Choi, Kaydee Manikhong,
Linda Marie Trevino, Nitya Sriram, Nora Chen, Ray Huang, Shivalika Jhabua and Weiyin Gao.
This project was supported by Meta-BAIR Commons, CIFAR Catalyst Award: Causally guided
exploration in children & AI, and ONR MURI Self-Learning Perception Through Real-World Interac-
tion.

R EFERENCES
Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev, Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Ellie Pavlick, and Anders Søgaard.
 Can language models encode perceptual structure without grounding? a case study in color. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2109.06129, 2021. 4
Kian Ahrabian, Zhivar Sourati, Kexuan Sun, Jiarui Zhang, Yifan Jiang, Fred Morstatter, and Jay
  Pujara. The curious case of nonverbal abstract reasoning with multi-modal large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12117, 2024. 2, 4, 5
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zitnick,
  and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015. 4
Yutong Bai, Xinyang Geng, Karttikeya Mangalam, Amir Bar, Alan Yuille, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra
  Malik, and Alexei A Efros. Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large vision models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00785, 2023. 10
Yutong Bai, Xinyang Geng, Karttikeya Mangalam, Amir Bar, Alan L Yuille, Trevor Darrell, Jitendra
  Malik, and Alexei A Efros. Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large vision models.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  22861–22872, 2024. 9, 19
Amir Bar, Yossi Gandelsman, Trevor Darrell, Amir Globerson, and Alexei Efros. Visual prompting
 via image inpainting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25005–25017, 2022.
 10
George M Bodner and Roland B Guay. The purdue visualization of rotations test. The chemical
  educator, 2(4):1–17, 1997. 6
M. M. Bongard. Pattern Recognition. Spartan Books, New York, 1970. 4, 5
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. 4
Declan Campbell, Sunayana Rane, Tyler Giallanza, Camillo Nicolò De Sabbata, Kia Ghods, Amogh
  Joshi, Alexander Ku, Steven Frankland, Tom Griffiths, Jonathan D Cohen, et al. Understanding the
  limits of vision language models through the lens of the binding problem. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 37:113436–113460, 2025. 7, 19
Patricia A Carpenter, Marcel A Just, and Peter Shell. What one intelligence test measures: a theoretical
  account of the processing in the raven progressive matrices test. Psychological review, 97(3):404,
  1990. 4
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Dhruv Batra, and Devi
  Parikh. Counting everyday objects in everyday scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1135–1144, 2017. 6
Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Pete Florence, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia. Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reason-
  ing capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12168, 2024. 4


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weifeng Chen, Zhao Fu, Dawei Yang, and Jia Deng. Single-image depth perception in the wild.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. 6
Anoop Cherian, Kuan-Chuan Peng, Suhas Lohit, Kevin A Smith, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Are
  deep neural networks smarter than second graders? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10834–10844, 2023. 2, 4
François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019. 1, 2, 4
Stella Christie and Dedre Gentner. Where hypotheses come from: Learning new relations by structural
  alignment. Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3):356–373, 2010. 3, 4
Nicole Coates, Max Siegel, Josh Tenenbaum, and Laura Schulz. Representations of abstract relations
  in early childhood. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
  volume 45, 2023. 3
I Bernard Cohen. The triumph of numbers: How counting shaped modern life. WW Norton &
  Company, 2005. 6
RH Day and BE McKenzie. Infant perception of the invariant size of approaching and receding
 objects. Developmental Psychology, 17(5):670, 1981. 2, 4, 10
Joshua R De Leeuw. jspsych: A javascript library for creating behavioral experiments in a web
  browser. Behavior research methods, 47:1–12, 2015. 7
Stefan Depeweg, Contantin A Rothkopf, and Frank Jäkel. Solving bongard problems with a visual
  language and pragmatic constraints. Cognitive Science, 48(5):e13432, 2024. 10
Vaibhav A Diwadkar and Timothy P McNamara. Viewpoint dependence in scene recognition.
  Psychological science, 8(4):302–307, 1997. 6
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, and
  Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022. 10
Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kinman, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann,
  Thomas B McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google scanned objects: A high-quality dataset of 3d
  scanned household items. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 2553–2560. IEEE, 2022. 3, 6
Shinchieh Duh and Su-hua Wang. Infants detect changes in everyday scenes: The role of scene gist.
  Cognitive Psychology, 72:142–161, 2014. 6
Andrea Frick, Melissa A Hansen, and Nora S Newcombe. Development of mental rotation in 3-to
  5-year-old children. Cognitive Development, 28(4):386–399, 2013. 2, 4
Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A Smith,
  Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but not
  perceive. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12390, 2024. 4
Dedre Gentner. Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2):
 155–170, 1983. 1, 3, 10
Theo Gevers and Arnold WM Smeulders. Color-based object recognition. Pattern recognition, 32(3):
  453–464, 1999. 6
Nicholas A Giudice. Navigating without vision: Principles of blind spatial cognition. In Handbook
  of behavioral and cognitive geography, pp. 260–288. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018. 6
Mariel K Goddu, Tania Lombrozo, and Alison Gopnik. Transformations and transfer: Preschool
 children understand abstract relations and reason analogically in a causal task. Child development,
 91(6):1898–1915, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10
Mariel K Goddu, Eunice Yiu, and Alison Gopnik. Causal relational problem solving in toddlers.
 Cognition, 254:105959, 2025. 3


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Usha Goswami. Analogical reasoning in children. Psychology Press, 2013. 1
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the v in vqa
  matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6904–6913, 2017. 4
Justin Harris, Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, and Nora S Newcombe. Understanding spatial transformations:
  Similarities and differences between mental rotation and mental folding. Cognitive processing, 14:
  105–115, 2013. 6
Gary Hatfield and Sarah Allred. Visual experience: sensation, cognition, and constancy. Oxford
  University Press, 2012. 6
Keith J Holyoak. Analogy and relational reasoning. The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning,
  pp. 234–259, 2012. 1
Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Wenhui Wang, Yaru Hao, Saksham Singhal, Shuming Ma, Tengchao Lv,
  Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Barun Patra, et al. Language is not all you need: Aligning
  perception with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
  2, 4, 5
Dongfu Jiang, Xuan He, Huaye Zeng, Cong Wei, Max Ku, Qian Liu, and Wenhu Chen. Mantis:
  Interleaved multi-image instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01483, 2024a. 3, 7
Guangyuan Jiang, Chuyue Tang, Yuyang Li, and Yu Liu. Bongard-tool: Tool concept induction from
  few-shot visual exemplars. In PKU 22Fall Course: Cognitive Reasoning, 2023. 6
Huaizu Jiang, Xiaojian Ma, Weili Nie, Zhiding Yu, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Bongard-hoi:
  Benchmarking few-shot visual reasoning for human-object interactions. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 19056–19065, 2022. 6
Yao Jiang, Xinyu Yan, Ge-Peng Ji, Keren Fu, Meijun Sun, Huan Xiong, Deng-Ping Fan, and
  Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Effectiveness assessment of recent large vision-language models. Visual
  Intelligence, 2(1):17, 2024b. 10
Amita Kamath, Jack Hessel, and Kai-Wei Chang. What’s" up" with vision-language models?
 investigating their struggle with spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19785, 2023. 4
Ivan Kapelyukh, Yifei Ren, Ignacio Alzugaray, and Edward Johns. Dream2real: Zero-shot 3d object
  rearrangement with vision-language models. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for
  Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024, 2023. 4
Megumi Kuwabara and Linda B Smith. Cross-cultural differences in cognitive development: Attention
 to relations and objects. Journal of experimental child psychology, 113(1):20–35, 2012. 4
Jennifer Lehmann, Claudia Quaiser-Pohl, and Petra Jansen. Correlation of motor skill, mental
  rotation, and working memory in 3-to 6-year-old children. European Journal of Developmental
  Psychology, 11(5):560–573, 2014. 2
Susan Cohen Levine, Nancy C Jordan, and Janellen Huttenlocher. Development of calculation
  abilities in young children. Journal of experimental child psychology, 53(1):72–103, 1992. 2, 4
Dingkang Liang, Jiahao Xie, Zhikang Zou, Xiaoqing Ye, Wei Xu, and Xiang Bai. Crowdclip:
  Unsupervised crowd counting via vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2893–2903, 2023. 4
Zhiqiu Lin, Jin Sun, Abe Davis, and Noah Snavely. Visual chirality. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12295–12303, 2020. 4, 7
Fangyu Liu, Guy Emerson, and Nigel Collier. Visual spatial reasoning. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 11:635–651, 2023. 4
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 36, 2024. 3, 7


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zixu Liu, Qian Wang, and Fanlin Meng. A benchmark for multi-class object counting and size
  estimation using deep convolutional neural networks. Engineering Applications of Artificial
  Intelligence, 116:105449, 2022. 4
Andrew Lovett and Kenneth Forbus. Modeling visual problem solving as analogical reasoning.
 Psychological review, 124(1):60, 2017. 4
John Maule, Alice E Skelton, and Anna Franklin. The development of color perception and cognition.
  Annual Review of Psychology, 74:87–111, 2023. 6
Allen E Milewski and Einar R Siqueland. Discrimination of color and pattern novelty in one-month
  human infants. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 19(1):122–136, 1975. 4, 10
Melanie Mitchell. Abstraction and analogy-making in artificial intelligence. Annals of the New York
 Academy of Sciences, 1505(1):79–101, 2021. 1
Melanie Mitchell, Alessandro B Palmarini, and Arseny Moskvichev. Comparing humans, gpt-4, and
 gpt-4v on abstraction and reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09247, 2023. 2, 4, 5, 10
Arseny Moskvichev, Victor Vikram Odouard, and Melanie Mitchell. The conceptarc benchmark:
  Evaluating understanding and generalization in the arc domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07141,
  2023. 2, 4, 5
OpenAI. Gpt-4v(ision) technical work and authors. 2023. https://cdn.openai.com/contributions/
  gpt-4v.pdf. 3, 7
OpenAI. Openai o1 system card. 2024. https://cdn.openai.com/o1-system-card.pdf. 3
Roni Paiss, Ariel Ephrat, Omer Tov, Shiran Zada, Inbar Mosseri, Michal Irani, and Tali Dekel.
  Teaching clip to count to ten. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12066, 2023. 4
Viorica Pătrăucean, Lucas Smaira, Ankush Gupta, Adrià Recasens Continente, Larisa Markeeva,
  Dylan Banarse, Skanda Koppula, Joseph Heyward, Mateusz Malinowski, Yi Yang, et al. Perception
  test: A diagnostic benchmark for multimodal video models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13786,
  2023. 4
Molly R Petersen and Lonneke van der Plas. Can language models learn analogical reason-
 ing? investigating training objectives and comparisons to human performance. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.05597, 2023. 2
Nicolas Pinto, David D Cox, and James J DiCarlo. Why is real-world visual object recognition hard?
  PLoS computational biology, 4(1):e27, 2008. 6
Prolific. Prolific: Online platform for participant recruitment. https://www.prolific.com. Accessed:
  2024-06-05. 7
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. Learning how to ask: Querying lms with mixtures of soft prompts.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06599, 2021. 9
Claudia Quaiser-Pohl. The mental cutting test" schnitte" and the picture rotation test-two new
  measures to assess spatial ability. International Journal of Testing, 3(3):219–231, 2003. 2, 4, 6
Pooyan Rahmanzadehgervi, Logan Bolton, Mohammad Reza Taesiri, and Anh Totti Nguyen. Vision
  language models are blind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06581, 2024. 10
John C Raven and JH Court. Raven’s progressive matrices. Western Psychological Services Los
  Angeles, CA, 1938. 4
Patrik Reizinger, Szilvia Ujváry, Anna Mészáros, Anna Kerekes, Wieland Brendel, and Ferenc Huszár.
  Understanding llms requires more than statistical generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01964,
  2024. 1
Shannon Ross-sheehy, Lisa M Oakes, and Steven J Luck. The development of visual short-term
  memory capacity in infants. Child development, 74(6):1807–1822, 2003. 2, 4, 10


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ahnaf Mozib Samin, M Firoz Ahmed, and Md Mushtaq Shahriyar Rafee. Colorfoil: Investigating
  color blindness in large vision and language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11685, 2024. 4
Johann Sawatzky, Yaser Souri, Christian Grund, and Jurgen Gall. What object should i use?-task
  driven object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 7605–7614, 2019. 6
Christian D Schunn and Kevin Dunbar. Priming, analogy, and awareness in complex reasoning.
  Memory & Cognition, 24(3):271–284, 1996. 1
Children Helping Science. Children helping science: The online directory of research studies for
  children. https://www.childrenhelpingscience.com. Accessed: 2024-06-05. 7
Pratyusha Sharma, Tamar Rott Shaham, Manel Baradad, Stephanie Fu, Adrian Rodriguez-Munoz,
  Shivam Duggal, Phillip Isola, and Antonio Torralba. A vision check-up for language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2401.01862, 2024. 9
Roger N Shepard and Jacqueline Metzler. Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 171
  (3972):701–703, 1971. 6
Alan Slater, Anne Mattock, and Elizabeth Brown. Size constancy at birth: Newborn infants’ responses
  to retinal and real size. Journal of experimental child psychology, 49(2):314–322, 1990. 3, 4, 10
Robert J Sternberg. Component processes in analogical reasoning. Psychological review, 84(4):353,
  1977. 1, 5
Robert J Sternberg and Bathsheva Rifkin. The development of analogical reasoning processes.
  Journal of experimental child psychology, 27(2):195–232, 1979. 1
Stefan Stojanov, Anh Thai, and James M Rehg. Using shape to categorize: Low-shot learning with an
  explicit shape bias. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 1798–1808, 2021. 3, 6
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and Can-
  dace Ross. Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic compositionality.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  5238–5248, 2022. 4, 6
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Can large language models
  really improve by self-critiquing their own plans? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08118, 2023. 9
Jiayu Wang, Yifei Ming, Zhenmei Shi, Vibhav Vineet, Xin Wang, Yixuan Li, and Neel Joshi. Is a
   picture worth a thousand words? delving into spatial reasoning for vision language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2406.14852, 2024. 10
Su-hua Wang and Elizabeth J Goldman. Infants actively construct and update their representations of
  physical events: Evidence from change detection by 12-month-olds. Child Development Research,
  2016, 2016. 2, 3
Xinlong Wang, Wen Wang, Yue Cao, Chunhua Shen, and Tiejun Huang. Images speak in images: A
  generalist painter for in-context visual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6830–6839, 2023. 10
Taylor Webb, Keith J Holyoak, and Hongjing Lu. Emergent analogical reasoning in large language
  models. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(9):1526–1541, 2023. 2
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022. 9
Erik Weitnauer, Robert L Goldstone, and Helge Ritter. Perception and simulation during concept
  learning. Psychological Review, 2023. 4
Anne Wu, Kianté Brantley, and Yoav Artzi. A surprising failure? multimodal llms and the nlvr
  challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17793, 2024. 10


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Jianfeng Wang, Chung-Ching Lin, Zicheng Liu, and Li-
  juan Wang. The dawn of lmms: Preliminary explorations with gpt-4v (ision). arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.17421, 9, 2023. 4
Semir Zeki, JD Watson, CJ Lueck, Karl J Friston, C Kennard, and RS Frackowiak. A direct
  demonstration of functional specialization in human visual cortex. Journal of neuroscience, 11(3):
  641–649, 1991. 3, 8, 10
Hang Zeng, Gereon R Fink, and Ralph Weidner. Visual size processing in early visual cortex follows
  lateral occipital cortex involvement. Journal of Neuroscience, 40(22):4410–4417, 2020. 3, 8, 10


A     V ISUAL A NALOGICAL R EASONING P ROMPTS
A.1    S TITCHED VISUAL EXTRAPOLATION EXAMPLES FOR EACH DOMAIN

Visual Extrapolation. As the final step of the querying process, we presented an image of a new
object and ask the model to predict what the object will look like if it goes through the same change
as the given transformation.


(a) Example of a visual extrapolation trial involving a        (b) Example of a visual extrapolation trial involving
reflection.                                                    an angular rotation.


(c) Example of a visual extrapolation trial involving a        (d) Example of a visual extrapolation trial involving a
size change.                                                   number change.


                             (e) Example of a visual extrapolation trial involving a
                             color change.

           Figure 10: Examples of visual extrapolation trials for different transformations.


A.2    P ROMPTING OF M ODELS AND H UMAN A DULTS

We first include a system prompt to orient the models for visual analogical reasoning. You are an
excellent visual puzzle solver! You will be given a visual puzzle that requires using visual analogical
reasoning. For models, we include a chain-of-thought prompt. You will think "step-by-step" and
carefully examine the visual evidence before providing an answer. For human adults, we additionally


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


include the following prompt to motivate their participation. At the end of the experiment, you will
see the total number of correct answers you provided. Each correct answer will convert to $0.01
additional compensation for your study participation. Then we provide an initial instruction prompt:
You are given a visual puzzle. The puzzle features a left-to-right transformation of an object on top
and three left-to-right transformations of a different object on the bottom marked by (A) or (B) or (C).
The transformations involve a change of either the size, orientation, number, or color of an object.

      1. Verbal Classification (“what”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation on top of the
         puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right? Answer with the
         correct rule number. Surrounded by parentheses, then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning
         for your choice."
      2. Verbal Specification (“how”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation in the top
         of the puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right?. Answer
         with the correct rule number surrounded by parentheses. Then provide a "step-by-step"
         reasoning for your choice."
      3. Visual Extrapolation.
        “Which one of the three left-to-right object transformations (marked by either (A), (B) or
         (C)) on the bottom of the puzzle is the same as the left-to-right transformation on the top of
         the puzzle? Answer with the correct letter surrounded by parentheses (or (D) if none of the
         options apply), then provide a a "step-by-step" reasoning for your choice."

A.3    P ROMPTING H UMAN C HILDREN

All verbal instructions are read out loud to children by a human experimenter. We first provide a
context to motivate children’s participation in the experiment. You are on a mission as a picture
detective. You will see how different pictures change. Your job as a picture detective is to figure out
how the pictures change, and to guess how a new picture would change based on that. These pictures
can change in size, where they face, number, or color. Every time you answer correctly, you will get a
coin. You won’t find out how many coins you get until the end of the game. At the end of the game,
you will see the total number of coins you win. The more coins you get, the more stickers you win.

      1. Verbal Classification (“what”).
        “Here are two pictures separated by a black line in the middle. The picture on the left turns
         into the picture on the right. Do you think there is a change? What do you think the change
         is?"
      2. Verbal Specification (“how”).
        “Can you say more about the change from the left to the right?"
      3. Visual Extrapolation.
        “Here is another picture that goes through the same change from the left to right. Can you
         find the box that shows the same change?"

Note that the prompt used for children did not improve model or human adult performance.

A.4    P ROMPTING MODELS THROUGH REFLECTION AND SELF - CRITIQUE

      1. Verbal Classification (“what”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation on top of the
         puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right? Answer with the
         correct rule number surrounded by parentheses, then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning for
         your choice. Please reflect on your answer and provide a revised response if necessary."
         (repeat three times following model output) Start your response with your updated answer.
      2. Verbal Specification (“how”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation in the top of
         the puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right?. Answer with


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         the correct rule number surrounded by parentheses, then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning
         for your choice. Please reflect on your answer and provide a revised response if necessary."
         (repeat three times following model output) Start your response with your updated answer.
      3. Visual Extrapolation.
        “Which one of three left-to-right object transformations (marked by either (A), (B) or (C))
         on the bottom of the puzzle is the same as the left-to-right transformation on the top of the
         puzzle? Answer with the correct letter surrounded by parentheses (or (D) if none of the
         options apply), then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning for your choice. Please reflect on
         your answer and provide a revised response if necessary."
         (repeat three times following model output) Start your response with your updated answer.

A.5   P ROMPTING MODELS THROUGH INSTRUCTIONS

      1. Verbal Classification (“what”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation on top of the
         puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right? Answer with the
         correct rule number surrounded by parentheses, then provide a “step-by-step” reasoning
         for your choice."
      2. Verbal Specification (“how”).
        “Provide brief instructions on how to establish if a transformation involves an object rotates
         90 degrees or 180 degrees. Use the instructions form before to answer the following question:
         Which one of the following rules best describes the transformation in the top of the puzzle
         where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right?. Answer with the correct
         rule number surrounded by parentheses, then provide a “step-by-step” reasoning for your
         choice."
      3. Visual Extrapolation.
        “Provide brief instructions on how to determine which one of three left-to-right object trans-
         formations (marked by either (A), (B) or (C) ) on the bottom of the puzzle is the same as
         the left-to-right transformation on the top of the puzzle? Use the instructions from before to
         determine which one of three left-to-right object transformations (marked by either (A), (B)
         or (C) ) on the bottom of the puzzle is the same as the left-to-right transformation on the top
         of the puzzle? Answer with the correct letter surrounded by parentheses (or (D) if none of
         the options apply), then provide a step-by-step reasoning for your choice."

A.6   P ROMPTING MODELS THROUGH CODE

      1. Verbal Classification (“what”).
        “Which one of the following rules best describes the left-to-right transformation on top of the
         puzzle where the picture on the left transforms to the picture on the right? Answer with the
         correct rule number surrounded by parentheses, then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning for
         your choice."
      2. Verbal Specification (“how”).
        “Generate python code using the package pillow that takes in the left image in the left-to-right
         transformation on top and outputs the right image. Denote this snippet as training snippet
         using the insights from the training code snippet, which one of the following rules best
         describes the left-to-right transformation in the top of the puzzle where the picture on the
         left transforms to the picture on the right?. Answer with the correct rule number surrounded
         by parentheses, then provide a "step-by-step" reasoning for your choice."
      3. Visual Extrapolation.
        “Generate a brief code snippet using python and the pillow package for each left-to-right
         transformation in the bottom. Each snippet takes in the left picture of the transformation
         and outputs the right one. Now Which one of three code snippets is the same as the training
         code snippet you have produced before. Answer with the correct snippet letter ((A) or (B)
         or (C)) surrounded by parentheses (or (D) if none of the options apply), then provide a
         "step-by-step" reasoning for your choice."


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     A DDITIONAL MODEL ANALYSES
B.1   E FFECTS OF M ULTI - IMAGE VERSUS S INGLE - IMAGE PRESENTATION ON GPT- O 1’ S
      V ISUAL E XTRAPOLATION

We evaluate whether or not GPT-o1 does indeed benefit from muti-image presentation, in which
the given transformation and the three test transformation options are provided to the model as four
separate images, as opposed to combining everything into a single image, as described in (Campbell
et al., 2025). GPT-o1 shows significantly better performance in visual extrapolation of color, size and
number, but not for rotation and reflection (Figure 11), suggesting that challenge in the latter two
domains goes beyond a visual binding problem described in Campbell et al. (2025).

B.2   M ODELS ’ EXTRAPOLATION PERFORMANCE BASED ON PREVIOUS VERBAL REASONING

Furthermore, we report models’ extrapolation performance conditional on succeeding (green) or
failing (red) at the previous steps of verbal reasoning in Figure 12. GPT-o1 exhibits significantly higher
visual extrapolation accuracy when its preceding verbal reasoning is correct across all transformation
domains, whereas GPT-4V shows this benefit only in the color and size domains. In other words,
successful visual extrapolation is contingent on solving verbal classification or specification correctly
when models are solving KiVA above chance level. Meanwhile, there is no conditional dependence
of prior verbal reasoning on subsequent visual extrapolation in LLaVA-1.5 and MANTIS, and they
also perform no better than chance level on KiVA.

B.3   M ODELS ’ PERFORMANCE WHEN GIVEN CORRECT PREVIOUS VERBAL REASONING STEP

10% of transformation trials were randomly sampled to evaluate if model performance across the
three weaker performing visual domains (number, rotation and reflection) would improve when given
the correct answer to the previous reasoning step. In one experiment, we provided the correct verbal
classification answer and evaluated models’ verbal specification (Figure 13a). In another experiment,
we provided the correct verbal specification answer and evaluated models’ visual extrapolation
(Figure 13b). Overall, having the ground truth for the preceding verbal reasoning step did not
guarantee much success in the subsequent verbal specification or visual extrapolation tasks.

B.4   A L ARGE V ISION M ODEL’ S V ISUAL E XTRAPOLATION P ERFORMANCE ON K I VA

We further examined whether a large vision model (Bai et al., 2024), trained in the absence of any
linguistic data, can solve KiVA. Since the large vision model does not contain text descriptions, we
stitch object transformations by adopting the framework described in Section 5.3 of Bai et al. (2024)
and prompt the model to generate the missing part in the bottom right corner (see Figure 14a for
an example of the image prompt). The prediction with the lowest perplexity is determined as the
model’s answer. Even in the absence of any language to reason about what changed, how it changed,
and how to extend the change to a new object, the large vision model can solve some visual analogies
(Figure 14b). Interestingly, resembling large multimodal models, the large vision model is more
capable of reasoning analogically in terms of color and size than in number and space.
Future work may look into the effects of longer visual prompt with more training examples (in-context
learning) or further instruction tuning in improving the performance of the large vision model.


Figure 11: Visual Extrapolation performance of GPT-o1 under Multi- versus Single-image
presentations.

                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: Visual Extrapolation performance of models following Correct and Incorrect verbal
classification / specification, sorted by transformation domain. Standard errors are in parentheses.
(Note that verbal specification is only asked if verbal classification is correct.)


(a) Subsequent Verbal Specification performance          (b) Subsequent Visual Extrapolation performance
when given Correct Verbal Classification.                when given Correct Verbal Specification.

Figure 13: Subsequent performance of models when given correct verbal details in KiVA, sorted
by transformation domain.


 (a) Example of a KiVA trial   (b) Visual Extrapolation Performance of the Large Vision Model across Trans-
 input for the Large Vision    formation Domains.
 Model.

                          Figure 14: Testing Large Vision Model on KiVA.


                                                    20
