Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


S CALING L AWS FOR D OWNSTREAM TASK
P ERFORMANCE IN M ACHINE T RANSLATION
 Berivan Isik♣ , Natalia Ponomareva♣ , Hussein Hazimeh♦∗, Dimitris Paparas♣

 Sergei Vassilvitskii♣ , Sanmi Koyejo§∗
 ♣
  Google Research, ♦ OpenAI, § Stanford University
 berivan@google.com



                                                A BSTRACT

           Scaling laws provide important insights that can guide the design of large language
           models (LLMs). Existing work has primarily focused on studying scaling laws for
           pretraining (upstream) loss. However, in transfer learning settings, in which LLMs
           are pretrained on an unsupervised dataset and then finetuned on a downstream
           task, we often also care about the downstream performance. In this work, we
           study the scaling behavior in a transfer learning setting, where LLMs are finetuned
           for machine translation tasks. Specifically, we investigate how the choice of the
           pretraining data and its size affect downstream performance (translation quality)
           as judged by: downstream cross-entropy and translation quality metrics such
           as BLEU and COMET scores. Our experiments indicate that the size of the
           finetuning dataset and the distribution alignment between the pretraining and
           downstream data significantly influence the scaling behavior. With sufficient
           alignment, both downstream cross-entropy and translation quality scores improve
           monotonically with more pretraining data. In such cases, we show that it is possible
           to predict the downstream translation quality metrics with good accuracy using
           a log-law. However, there are cases where moderate misalignment causes the
           downstream translation scores to fluctuate or get worse with more pretraining,
           whereas downstream cross-entropy monotonically improves. By analyzing these,
           we provide new practical insights for choosing appropriate pretraining data.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Scaling laws quantify the relationship between a model’s performance and key design factors such
as the size of the training data or the model’s architecture. In the context of LLMs, these laws offer
valuable guidance for model development, resource allocation, and selection of appropriate training
data. Extensive research has focused on scaling laws for upstream perplexity or cross-entropy loss
(i.e., evaluated on pretraining data), demonstrating that these quantities can be well predicted using
power laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Gordon et al., 2021; Hernandez et al., 2022;
Fernandes et al., 2023; Henighan et al., 2020; Johnson et al., 2018). However, in practice, LLMs
often undergo transfer learning–they are first pretrained on unsupervised data and then finetuned
for specific downstream1 tasks such as coding or translation. The question of whether scaling laws
can be used to predict downstream task performance is critical (OpenAI, 2024), yet remains largely
unanswered (Hernandez et al., 2021; Tay et al., 2021). Here, the term task performance refers to
metrics that measure task-related quantities such as accuracy and translation scores like BLEU,
ROUGE, or COMET, which are different from next-token prediction metrics such as cross-entropy.
In this work, we study scaling laws for transfer learning and focus on machine translation tasks.
Specifically, we look into the relation between the pretraining dataset size and the downstream task
performance after finetuning on the task. We find that, in addition to the finetuning data size and the
    ∗
     Work done when all the authors were at Google.
     1
     We use the term downstream to refer to the finetuning task or metrics computed on it, and the term upstream
to refer to the metrics computed on the pretraining dataset.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


choice of the performance metric, this relation fundamentally depends on the alignment between
the pretraining data and the downstream task (based on the translation alignment score provided in
Section 3). While similar observations have been made in different contexts in the transfer learning
literature (Tamkin et al., 2020; Agostinelli et al., 2022), our work provides new insights and concrete
scaling laws for the downstream performance in machine translation.
We carry out systematic experiments in which we pretrain LLMs on multilingual unsupervised datasets
and then finetune them on several machine translation tasks. Across the experiments, we vary the type
of pretraining data (to control the degree of distribution alignment with the downstream task) and the
finetuning data size. We study the following metrics: downstream BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002),
downstream ROUGE score (Lin, 2004), downstream COMET score (Rei et al., 2020; Stewart et al.,
2020; Rei et al., 2022)2 , and downstream cross-entropy. We find that in settings where the distributions
are well-aligned, both the translation scores and downstream cross-entropy improve monotonically
with more pretraining (see Figure 1, orange curves). In these settings, we demonstrate that the
translation scores (e.g., BLEU, ROUGE, and COMET) can be well predicted using the following
log-law: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dpα ))β , where Dp denotes the size of the pretraining data, and A, α, β
are the coefficients to be fit. We further propose a power-law L(Dp ) = E + DAα for the downstream
                                                                                  p
cross-entropy as the pretraining data scales – echoing similar laws developed for the upstream cross-
entropy as a function of the pretraining dataset size (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) and
downstream cross-entropy as a function of the finetuning dataset size (Hernandez et al., 2021).
However, when distributions are not sufficiently aligned and the finetuning data size is relatively
small, we find that there are cases where the translation scores exhibit an unclear, non-monotonic
behavior, whereas the downstream cross-entropy still improves monotonically following a power-law.
This observation suggests that using cross-entropy as a proxy for task-related metrics like BLEU,
ROUGE, or COMET scores may lead to critical misjudgments in practice if used to make decisions
about the “relevance” of the pretraining data for the downstream task or the required size of the
pretraining data for the target downstream performance. Finally, our empirical studies suggest that
pretraining brings little to no improvement on the translation quality when the finetuning (translation)
dataset is already large enough, complementing the findings of Hernandez et al. (2021).
Our contributions and main findings can be summarized as:

      • We carry out systematic experiments on 770-million and 3-billion encoder-decoder
        T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) models to study how downstream performance, measured by
        downstream cross-entropy and translation scores, scales with the pretraining dataset
        size. For pretraining, we experiment with different subsets of the Multilingual C4 (MC4)
        dataset (Raffel et al., 2020), including English (en), German (de), French (fr), and Romanian
        (ro). For finetuning, we study the following translation tasks: WMT-17 en-de (Bojar et al.,
        2017), WMT-15 en-fr (Bojar et al., 2014), and WMT-16 en-ro (Bojar et al., 2016).
      • We observe that, when the distributions of the pretraining and downstream tasks are well-
        aligned, both the translation scores and downstream cross-entropy improve monotonically
        with more pretraining (Figure 1, orange curves). For BLEU, ROUGE, and COMET scores,
        we propose a new log scaling law and show that it has good predictive accuracy.
      • When the distributions are not sufficiently aligned and the finetuning data size is relatively
        small, translation scores fluctuate or even get worse with more pretraining–losing the
        monotonic scaling behavior (Figure 1, red curves). In these same settings, we find that the
        downstream cross-entropy still scales monotonically according to a power-law.
      • We argue that the value of pretraining data for translation tasks should be evaluated using
        downstream translation scores like BLEU, ROUGE, and COMET score and propose a prac-
        tical guide for such an assessment by leveraging the proposed scaling law for these scores.
      • We show that the proposed log scaling law generalizes to tasks beyond translation, with
        experiments on SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) tasks, which covers question answering,
        reasoning, reading comprehension, and textual entailment.

   2
     In the rest of the paper, we will drop “downstream” when we refer to the downstream translation scores
such as BLEU, ROUGE, and COMET.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK

Scaling laws for transformers. Scaling laws for LLMs have attracted significant attention as they
can inform the decisions about key design choices such as model size and the type and size of the
pretraining data (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Hernandez et al., 2021). Most of the
pioneering work has focused on how upstream cross-entropy loss or perplexity scales with more
pretraining data, larger models, or longer training (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). Follow-
up works have analyzed scaling behavior of translation models (Ghorbani et al., 2021; Zhuocheng
et al., 2023; Gordon et al., 2021; Fernandes et al., 2023; Bansal et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022),
studied theoretical foundation behind scaling laws (Sharma & Kaplan, 2020; Hutter, 2021; Bahri
et al., 2021), or extended the laws to the vision models (Zhai et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2023). Closest
to our work, Hernandez et al. (2021) have analyzed transfer learning but with a focus on how the
cross-entropy loss behaves as the finetuning data scales. Unlike our work, their scaling law describes
the relation between the size of a (finetuning) dataset and the cross-entropy loss on the same dataset
– making this closer to the standard scaling laws in the literature since the finetuning loss and the
finetuning dataset are computed over samples from the same distribution. On the other hand, we
propose scaling laws for the downstream metrics on the finetuning dataset as the pretraining data
scales – switching the focus to an “out-of-distribution” analysis. The only work we are aware of that
proposed scaling laws for the downstream task performance as a function of pretraining dataset size
(Sun et al., 2017) has focused on classification tasks in the vision domain and used smaller models.

Transferability metrics and value of pretraining. While it may be commonly suggested that
pretraining data improves both upstream and downstream performance, this rule has been challenged
in the vision domain. Zoph et al. (2020); He et al. (2019); Shen et al. (2019); Ghiasi et al. (2018);
Mikami et al. (2022) have demonstrated that pretraining can sometimes have no effect on the
downstream task performance and sometimes it can even hurt the performance. We make similar
observations in the language domain with extensive experiments on machine translation tasks and
identify cases where (a) adding more pretraining data hurts the downstream task performance
when pretraining data is not aligned enough with the task and (b) pretraining does not improve
the downstream task performance noticeably when the finetuning dataset is large enough. Our
observations about the importance of “aligned” pretraining data are also supported by recent work
on machine translation (Alves et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024) trying to keep the pretraining data as
multilingual as possible instead of being heavily English-centric (Stap et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024).
Another related line of work is on transferability metrics (Tamkin et al., 2020; Chiang & Lee, 2022;
Ibrahim et al., 2022; Agostinelli et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2020; You et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2019;
Huang et al., 2022; Ibrahim et al., 2022; Tran et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2019; Van Asch & Daelemans,
2010; Plank & Van Noord, 2011), which are efficient heuristics used to select the most appropriate
source models or pretraining data for a given target task. We note that transferability metrics are
designed to solve ranking problems, different from scaling laws. For example, these metrics answer
questions such as given a pool of source models (or pretraining datasets), which source model (or
pretraining dataset) is the best to finetune on for a given target task. These metrics are not designed to
predict the performance of the model when key quantities (e.g., pretraining data size) are scaled.


3     S CALING L AWS FOR T RANSFER L EARNING

In this section, we present our proposed scaling laws for translation quality metrics (e.g., BLEU,
ROUGE, and COMET scores) and downstream cross-entropy. We also introduce an alignment score
for translation tasks, discuss when the proposed scaling laws apply, and provide practical guidance
for assessing the value of a pretraining dataset for a given target downstream translation task. The
experimental results will be later discussed in Section 5.

3.1   A S CALING L AW FOR T RANSLATION Q UALITY M ETRICS

Different from cross-entropy and perplexity, which follow a power-law scaling behavior (Kaplan
et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022), we find out that translation scores, such as BLEU and COMET,
scale closer to a log-law, as evident from Figures 1,2, 3, and 4. Therefore, we propose the following


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


scaling law for translation scores3 as a function of the pretraining dataset size Dp :
                                        f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dpα ))β ,                                     (1)
where A, α, and β are coefficients to be fit. We notice that these coefficients depend on how aligned
the pretraining dataset with the target downstream task (translation from language 1 to language
2) and how large the finetuning (translation) dataset is. With extensive experiments across several
translation tasks and multilingual pretrained models, we demonstrate that the law in (1) indeed well
describes translation quality scaling, with a small prediction error which we quantify in Appendix C.3.

3.2   T RANSLATION A LIGNMENT S CORE

It is nontrivial to define a general alignment score that could be used for any pair of pretraining data
and downstream task since it is an open research question what makes a pretraining data more aligned
with (or relevant to) a particular task. Therefore, we focus on a more controlled setting and define an
alignment score for translation tasks that captures the language overlap between the pretraining data
and the translation task. We note that there might be alternative definitions of translation alignment.
We propose one that measures what percentage of the languages in the translation task is present in
the pretraining data in a balanced way.
Definition 1 ( Translation Alignment Score). We use the following score to measure alignment
between a multilingual pretraining data D and a translation task T (Lsource , Ldest ):
                 A(D, T (Lsource , Ldest )) = PLsource · PLdest + 0.7 · PLsource + 0.8 · PLdest          (2)
where D is the pretraining data mixture, T (Lsource , Ldest ) is the translation task from Lsource to Ldest ,
PLsource is percentage of Lsource in D, and PLdest is percentage of Ldest in D.

For instance, for an en-to-fr translation task, a pretraining data mixture with 50% en and 50% fr data
would yield an alignment score of A(D, T (en, fr)) = 0.5 · 0.5 + 0.7 · 0.5 + 0.8 · 0.5 = 1.
Likewise, a pretraining data mixture with 100% en would have an alignment score of
A(D, T (en, fr)) = 1 · 0 + 0.7 · 1 + 0.8 · 0 = 0.7.

3.3   I S C ROSS -E NTROPY L OSS A LWAYS A G OOD M ETRIC ?

We compare the downstream cross-entropy loss and the translation scores empirically as prior work
made the assumption that upstream or downstream cross-entropy loss is a good indicator for a model’s
downstream task performance. Following the well-understood scaling behavior of the upstream
cross-entropy loss as a function of the pretraining dataset size (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2022), we show that the same scaling law can also describe the downstream cross-entropy loss as
                                                              A
                                            L(Dp ) = E +          ,                                      (3)
                                                              Dpα
where E, A, and α are the coefficients to be optimized. In Section 5, we report BLEU score and
cross-entropy together for a direct comparison and discover several cases where the two metrics do not
correlate well. We provide similar results for COMET score in Appendix C.1. These results support
some of the findings of Ghorbani et al. (2021) suggesting inconsistency between the translation quality
scores and the cross-entropy, but also shows that the exponential relationship between BLEU score
and cross-entropy advocated by Gordon et al. (2021) does not always hold. More specifically, our
empirical results show that while cross-entropy loss always monotonically decreases (with appropriate
learning rate) as the pretraining dataset size increases, translation score may show a non-monotonic
trend when the pretraining data is not sufficiently aligned with the task. For instance, in Figure 1, we
show the scaling behavior of translation scores like BLEU, ROUGE, and COMET and cross entropy
as the size of a more aligned (A = 1) and a less aligned (A = 0.7) pretraining data increases. The
first three plots show that increasing the less aligned data’s size sometimes hurts the translation scores
(more detailed results with full description of datasets and tasks will be in Sections 4 and 5). Even
though they may initially follow the law in (1) for smaller pretraining dataset sizes, the scaling law
breaks for larger data for the “less aligned” pretraining data. However, if we were to look at only
   3
     In Appendix B, we show that the same law also applies to other tasks, including question answering,
reasoning, reading comprehension, and textual entailment.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the cross-entropy loss in Figure 1-(right), we would conclude that both the more aligned and less
aligned data bring noticeable improvements to the model and they both are worth being added into
the pretraining mixture – which would be a poor decision.
A remotely related study on the mismatch between the task-related metrics and the cross-entropy
(McKenzie et al., 2023) looked at how the downstream task performance changes as the model grows
and suggested that LLMs may show worse task performance with increased model size but, similar
to our findings, this is not captured by the monotonically decreasing cross-entropy loss.


Figure 1: Scaling behavior of BLEU, ROUGE, COMET, and cross-entropy when the pretraining and
downstream data are aligned with A = 1 (orange) and A = 0.7 (red). Task: en-to-fr translation.

3.4   W HEN D O S CALING L AWS FALL S HORT IN T RANSFER L EARNING ?

While the cross-entropy loss always follows a monotonically decreasing trend which can be captured
by the scaling law in (3), we do not always see a monotonic increase in the translation scores when
increasing the pretraining dataset size (See Figure 1 (red curves) for an example on English-to-French
translation task.). We observe that this only happens when the pretraining dataset is not sufficiently
aligned with the translation task – which results in low translation scores overall compared to models
that were pretrained in other datasets. For the pretrained models that lead to high translation scores
after finetuning, we consistently see that the translation scores increase monotonically and can be
well described with the scaling law in (1). Therefore, whether the scaling law could fit the empirical
translation scores or not could be a good first-check in assessing the value of pretraining data for
the downstream translation task. We elaborate more on this in the next section.

3.5   A G UIDE FOR P RETRAINING DATA VALUATION

Finally, combining our findings on the scaling behavior of translation scores, we propose the following
guide for assessing the value of pretraining dataset for a target downstream task:

      1. Given a pretraining dataset, pretrain as long as possible under the given computational and
         time constraints4 . Periodically choose pretraining checkpoints, finetune on them, and record
         the downstream performance metric (we recommend BLEU, ROUGE, or COMET scores
         over cross-entropy due to the discussion in Section 3.4).
      2. Since the law in (1) has three coefficients to be fit, once we have 3 pairs of (number of
         pretraining tokens seen, translation score), we try to find the optimal coefficients and move
         onto one of the following steps:
          (a) If the translation scores have a non-monotonic behavior (e.g., red curves in Figure 1),
              we cannot fit the scaling law. Since the non-monotonic behavior could be an
              indication of misalignment (following the discussion in Section 3.4), we expect worse
              performance with more pretraining data. Therefore, we recommend checking the score
              of the best available finetuned checkpoint and comparing it to the performance of the
              non-pretrained model trained on the downstream task directly. This would indicate
              how much value we can get from this pretraining dataset.
          (b) If the scaling law fits well (e.g., orange curves in Figure 1), then we make the initial
              prediction for the translation score as we increase the pretraining dataset size. If we are
              not satisfied with the predicted score, then we conclude that it is not worth pretraining
              on this dataset. If the predicted score is high enough, then we keep pretraining until
   4
     We avoid repeating sequences as repetitions may complicate the scaling behavior (Hernandez et al., 2022;
Muennighoff et al., 2023; Tirumala et al., 2023). This means as pretraining goes on, we effectively pretrain each
checkpoint on a “larger dataset”.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              we reach the target score. If the scaling law breaks at any point, we conclude that the
              pretraining dataset is not sufficiently aligned with the downstream task and pretraining
              further may not be beneficial.


4   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

In the experiments, we first pretrain a model without doing more than one pass over any of the
examples. Then, we finetune selected checkpoints of the pretrained model. Naturally, there is a
one-to-one mapping between the checkpoint number and the number of pretraining tokens seen. This
way, we collect pairs of (number of pretraining tokens, translation score) and (number of pretraining
tokens, downstream cross-entropy loss) to analyze them with the proposed scaling laws in (1) and (3).
All the plots are on a log-log scale. We present BLEU results in this section and provide COMET
results in Appendix C.1. The observations and conclusions are similar in both scores.

Model. We use the 3-billion encoder-decoder T5 model with 24 encoder layers, 24 decoder layers,
embedding dimension 1024, and 32 heads with dimension 128. We note that this is the same model
as T5-3B in Abnar et al. (2022). In Appendix C, we also provide results with the 770-million encoder-
decoder T5 model. This model corresponds to T5-Large in Raffel et al. (2020). We share more details
about the architectures in Appendix A. For encoding the text as WordPiece tokens (Sennrich et al.,
2016; Kudo, 2018), we use SentencePiece (Kudo & Richardson, 2018) trained with a vocabulary of
size 250, 112 that covers all the languages in the MC4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2020).

Datasets. We use the English (en), German (de), French (fr), and Romanian (ro) portions of the
MC4 dataset. We experiment with both pretraining on these languages individually as well as mixing
pairs of languages. In Figure 2, we present results for the models pretrained on (left) a mixture
of 50% en-MC4 + 50% de-MC4, (center) a mixture of 50% en-MC4 + 50% fr-MC4, and (right)
a mixture of 50% en-MC4 + 50% ro-MC4 – meaning that 50% of one pretraining batch is sampled
from en-MC4 and the other 50% is sampled from the other language. Notice that all the pretraining
data-translation task pairs in Figure 2 has an alignment score of A = 1. In Figure 3, we show results
for the models pretrained only on en-MC4, corresponding to an alignment score of A = 0.7. In
Figure 4, in addition to these, we also present results for the models pretrained on a mixture of 30%
en-MC4 + 70%-fr and a mixture of 70% en-MC4 + 30%-fr as well as models pretrained only on
de-MC4, only on fr-MC4, and only on ro-MC4. We finetune the pretrained models on WMT-17
en-de with 3B tokens (Bojar et al., 2017), WMT-15 en-fr with 21B tokens (Bojar et al., 2014), and
WMT-16 en-ro with 312M tokens (Bojar et al., 2016), separately. To understand the effect of the
finetuning data size on scaling, we sometimes use a smaller randomly sampled portion from these
translation datasets and indicate the number of tokens used in the plots.
In Appendix B, we provide additional experimental results to demonstrate that the proposed scaling
law is applicable to tasks beyond translation as well. For this, we analyze models pretrained on
en-MC4 and finetuned on SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019), which includes several classes of
tasks such as question answering (BoolQ, MultiRC), reasoning (COPA), reading comprehension
(ReCoRD), and textual entailment (RTE).

Hyperparameters. During pretraining, we use a batch size of 256 and a sequence length of 512 for
1, 000, 000 steps except for the ro-MC4 pretraining. For ro-MC4, we pretrain for 510, 000 steps since
otherwise, we would need to do repetitions over the sequences. Following Raffel et al. (2020), we use
an “inverse square root” learning rate schedule, √ 1         , where n is the current pretraining step
                                                      max(n,k)
and k = 104 . We do a grid search for the base learning rate from {0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0} and
pick the best one for each pretrained model based on upstream cross entropy. We perform full-weight
finetuning. During finetuning, again following Raffel et al. (2020), we use a batch size of 128 and
a sequence length of 512 for 300 steps. We use a constant learning rate by selecting the best from
{0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1}. In both stages, we use AdaFactor optimizer (Shazeer & Stern, 2018).

Optimizing the scaling law coefficients. To fit the coefficients in the scaling laws in (1) and
(3), similar to Hoffmann et al. (2022), we use the Huber loss (Huber, 1992) and the L-BFGS
algorithm (Nocedal, 1980) to estimate the scaling law robustly in the presence of outliers. For the


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: (top) BLEU score vs pretraining dataset size: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα            β
                                                                                     p )) . (left) WMT-17
en-to-de translation task. Pretraining dataset has 50% en-MC4 + 50% de-MC4. Dotted, dashed, and
solid blue curves correspond to the fitted scaling laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 6M ,
Df = 31M , Df = 3B tokens, respectively. (center) WMT-15 en-to-fr translation task. Pretraining
dataset has 50% en-MC4 and 50% fr-MC4. Dotted, dashed, and solid orange curves correspond to
the fitted scaling laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 42M , Df = 210M , Df = 21B
tokens, respectively. (right) WMT-16 en-to-ro translation task. Pretraining dataset has 50% en-MC4
+ 50% ro-MC4. Dotted, dashed, and solid green curves correspond to the fitted scaling laws for
different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 625K, Df = 3M , Df = 312M tokens, respectively.
(bottom) Cross-entropy (CE) validation loss vs pretraining dataset size: L(Dp ) = E + DAα .
                                                                                                       p
Same models as the top row. For all the plots, the markers are the actual experimental results and
the black horizontal curves correspond to the non-pretrained model directly trained on the task
dataset. The finetuning dataset size increases in the order of dotted-dashed-solid for all the
curves including the black horizontal lines. Note that all the plots have alignment score of A = 1.

Huber loss, we use δ = 0.1 for the translation scores and δ = 1e−3 for the downstream cross-entropy
loss. We select the best fit among a grid of initializations and report the prediction error computed
via the Huber loss in Appendix C.3. To optimize the coefficients, we use the first four data points
that require the smallest amount of pretraining data and leave the remaining data points as held-out
data to evaluate the accuracy of the laws. We note that, ideally, three points should be enough since
both laws have three coefficients to be optimized for. However, adding more points improves the fit
by making the optimization more robust to outliers. We provide more details about how to optimize
the scaling law coefficients in Appendix A.2. We refer the reader to Appendix C.3 for the list of
optimized coefficients and the prediction errors for each law we present in the next section.

5    R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

In Figure 2, we analyze the models that are pretrained on different portions of (left) a mixture of
50% en-MC4 + 50% de-MC4 (A = 1), (center) a mixture of 50% en-MC4 + 50% fr-MC4 (A = 1),
and (right) a mixture of 50% en-MC4 + 50% ro-MC4 (A = 1). These models are then finetuned on
different portions of (left) en-de, (center) en-fr, and (right) en-ro translation datasets. In the top row,
we report the BLEU score and, in the bottom row, we report the downstream cross-entropy loss. The
dotted, dashed, and solid lines correspond to the scaling laws in (1) and (3) for different finetuning
dataset sizes Df . The black lines correspond to “non-pretrained” models (randomly initialized) that
are directly trained on different portions of the finetuning dataset. In all cases, the scaling laws fit well
to the empirical results (the markers) with prediction error at most 0.061 for the BLEU score (δ = 0.1)
and 5.95e − 12 for the downstream cross-entropy (δ = 1e − 3) (see Appendix C.3 for more details).


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As expected, as the finetuning dataset size increases (e.g., going in the order of dotted-dashed-solid
lines), the BLEU score increases and the cross-entropy loss decreases smoothly and monotonically.
Similarly, as the pretraining dataset size Dp increases (along the x-axis), we see improvements in both
metrics. Notice that the improvements by an increase in the pretraining dataset size is more effective
for smaller finetuning datasets. When the finetuning dataset is large enough (e.g., solid lines), BLEU
score is more or less constant regardless of the pretraining dataset size. In fact, we see little to no
improvement of pretraining compared to the non-pretrained models (black lines) when the finetuning
dataset is large. This implies that, for these tasks, there is no need to pretrain the models when
the finetuning dataset is large enough (We note that typically supervised finetuning data is not
as widely available as unsupervised data due to its cost – hence pretraining on unsupervised
data is important in practice.). Luckily, we can correctly predict whether this is going to be the
case (i.e., whether the available finetuning data is enough to eliminate pretraining altogether) with the
use of scaling laws.
In Figure 3, we change the pretraining dataset to 100% en-MC4 in all plots, giving an alignment
score of A = 0.7. Intuitively, we expect this dataset to be less aligned with the translation tasks than
the multilingual pairs in Figure 2 since it does not include one of the languages in the translation
tasks. Indeed, we see smaller BLEU score and higher cross-entropy loss in general for the same
finetuning dataset size. Most of the conclusions from Figure 2 carry over to the results in Figure 3. For
instance, the pretraining data matters less when the finetuning dataset is large enough. One noticeable
difference is in the BLEU scores for the en-fr translation task (center). We see that, for Df = 42M
and Df = 210M , the scaling law for BLEU score actually breaks once the pretraining dataset size
passes a threshold while the cross-entropy loss scales as expected. This is counter-intuitive because
the BLEU score sometimes decreases for larger pretraining dataset. Notice that this break in scaling
law does not happen in en-de or en-ro translation tasks as the scaling law fits well to the pretraining
data with prediction error at most 0.025 for these tasks (δ = 0.1). To better investigate this, in
Figure 4, we take a closer look at some less aligned pretraining datasets due to the choice of language.


Figure 3: Same as Figure 2, except that the pretraining dataset is 100% en-MC4 for all plots, i.e., the
alignment score is A = 0.7.
In Figure 4-(left), we provide the scaling laws for en-de translation task where the pretraining datasets
are 100% en-MC4 (A = 0.7, same as Figure 3-(left)), 50% en-MC4 and 50% de-MC4 (A = 1,
same as Figure 2-(left)), 100% de-MC4 (A = 0.8), 100% fr-MC4 (A = 0, less aligned), and 100%
ro-MC4 (A = 0, less aligned). Notice that the last two pretraining datasets are expected to be the least
aligned with the translation task since the translation pair does not include these languages. We see
that, despite this, the scaling laws consistently fit well for both the BLEU score and the cross-entropy
loss. However, this is not always the case for the en-fr translation task. In Figure 4-(right), we provide
the scaling laws for the en-fr translation task where the pretraining datasets are different mixtures
of en-MC4 and fr-MC4 datasets. We also include the “less aligned” pretraining datasets such as


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Comparison of scaling behavior for different pretraining datasets. (top) BLEU score vs
pretraining dataset size: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα     β
                                                p )) . (left) WMT-17 en-de translation task. (right)
WMT-15 en-fr translation task. (bottom) Cross-entropy (CE) validation loss vs pretraining
dataset size: L(Dp ) = E + DAα . Same as the top row but for CE loss instead of BLEU score.
                                p
For all the plots, the markers are the actual experimental results and the black horizontal curves
correspond to the non-pretrained model directly trained on the task dataset.
100% de-MC4 (A = 0) and 100% ro-MC4 (A = 0). Surprisingly, we see that the scaling law for the
BLEU score breaks after some point for the only-English (100% en-MC4, A = 0.7), only-German
(100% de-MC4, A = 0), and only-Romanian (100% ro-MC4, A = 0) pretraining datasets while
the cross-entropy loss always follows the scaling law in (3). Interestingly, we do not observe such a
break in the BLEU score scaling for the only-French (100% fr-MC4, A = 0.8) pretraining dataset –
hinting that not including French data in pretraining leads to poor scaling in the en-fr translation task
but not including English does not have such an effect. We also notice that the BLEU score is the
lowest for these three pretraining datasets where scaling breaks. This suggests that the scaling law
in (1) works well for the BLEU score as long as the pretraining dataset has the promise to give
rise to a good performance. However, when the scaling law does not fit well, we may suspect
the BLEU score to be low overall. Therefore, whether we can fit the scaling law for the BLEU
score seems to give a good indication about the degree of alignment between the pretraining
data and the particular translation task.
Remark 1. We observe another interesting phenomenon in Figure 4. For both en-de and en-fr tasks,
100% en-MC4 leads to significantly worse BLEU score and downstream cross-entropy than the more
aligned 50% en-MC4 + 50% de/fr-MC4 balanced datasets, respectively. However, de-MC4 and
fr-MC4 perform almost as well as the balanced datasets in en-de and en-fr tasks. We believe this is
because, in these translation tasks, the model generates text in German/French (not English), and
de/fr-MC4 pretraining is more helpful than en-MC4. We leave further investigation to future work.

We also highlight that we cannot make any strong conclusion about the degree of alignment of
the pretraining dataset with the task by only looking at the downstream cross-entropy loss because
of the inconsistency with the BLEU score, a task-related metric, observed in the en-fr plots in
Figures 3 and 4. This is a counter-example for the claim by Gordon et al. (2021) that the two
metrics have an exponential relation. To better demonstrate this, in Figure 5, we provide a BLEU
score vs. downstream cross-entropy log-log plot for en-de and en-fr translation tasks, respectively.
While the two metrics indeed seem correlated in Figure 5-(left) on the en-de task, we observe a


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: BLEU score vs. downstream cross-entropy loss. (left) For en-de translation task, we see
a consistent correlation between the two metrics for all the pretraining datasets. This supports the
findings of Gordon et al. (2021). (right) For en-fr translation task, the two metrics usually show
an arbitrary relation. Sometimes, the BLEU score increases while the cross-entropy also increases.
Unlike the en-de results (left), the exponential relation in (Gordon et al., 2021) is not observed here.

somewhat arbitrary relation for the en-fr task in Figure 5-(right) in some cases – which clearly cannot
be explained with an exponential relation. This suggests that downstream cross-entropy is not
always a good indicator for BLEU score and raises the question whether the existing scaling
laws for cross-entropy are actually useful predictors for models’ downstream behavior.
All the observations on BLEU score presented in this section carry over to COMET score as well
(see Figure 1 and Appendix C.1).
Remark 2. To better understand the root cause of the non-monotonic behavior of the BLEU score
when the alignment is not sufficient (i.e., when the BLEU score fluctuates with more pretraining
data), we revisit its definition. Recall that the common form of BLEU score is as follows

                                                         4
                                                                            !1/4
                                                         Y
                          BLEU = brevity-penalty ·             precisioni          ,                 (4)
                                                         i=1

where precisionn refers to the precision of n-grams, and the second term is the geometric mean of the
precision when n is varied from 1 to 4. In all the experiments, we observe brevity-penalty = 1, i.e.,
the non-monotonic behavior comes from the precision term, not the brevity penalty.

5.1   OTHER TASKS

In Appendix B, we show that the proposed log scaling law is not only applicable to the translation
scores/tasks but also to metrics on question answering, reasoning, reading comprehension, and textual
entailment tasks within SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019). Our results demonstrate that the same
scaling law captures the scaling of these metrics as the pretraining data grows.


6     D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

We study the scaling behavior of the downstream performance in machine translation as the pretraining
data grows and propose scaling laws for both downstream cross-entropy and translation quality
metrics. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that the scaling behavior is significantly
influenced by (1) the degree of alignment between the pretraining and the downstream data and (2)
the finetuning dataset size. In favorable cases where the distributions are sufficiently aligned, we show
that downstream translation quality, measured by translation scores, can be accurately predicted using
a log scaling law. However, with less alignment, there are cases where translation scores fluctuate
unpredictably whereas downstream cross-entropy improves monotonically. We also observe that
when the finetuning dataset size is sufficiently large, pretraining has little to no value. Our findings
highlight the importance of studying downstream performance metrics and not making decisions
solely based on cross-entropy (whether upstream or downstream).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Limitations. Our work goes beyond cross-entropy loss to understand and predict the downstream
model performance at scale. While the proposed laws fit the empirical data well and predict the
translation scores at scale successfully when there is sufficient alignment, there are cases where these
scores do not scale monotonically. Our work identifies many such cases; however, as mentioned in
Remark 1, a more linguistic approach into alignment in translation could provide better understanding.

Reproducibility Statement. We used publicly available datasets and models, and specified their
versions with proper citations in Section 4 and Appendix A. We provided details on the training
procedure and hyperparameters for both pretraining and finetuning stages.

R EFERENCES
Samira Abnar, Mostafa Dehghani, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring the limits of
  large scale pre-training. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=V3C8p78sDa.
Andrea Agostinelli, Jasper Uijlings, Thomas Mensink, and Vittorio Ferrari. Transferability metrics
  for selecting source model ensembles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7936–7946, 2022.
Duarte Miguel Alves, José Pombal, Nuno M Guerreiro, Pedro Henrique Martins, João Alves, Amin
  Farajian, Ben Peters, Ricardo Rei, Patrick Fernandes, Sweta Agrawal, Pierre Colombo, José
  G. C. de Souza, and Andre Martins. Tower: An open multilingual large language model for
  translation-related tasks. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=EHPns3hVkj.
Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
  scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06701, 2021.
Yamini Bansal, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ankush Garg, Biao Zhang, Colin Cherry, Behnam Neyshabur,
  and Orhan Firat. Data scaling laws in nmt: The effect of noise and architecture. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1466–1482. PMLR, 2022.
Yajie Bao, Yang Li, Shao-Lun Huang, Lin Zhang, Lizhong Zheng, Amir Zamir, and Leonidas Guibas.
  An information-theoretic approach to transferability in task transfer learning. In 2019 IEEE
  international conference on image processing (ICIP), pp. 2309–2313. IEEE, 2019.
Roy Bar Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan
  Szpektor. The second PASCAL recognising textual entailment challenge. 2006.
Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. The
  fifth PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. 2009.
Ond rej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias
  Huck, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Philipp Koehn, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri,
 Aurelie Neveol, Mariana Neves, Martin Popel, Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Carolina Scarton, Lucia
  Specia, Marco Turchi, Karin Verspoor, and Marcos Zampieri. Findings of the 2016 conference
  on machine translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation, pp.
 131–198, Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
  http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W16/W16-2301.
Ond rej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Shujian
  Huang, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu, Varvara Logacheva, Christof Monz, Matteo Negri,
  Matt Post, Raphael Rubino, Lucia Specia, and Marco Turchi. Findings of the 2017 conference on
  machine translation (wmt17). In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation,
 Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pp. 169–214, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association
  for Computational Linguistics. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-4717.
Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Johannes
  Leveling, Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve Saint-Amand, et al. Findings of the 2014
 workshop on statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the ninth workshop on statistical
  machine translation, pp. 12–58, 2014.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. On the transferability of pre-trained language models: A
  study from artificial datasets. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 10518–10525, 2022.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
  Toutanova. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising difficulty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceedings
  of NAACL-HLT 2019, 2019.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
  challenge. In Machine learning challenges. evaluating predictive uncertainty, visual object
  classification, and recognising tectual entailment, pp. 177–190. Springer, 2006.
Xiang Dai, Sarvnaz Karimi, Ben Hachey, and Cecile Paris. Using similarity measures to select
  pretraining data for ner. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 1460–1470, 2019.
Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, Mandy Simons, and Judith Tonhauser. The CommitmentBank:
 Investigating projection in naturally occurring discourse. 2019. To appear in proceedings of Sinn
 und Bedeutung 23. Data can be found at https://github.com/mcdm/CommitmentBank/.
Patrick Fernandes, Behrooz Ghorbani, Xavier Garcia, Markus Freitag, and Orhan Firat. Scaling laws
  for multilingual neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09650, 2023.
Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Quoc V Le. Dropblock: A regularization method for convolutional
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Behrooz Ghorbani, Orhan Firat, Markus Freitag, Ankur Bapna, Maxim Krikun, Xavier Garcia,
  Ciprian Chelba, and Colin Cherry. Scaling laws for neural machine translation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan, and Bill Dolan. The third PASCAL recognizing
  textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL workshop on textual entailment
  and paraphrasing, pp. 1–9. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2007.
Mitchell A Gordon, Kevin Duh, and Jared Kaplan. Data and parameter scaling laws for neural
 machine translation. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
 tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 5915–5922, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
 Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.478. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.478.
Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Piotr Dollár. Rethinking imagenet pre-training. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4918–4927, 2019.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
Danny Hernandez, Tom Brown, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson
  Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, et al. Scaling laws and interpretability
  of learning from repeated data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10487, 2022.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Long-Kai Huang, Junzhou Huang, Yu Rong, Qiang Yang, and Ying Wei. Frustratingly easy trans-
  ferability estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9201–9225. PMLR,
  2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology
  and distribution, pp. 492–518. Springer, 1992.
Marcus Hutter. Learning curve theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04074, 2021.
Shibal Ibrahim, Natalia Ponomareva, and Rahul Mazumder. Newer is not always better: Rethinking
  transferability metrics, their peculiarities, stability and performance. In Joint European Conference
  on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 693–709. Springer, 2022.
Achin Jain, Gurumurthy Swaminathan, Paolo Favaro, Hao Yang, Avinash Ravichandran, Hrayr
  Harutyunyan, Alessandro Achille, Onkar Dabeer, Bernt Schiele, Ashwin Swaminathan, et al. A
  meta-learning approach to predicting performance and data requirements. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3623–3632, 2023.
Mark Johnson, Peter Anderson, Mark Dras, and Mark Steedman. Predicting accuracy on large
 datasets from smaller pilot data. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 450–455, 2018.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
   Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Daniel Khashabi, Snigdha Chaturvedi, Michael Roth, Shyam Upadhyay, and Dan Roth. Looking
  beyond the surface: A challenge set for reading comprehension over multiple sentences. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 252–262,
  2018.
Taku Kudo. Subword regularization: Improving neural network translation models with multiple sub-
  word candidates. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 66–75, 2018.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword
  tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. EMNLP 2018, pp. 66, 2018.
Jiahuan Li, Hao Zhou, Shujian Huang, Shanbo Cheng, and Jiajun Chen. Eliciting the translation ability
   of large language models via multilingual finetuning with translation instructions. Transactions of
   the Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:576–592, 2024.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Ian R McKenzie, Alexander Lyzhov, Michael Pieler, Alicia Parrish, Aaron Mueller, Ameya Prabhu,
  Euan McLean, Aaron Kirtland, Alexis Ross, Alisa Liu, et al. Inverse scaling: When bigger isn’t
  better. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09479, 2023.
Hiroaki Mikami, Kenji Fukumizu, Shogo Murai, Shuji Suzuki, Yuta Kikuchi, Taiji Suzuki, Shin-ichi
  Maeda, and Kohei Hayashi. A scaling law for syn2real transfer: How much is your pre-training
  effective? In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases, pp. 477–492. Springer, 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra
  Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=j5BuTrEj35.
Cuong Nguyen, Tal Hassner, Matthias Seeger, and Cedric Archambeau. Leep: A new measure
  to evaluate transferability of learned representations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7294–7305. PMLR, 2020.
Jorge Nocedal. Updating quasi-newton matrices with limited storage. Mathematics of computation,
  35(151):773–782, 1980.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


OpenAI.   Learning to reason with llms.                    In https://openai.com/index/
  learning-to-reason-with-llms/, 2024.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.

Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Jose Camacho-Collados. WiC: The word-in-context dataset for
 evaluating context-sensitive meaning representations. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, 2019.

Barbara Plank and Gertjan Van Noord. Effective measures of domain similarity for parsing. In
  Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, pp. 1566–1576, 2011.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Ricardo Rei, Craig Stewart, Ana C Farinha, and Alon Lavie. Comet: A neural framework for mt
  evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2685–2702, 2020.

Ricardo Rei, José GC De Souza, Duarte Alves, Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Taisiya Glushkova,
  Alon Lavie, Luisa Coheur, and André FT Martins. Comet-22: Unbabel-ist 2022 submission for the
  metrics shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), pp.
  578–585, 2022.

Melissa Roemmele, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and Andrew S. Gordon. Choice of plausible alternatives:
 An evaluation of commonsense causal reasoning. In 2011 AAAI Spring Symposium Series, 2011.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
  subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1715–1725, 2016.

Utkarsh Sharma and Jared Kaplan. A neural scaling law from the dimension of the data manifold.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10802, 2020.

Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018.

Zhiqiang Shen, Zhuang Liu, Jianguo Li, Yu-Gang Jiang, Yurong Chen, and Xiangyang Xue. Object
  detection from scratch with deep supervision. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 42(2):398–412, 2019.

David Stap, Eva Hasler, Bill Byrne, Christof Monz, and Ke Tran. The fine-tuning paradox: Boost-
  ing translation quality without sacrificing LLM abilities. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6189–6206, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.336. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.336.

Craig Stewart, Ricardo Rei, Catarina Farinha, and Alon Lavie. Comet-deploying a new state-of-the-art
  mt evaluation metric in production. In AMTA (2), pp. 78–109, 2020.

Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable
  effectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 843–852, 2017.

Alex Tamkin, Trisha Singh, Davide Giovanardi, and Noah Goodman. Investigating transferability
  in pretrained language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  EMNLP 2020, pp. 1393–1401, 2020.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Jinfeng Rao, William Fedus, Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, Sharan
  Narang, Dani Yogatama, Ashish Vaswani, and Donald Metzler. Scale efficiently: Insights from
  pretraining and finetuning transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Kushal Tirumala, Daniel Simig, Armen Aghajanyan, and Ari S Morcos. D4: Improving llm
  pretraining via document de-duplication and diversification. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
Anh T Tran, Cuong V Nguyen, and Tal Hassner. Transferability and hardness of supervised classifi-
  cation tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 1395–1405, 2019.
Vincent Van Asch and Walter Daelemans. Using domain similarity for performance estimation. In
  Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Domain Adaptation for Natural Language Processing, pp.
  31–36, 2010.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. arXiv preprint 1905.00537, 2019.
Haoran Xu, Young Jin Kim, Amr Sharaf, and Hany Hassan Awadalla. A paradigm shift in machine
  translation: Boosting translation performance of large language models. In The Twelfth Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=farT6XXntP.
Kaichao You, Yong Liu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Logme: Practical assessment of
  pre-trained models for transfer learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 12133–12143. PMLR, 2021.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.
Biao Zhang, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ankur Bapna, Yong Cheng, Xavier Garcia, Jonathan Shen, and Orhan
  Firat. Examining scaling and transfer of language model architectures for machine translation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26176–26192. PMLR, 2022.
Sheng Zhang, Xiaodong Liu, Jingjing Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Kevin Duh, and Benjamin Van Durme.
  ReCoRD: Bridging the gap between human and machine commonsense reading comprehension.
  arXiv preprint 1810.12885, 2018.
Zhang Zhuocheng, Shuhao Gu, Min Zhang, and Yang Feng. Scaling law for document neural
  machine translation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023,
  pp. 8290–8303, 2023.
Barret Zoph, Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yin Cui, Hanxiao Liu, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Quoc Le.
  Rethinking pre-training and self-training. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  3833–3845, 2020.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

For the T5-3B experiments, pretraining for 1M steps takes 15-20 hours and finetuning takes 5-7 hours
on an 8x8 TPU. For the sake of anonymity, we are unable to provide further information on compute
specifications at this time, but we will add details upon acceptance.

A.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

We provide the architecture details of the T5-3B and T5-770M models in Tables 1 and 2. These
models were initially introduced by Raffel et al. (2020).

                      Table 1: T5-3B (Raffel et al., 2020) architecture details.

                                 Embedding Dimension                       1024
                                   Number of Heads                          32
                                Number of Encoder Layers                    24
                                Number of Decoder Layers                    24
                                   Head Dimension                          128
                                   MLP Dimension                          16384


                     Table 2: T5-770M (Raffel et al., 2020) architecture details.

                                  Embedding Dimension                      1024
                                    Number of Heads                         16
                                 Number of Encoder Layers                   24
                                 Number of Decoder Layers                   24
                                    Head Dimension                          64
                                    MLP Dimension                          2816


A.2   O PTIMIZING THE S CALING L AW C OEFFICIENTS

In this section, we provide more details on how we optimize the coefficients of the scaling laws.
Following Hoffmann et al. (2022), we use the Huber loss (Huber, 1992) to minimize overfitting to
the outliers. Huber loss is particularly useful to suppress the effect of the outlier data points in the
optimization problem. More specifically, if the data point with value r is predicted by the law as r̂,
the loss for that data point would be

                                          1              2
                          `δ (r, r̂) =    2 (r − r̂)            for |r − r̂| ≤ δ,
                                                                                                    (5)
                                          δ · (|r − r̂| − 21 δ) otherwise.

Due to the numerical range difference between the COMET/BLEU score (between 0 and 100) and
the downstream cross-entropy typically taking much smaller values, we use δ = 0.1 for BLEU score
law in (1) and δ = 1e − 3 for the downstream cross-entropy law in (3).
For optimization, we use the L-BFGS algorithm (Nocedal, 1980). Specifically, for COMET/BLEU
score law in (1), we solve

                                              X
                                 min                     `δ (log fi , log fˆ(Dpi )),                (6)
                               E,A,α,β
                                          Data point i


where Dpi is the pretraining dataset size and fi is the COMET/BLEU score for the data point i, and
fˆ(·) is the approximation for the optimal law f (·). Similarly, for the downstream cross-entropy loss
law in (3), we solve


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           X
                                 min                   `δ (log Li , log L̂(Dpi )),                   (7)
                                E,A,α
                                        Data point i

where Dpi is the pretraining dataset size and Li is the downstream cross-entropy loss for the data
point i, and L̂(·) is the approximation for the optimal law L(·).

B     S UPER GLUE E XPERIMENTS
Figure 6 demonstrates how SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) task metrics such as Boolean Ques-
tions (BoolQ) (Clark et al., 2019), CommitmentBank (CB) (De Marneffe et al., 2019), Choice of
Plausible Alternatives (COPA) (Roemmele et al., 2011), Multi-Sentence Reading Comprehension
(MultiRC) (Khashabi et al., 2018), Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) (Dagan et al., 2006;
Bar Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo et al., 2007; Bentivogli et al., 2009), Reading Comprehen-
sion with Commonsense Reasoning Dataset (ReCoRD) (Zhang et al., 2018), and Word-in-Context
(WiC) (Pilehvar & Camacho-Collados, 2019) scale as the pretraining data grows. For these exper-
iments, we use T5-3B model pretrained on en-MC4 data (same as Section 5). For finetuning on
SuperGLUE, we use a batch size of 128 and a sequence length of 512 for 300 steps. We use a constant
learning rate by selecting the best from {0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5}.
The results indicate that the same scaling law, f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα     β
                                                                      p )) , that was demonstrated to
fit well to translation scores in Section 5 also captures the scaling of question answering (BoolQ,
MultiRC), reasoning (COPA), reading comprehension (ReCoRD), and textual entailment (RTE) tasks,
as well.

C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide additional experimental results that we had to skip in the main body due
to the page limit.

C.1   R ESULTS WITH COMET S CORES

We extend our experimental evaluation to COMET score, which we had to skip in the main body
due to the page limit. In Figure 7, we provide the COMET scores for the models previously used
in Figures 2 and 3 for BLEU score and cross-entropy. Similar to BLEU score, the law given in (1)
well describes the scaling behavior of COMET score, when there is sufficient alignment between the
pretraining and dowsntream data (Figure 7-(top)). When the alignment is not sufficient (Figure 7-
(bottom)), again similar to the BLEU score, COMET score fluctuates and sometimes gets worse with
more pretraining.

C.2   R ESULTS ON T5-770M

In Figures 8 and 9, we present results similar to Figures 2 and 3 in Section 5, but for T5-770M
instead of T5-3B. In general, we observe a similar trend. The proposed scaling laws describe the
downstream behavior well when the pretraining and downstream data are aligned. Similar to the
results in T5-3B in the main body of the paper, in Figure 9-(top, right), we observe a break in the
scaling law when the pretraining dataset is 100% en-MC4 and the task is en-fr translation – suggesting
the same misalignment for this pretraining data and task that was also observed in Section 5 on the
larger T5-3B model.

C.3   O PTIMIZED C OEFFICIENTS AND P REDICTION E RRORS OF THE S CALING L AWS

In Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6, we provide the optimized coefficients for the scaling laws plotted in Figures 2
and 3 together with the prediction error.


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 6: SuperGLUE scores vs pretraining dataset size: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα          β
                                                                                   p )) . Pretraining
dataset is en-MC4 and finetuning dataset is SuperGLUE. For all the plots, the markers are the actual
experimental results and the black horizontal curves correspond to the non-pretrained model directly
trained on the SuperGLUE dataset.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: (top) COMET score results for the 50%-50% balanced experiments in Figure 2:
f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα      β
                       p )) . (left) WMT-17 en-to-de translation task. Pretraining dataset has 50%
en-MC4 + 50% de-MC4. Dotted, dashed, and solid blue curves correspond to the fitted scaling
laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 6M , Df = 31M , Df = 3B tokens, respectively.
(right) WMT-15 en-to-fr translation task. Pretraining dataset has 50% en-MC4 and 50% fr-MC4.
Dotted, dashed, and solid orange curves correspond to the fitted scaling laws for different finetuning
dataset sizes, Df = 42M , Df = 210M , Df = 21B tokens, respectively. (bottom) COMET score
results for the 100% en-MC4 pretraining experiments in Figure 3: Same as the top row, except
that the pretraining dataset is 100% en-MC4. For all the plots, the markers are the actual experimental
results and the black horizontal curves correspond to the non-pretrained model directly trained on
the task dataset. The finetuning dataset size increases in the order of dotted-dashed-solid for all
the curves including the black horizontal lines.


Table 3: The coefficients for the BLEU score law f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dpα ))β for the results in Figure 2-
(top). For the BLEU score laws, we use δ = 0.1 for the Huber Loss. We report log A instead of A
since A typically takes very small and very large values.

   Pretraining Dataset   Finetuning Dataset   Finetuning Dataset Size      log A          α         β     Prediction Error
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                  6M               −180.75          9.00     0.75        0.034
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                 31M              −1.68 × 103      84.04     0.49        0.050
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                  3B              −1.64 × 108   9.91 × 106   0.19        0.048
  50% en + 50% fr-MC4      WMT-15 en-fr                42M              −1.82 × 104   8.98 × 102   0.42        0.061
  50% en + 50% fr-MC4      WMT-15 en-fr               210M              −2.33 × 104   1.21 × 103   0.40        0.013
  50% en + 50% fr-MC4      WMT-15 en-fr                21B              5.08 × 103    4.61 × 108   0.16        0.005
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                625K                −36.02         1.77      1.28        0.042
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                 3M                −0.115.03       5.69      0.89        0.015
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                312M              −1.82 × 104   9.04 × 102   0.40        0.015


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: (top) BLEU score vs pretraining dataset size: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα        β
                                                                                 p )) . (left) WMT-17
en-to-de translation task. Pretraining dataset has 50% en-MC4 + 50% de-MC4. Dotted and dashed
blue curves correspond to the fitted scaling laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 6M
and Df = 31M tokens, respectively. (right) WMT-15 en-to-fr translation task. Pretraining dataset
has 50% en-MC4 and 50% fr-MC4. Dotted and dashed orange curves correspond to the fitted
scaling laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 42M and Df = 210M tokens, respectively.
(bottom) Cross-entropy (CE) validation loss vs pretraining dataset size: L(Dp ) = E + DAα .
                                                                                                    p
Same models as the top row. For all the plots, the markers are the actual experimental results and the
black horizontal curves correspond to the non-pretrained model directly trained on the task dataset.
The finetuning dataset size increases in the order of dotted-dashed for all the curves including
the black horizontal lines.


Table 4: The coefficients for the downstream cross-entropy law L(Dp ) = E + DAα for the results in
                                                                                                            p

Figure 2-(bottom). For the downstream cross-entropy laws, we use δ = 10−5 for the Huber Loss.

   Pretraining Dataset   Finetuning Dataset   Finetuning Dataset Size       E             A             α         Prediction Error
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                  6M              3.21 × 10−5       35.45        0.64        1.36 × 10−12
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                 31M              3.28 × 10−5    4.70 × 102      0.78        3.17 × 10−12
 50% en + 50% de-MC4      WMT-17 en-de                  3B              2.24 × 10−5   2.56 × 10−2      0.36        5.76 × 10−14
 50% en + 50% fr-MC4       WMT-15 en-fr                42M              2.72 × 10−5    2.01 × 106       1.18       7.52 × 10−13
 50% en + 50% fr-MC4       WMT-15 en-fr               210M              2.57 × 10−5    1.75 × 107       1.30       2.24 × 10−13
 50% en + 50% fr-MC4       WMT-15 en-fr                21B              1.11 × 10−7   3.41 × 10−5   1.82 × 10−2    5.20 × 10−14
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                625K              2.45 × 10−5      0.49          0.41        3.61 × 10−12
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                 3M               2.62 × 10−5      2.40          0.49        2.19 × 10−12
 50% en + 50% ro-MC4      WMT-16 en-ro                312M              2.08 × 10−5      3.94          0.53        5.95 × 10−12


                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: (top) BLEU score vs pretraining dataset size: f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dα         β
                                                                                  p )) . (left) WMT-
17 en-to-de translation task. Dotted and dashed red curves correspond to the fitted scaling laws
for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 6M and Df = 31M tokens, respectively. (right)
WMT-15 en-to-fr translation task. Dotted and dashed red curves correspond to the fitted scaling
laws for different finetuning dataset sizes, Df = 42M and Df = 210M tokens, respectively.
(bottom) Cross-entropy (CE) validation loss vs pretraining dataset size: L(Dp ) = E + DAα .
                                                                                                    p
Same models as the top row. For all the plots, the markers are the actual experimental results and the
black horizontal curves correspond to the non-pretrained model directly trained on the task dataset.
The finetuning dataset size increases in the order of dotted-dashed for all the curves including
the black horizontal lines.


Table 5: The coefficients for the BLEU score law f (Dp ) = (log(A · Dpα ))β for the results in Figure 3-
(top). For the BLEU score laws, we use δ = 0.1 for the Huber Loss. We report log A instead of A
since A typically takes very small and very large values.

 Pretraining Dataset   Finetuning Dataset   Finetuning Dataset Size      log A          α             β         Prediction Error
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                  6M                 −1.88         0.15          3.30            0.014
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                 31M              −1.81 × 104     896.12         0.28            0.006
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                  3B              1.02 × 10−7     104.92         0.42            0.015
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr                42M                 1.00       2.57 × 10−5    1.11 × 104        0.042
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr               210M              −6.38 × 107    3.43 × 106       0.20           0.034
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr                21B                204.81      3.80 × 1014   9.97 × 10−3        0.004
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                625K                −10.54         0.55          1.12            0.008
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                 3M                 −40.41         2.11          0.79            0.025
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                312M                 3.61       8.17 × 105       0.19            0.018


                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: The coefficients for the downstream cross-entropy law L(Dp ) = E + DAα for the results in
                                                                                                           p

Figure 3-(bottom). For the downstream cross-entropy laws, we use δ = 10−5 for the Huber Loss.

 Pretraining Dataset   Finetuning Dataset   Finetuning Dataset Size        E             A             α         Prediction Error
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                  6M              3.22 × 10−13   3.18 × 10−3      0.15        5.79 × 10−12
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                 31M              3.24 × 10−5    5.20 × 10−3      0.20        9.25 × 10−13
   100% en-MC4          WMT-17 en-de                  3B              2.24 × 10−5    2.56 × 10−2      0.36        5.76 × 10−14
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr                42M              3.49 × 10−5    1.05 × 10−2       0.25       3.63 × 10−13
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr               210M              4.24 × 10−5       19.39          0.66       5.40 × 10−13
   100% en-MC4           WMT-15 en-fr                21B              1.26 × 10−7    2.59 × 10−5   4.81 × 10−3    3.63 × 10−14
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                625K              5.79 × 10−12   1.03 × 10−3   7.76 × 10−2    5.56 × 10−12
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                 3M               1.78 × 10−12   9.98 × 10−4   8.33 × 10−2    8.23 × 10−12
   100% en-MC4          WMT-16 en-ro                312M              5.85 × 10−5     1.37 × 103       0.88       3.05 × 10−13


                                                                22
