Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EASONING E LICITATION IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS
VIA C OUNTERFACTUAL F EEDBACK

 Alihan Hüyük,∗† Xinnuo Xu,‡ Jacqueline Maasch,§ Aditya V. Nori,‡ Javier González‡
 †
   Harvard University, ‡ Microsoft Research Cambridge, § Cornell Tech



                                             A BSTRACT
          Despite the increasing effectiveness of language models, their reasoning capabili-
          ties remain underdeveloped. In particular, causal reasoning through counterfactual
          question answering is lacking. This work aims to bridge this gap. We first derive
          novel metrics that balance accuracy in factual and counterfactual questions, cap-
          turing a more complete view of the reasoning abilities of language models than
          traditional factual-only based metrics. Second, we propose several fine-tuning
          approaches that aim to elicit better reasoning mechanisms, in the sense of the
          proposed metrics. Finally, we evaluate the performance of the fine-tuned language
          models in a variety of realistic scenarios. In particular, we investigate to what
          extent our fine-tuning approaches systemically achieve better generalization with
          respect to the base models in several problems that require, among others, inductive
          and deductive reasoning capabilities.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are shown to be ca-                  Factual Question                Phi3 Mini
pable of delivering astounding performance in nu- A number is divisible by six if it          0.3
merous tasks across various domains. Examples has both two and three as prime
stretch from writing assistants (Gan et al., 2023), to factors. Is {N } divisible by six?


                                                                                            Error Rate of Answers
sentiment analysis in social media (Simmering and                                             0.2
                                                              Counterfactual Question
Huoviala, 2023), and even applications in healthcare
(González et al., 2023; Wong et al., 2023). While Ahasnumber       is divisible by six if it
                                                              both two and three as prime
the ever-increasing accuracy of these systems is now factors. Suppose that {N } had           0.1
undeniable, it is still rather unclear to what extent three as one of its prime factors
                                                         (retaining all its other prime fac-
this accuracy is due to effective recall of their train- tors). Then, would it have been
ing data vs. a genuine ability to reason by extract- been divisible by six?
                                                                                                0
ing, understanding, and adapting the fundamental
concepts underlying that training data (Huang and Figure 1: Error rate of Phi3-Mini in answering
Chang, 2023; Li et al., 2023). Previous work sug- factual vs. counterfactual questions—sampling 10
gests that LLMs might exhibit some emergent rea- answers for each N ∈ {1, . . . , 100}. It performs
soning capabilities (Bubeck et al., 2023; Kıcıman disproportionately better for the factual question
et al., 2023). However, many have observed a sig- (cf. recall) as opposed to the counterfactual ques-
nificant reasoning-recall gap: LLMs still perform tion (cf. reasoning).
substantially better on recall-based tasks that do not
explicitly require reasoning (Zhang et al., 2023a; Ahn et al., 2024; Seals and Shalin, 2024).
Motivated by this discrepancy between how well LLMs can recall vs. reason, our goal in this paper is
to see whether they can be fine-tuned explicitly to improve their reasoning. While reasoning can take
different forms, we will focus on causal reasoning as it provides us with a clear distinction between
recall and reasoning1 : the former is limited to inferring statistical correlations, whereas the latter
involves working with interventions and counterfactuals (Pearl, 2000). It has been previously shown
that LLMs struggle with counterfactual questions compared to purely factual questions (Jin et al.,
2024; González and Nori, 2024). This difficulty highlights the recall-reasoning discrepancy within
the causal domain (Figure 1).
    ∗
   Work done as an intern at Microsoft Research Cambridge. Correspondence: ahuyuk@seas.harvard.edu
    1
   As an example, a different kind of reasoning would be symbolic reasoning, which involves manipulating
symbols that represent mathematical statements (MacColl, 1897; Kelley, 1992).


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adopting a causal framework also allows us to consider an LLM’s ability to identify higher concepts
that are essential for connecting causes to their effects in causal reasoning, such as necessity and suffi-
ciency (Mackie, 1965; Lewis, 1973; Halpern and Pearl, 2005). For instance, a cause X is said to be
necessary for an effect Y if (i) without intervention, X and Y occur together and (ii) intervening to re-
move X results in no Y (Pearl, 1999). Therefore, for an LLM to be able to identify that X is necessary
for Y , it needs to not only determine the factual in (i) is indeed the case but also simultaneously recog-
nize the counterfactual would have been different as in (ii). This makes identification of necessity, or
similar relationships like sufficiency, a particularly good test of reasoning because it requires the LLM
to understand when to recall (cf. factual thinking) vs. when to reason (cf. counterfactual thinking).
We improve the causal reasoning of LLMs by adapting established methods of fine-tuning. In
particular, we consider supervised fine-tuning (SFT, e.g. Dai and Le (2015); Peters et al. (2018);
Radford et al. (2018); Khandelwal et al. (2019); Howard and Ruder (2018), used in Ziegler et al.
(2019); Ouyang et al. (2022)) and direct preference optimization (DPO, Rafailov et al. (2024), used
in Tian et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2024a)). For both of these approaches, we propose procedures to
generate supervised and preference-based datasets using factual questions as well as counterfactual
questions. We argue that generating demonstrations on a question-by-question basis only improves
the correctness of individual answers. As we discussed, identifying higher concepts such as necessity
and sufficiency requires coordination between how factual and counterfactual questions are answered
together. To target these higher concepts directly, we propose generating preference-based datasets
over dialogues involving both factual and counterfactual questions.
When the goal of fine-tuning is specifically to improve reasoning, a unique problem arises in evaluating
the fine-tuned LLMs: we cannot just measure performance for a held-out set of test samples within
the same reasoning task. If we do, it would be impossible to tell whether the LLM actually learned to
reason or whether it is still recalling the demonstrations we have made during fine-tuning.2 Hence,
measuring the generalization performance with respect to new reasoning tasks becomes crucial.3 We
cannot expect fine-tuning on one problem instance to arbitrarily generalize to all problem instances
either. So, building a systematic understanding regarding to what extent fine-tuning for reasoning
should be expected to generalize becomes important as well.
To build that understanding, we identify different modes in which reasoning in one problem is trans-
ferred to other problems. Notably, we define inductive generalization and deductive generalization.
Given a causal system where X → Y → Z, inductive generalization is the ability to reason about
the transitive relationship X → Z when demonstrated how to reason about X → Y and Y → Z.
Conversely, deductive generalization is the ability to reason about the relationships X → Y and
Y → Z when demonstrated how to reason about X → Z. We show that fine-tuning for reasoning
generalizes much more effectively in an inductive mode rather than a deductive mode (among many
other insights in Section 5).
Contributions.       We have four major contributions, corresponding to each of the following sections:
§2 We describe a framework for fine-tuning based on causal reasoning and formally categorize
   the ways in which reasoning generalizes from one problem to another. These categories are
   common-effect, common-cause, inductive, and deductive.
§3 We introduce novel metrics to measure the reasoning performance of an LLM, defining necessity
   and sufficiency inconsistency rates (N-IR & S-IR) based on probabilities of necessity and suffi-
   ciency from the causality literature. We also introduce the concepts of absent necessity and absent
   sufficiency to supplement cause-effect relationships covered neither by necessity nor sufficiency.
§4 We propose procedures to generate datasets to be used with SFT and DPO to fine-tune for
   reasoning by incorporating counterfactual feedback. In particular, we argue for generating
   dialogues that involve paired factual and counterfactual questions to directly target the reasoning
   metrics we introduce in Section 3. We call this causal consistency feedback.
§5 Finally, we evaluate the performance of the procedures proposed in Section 4 using the metrics
   introduced in Section 3. Moreover, we investigate to what extent that performance generalizes in
   relation to our categorization in Section 2.
    2
      For instance, chain-of-thought prompting aims to improve reasoning by providing examples of how a prob-
lem can be solved in smaller steps. While such prompting is effective, unless tested on cases that require a novel re-
arrangement of those smaller steps, its effectiveness can be attributed to successful imitation of the provided exam-
ples and is not necessarily the result of true reasoning (Wei et al., 2022, see Appendix E.1 for further discussion).
    3
      We are interested in this particular notion of generalization although there are other notions, see Appendix F.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



               ed                      train                                                                  trained
        train                               ed
                                                               trained            trained
                    Y            X
    X                                            Y      A                 B                 C    A              B             C
                    Ỹ           X̃                                                                  tested         trained
        test                                ed                           tested
               ed                       test
 (a) Common-Cause (b) Common-Effect                               (c) Inductive                 (d) Deductive (Effect-Based)
Figure 2: Different modes of generalization, in terms of the cause-effect relationships demonstrated during
fine-tuning (i.e. D, blue) vs. the relationship that the fine-tuned model is evaluated on (i.e. PX→Y , orange).

2    F INE - TUNING FOR R EASONING

World Model. We consider a causal world model, in which X (cause) and Y (effect) are two binary
variables, indicating the absence or presence of some conditions. We will denote with x, y the values
taken by X and Y respectively when the conditions they represent are present, and with x′ , y ′ the
complements of these values (i.e. the values taken by X and Y when the conditions they represent are
absent). The context, denoted by U , consists of all exogenous variables. Without any loss of generality,
we assume that all randomness in the model is captured through these exogenous variables, and all
endogenous variables, including X and Y , are deterministic functions of the exogenous variables
(i.e. the context U ). We denote these deterministic functions as X = fX (U ) and Y = fY (X, U ).
Additionally, we denote the the potential effects under the potential interventions for each unit in the
population as Yx = Y |do(X = x) = fY (x, U ) and Yx′ = Y |do(X = x′ ) = fY (x′ , U ).
Language Model. We can estimate different effects using a language model. Formally, let q(u)
be a factual question template that describes the world model in natural language and asks what the
factual effect would be for a specific context u. Denoting the language model by ℓ, let a = ℓ(q(u))
be the model’s answer to this question, which will be in natural language form. To transform the
answer into binary form, we use a mapping h such that Ŷ = h(a) = h(ℓ(q(u))) ∈ {y, y ′ }.4 Similar
to the factual case, suppose we also have interventional question templates q̃x (u) and q̃x′ (u) that
describe the world model. However, these templates ask for the potential effects under interventions
do(X = x) or do(X = x′ ). This leaves us with the following estimates for the two potential effects.
For a given context u, we rely on the factual question template when the effect is factual, and on
the interventional question template when the effect is counterfactual:

                                 h ◦ ℓ ◦ q(U )     if X = x                        h ◦ ℓ ◦ q̃x (U ) if X = x
                     Ŷx =                                          Ŷx′ =                                                    (1)
                                 h ◦ ℓ ◦ q̃x′ (U ) if X = x′                       h ◦ ℓ ◦ q(U ) if X = x′

Problem. Let P describe the context distribution such that U ∼ P. Moreover, let PX→Y denote
the corresponding distribution of cause X = fX (U ) and potential effects Yx (U ) = fY (x, U ),
Yx′ (U ) = fY (x′ , U ) such that X, Yx , Yx′ ∼ PX→Y . Suppose we are interested in optimizing some
metric V[ℓ; PX→Y ] ∈ R that measures the reasoning performance of the language model ℓ for the
cause-effect relationship PX→Y (we discuss the design of V in the subsequent section). Then, the
problem of fine-tuning for reasoning can be expressed as
                         maximize V[ℓ; PX→Y ] given ℓ0 , P, D = {PXi →Yi }i                                                   (2)
where ℓ0 is the target language model, and D is the set of different cause-effect relationships PXi →Yi
that are available as demonstrations. These relationships may involve causes {Xi } and effects {Yi }
other than the cause X or the effect Y of interest. We refer to the case where only the cause-effect
relationship of interest is demonstrated such that D = {PX→Y } as the “in-domain” problem.
Modes of Generalization. As we have discussed in the introduction, an in-domain evaluation
is not sufficient alone to assess the success of fine-tuning for reasoning. Therefore, we categorize
different ways in which reasoning can generalize—that is, how D might relate to PX→Y when
PX→Y ̸∈ D. We identify four main structures, summarized in Figure 2:
 (i) Common-Cause: When the relationship X → Y is demonstrated, common-cause generalization
     refers to the ability to reason about other relationships X → Ỹ that involve the same cause X.
   4
     In practice, this mapping would also be a language model prompted to reduce given answers to a binary
“negative” or “positive” (see the appendix for the exact prompt used in this paper).


                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(ii) Common-Effect: When the relationship X → Y is demonstrated, common-effect general-
     ization refers to the ability to reason about other relationships X̃ → Y that involve the same
     effect Y . Unlike common-cause generalisation, the task of determining the factual effect without
     intervention remains the same, regardless of whether X or X̃ is the cause of interest.
(iii) Inductive: When the relationship A → B and B → C are demonstrated, inductive general-
      ization refers to the ability to reason about the transitive relationship A → C. This ability may
      be hindered if A has a direct effect on C that is not mediated by B. We will investigate this
      empirically in Section 5.
(iv) Deductive: Similar to inductive generalization, consider the causal relationship A → B →
     C. When the relationships A → C and B → C are demonstrated, effect-based deductive
     generalization is the ability to reason about the relationship A → B. Similarly, when the
     relationships A → C and A → B are demonstrated, cause-based deductive generalization
     refers to the ability to reason about the relationship B → C. We will investigate the potential
     differences between the two scenarios empirically in Section 5.

3     M ETRICS OF R EASONING
Having defined the problem of fine-tuning for reasoning, we now discuss what would be a good
measure of reasoning ability (i.e. a good choice for V). In Section 3.1, we define error rates based
on the correctness of answers given by the language model to individual questions. In Section 3.2,
we go beyond these simple error rates and propose various inconsistency rates that capture the
causal consistency between the factual and counterfactual answers given within the same context. As
emphasized in the introduction, such consistency is necessary to identify causal relationships such
as necessity and sufficiency. Later, in Section 4, we will describe various methods for generating
datasets that aim to optimize either of these metrics.

3.1   C ORRECTNESS
Ignoring relationship between factual and counterfactual effects, the correctness of an individual
answer a = ℓ ◦ q(u) | ℓ ◦ q̃x (u) | ℓ ◦ q̃x′ (u) can be characterized by the factual error rate (F-ER) and
the counterfactual error rate (CF-ER) respectively:

                                                 CF-ER = P Ŷx ̸= Yx if X = x′
                                                              ′     ′
                  F-ER = P{Ŷ ̸= Y }                                                                   (3)
                                                                  Ŷx ̸= Yx   if X = x

where Ŷ , Ŷx , and Ŷx′ represent the binary values implied by the answer a. Using these two metrics,
we define the average error rate as Avg-ER = (F-ER + CF-ER)/2.
Why are factual and counterfactual correctness alone not enough? Being able to correctly
estimate factuals (cf. F-ER) or counterfactuals (cf. CF-ER) is, of course, an important step in causal
reasoning. However, what we ultimately want is to characterize the relationship between a cause and
its effect. For instance, is the cause necessary for the effect to occur? Is it sufficient? Or do the cause
and the effect only occur together (necessary and sufficient)? Identifying such relationships rely on
the estimated factuals and counterfactuals collectively—only getting one right but not the other might
not always lead to a correct characterization of the cause-effect relationship. By measuring the factual
and counterfactual accuracy separately, F-ER and CF-ER fail to capture any dependencies between
the two answers and how they might be describing a larger relationship together.
As a concrete example, consider necessity. According to Pearl (1999), when a cause X and an
effect Y occur together (i.e. X = x and Y = y), the cause is said to have been necessary for the
effect if the effect would not have occurred in the absence of the cause (i.e. Yx′ = y ′ ). Making an
accurate judgement regarding whether there is a necessity relationship between X and Y requires
both Ŷ and Ŷx′ to be correct when X = x and Y = y. However, no factual or counterfactual estimate
needs to be correct when X = x′ (as it is immediately apparent that cases where X = x′ do not affect
necessity), and similarly, only the factual estimates needs to be correct when X = x but Y = y ′ .
F-ER and CF-ER do not account for this complex requirement at all. In particular, depending on
how X and Y are distributed, a language model can achieve F-ER and CF-ER as high as 1/2 by
always estimating either Yx or Yx′ correctly (but not both together) while never reaching an accurate
conclusion regarding necessity.

                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   C AUSAL C ONSISTENCY
Previous work (González and Nori, 2024) has considered the use of “probabilities of causation”
together with F-ER and CF-ER to provide a set metrics that fully characterize the relationship
between a cause and its effect. Similar to necessity, Pearl (1999) also provides a causal definition of
sufficiency: whether the cause would have produced the effect (i.e. Yx = y) when both the cause and
the effect are absent (i.e. X = x′ and Y = y ′ ). The probability of necessity (PN) and the probability
of sufficiency (PS) are defined as:
          PN := P{Yx′ = y ′ |X = x, Y = y}                PS := P{Yx = y|X = x′ , Y = y ′ }         (4)
The answers given by the language model to factual and counterfactual questions and the effects
Ŷx , Ŷx′ estimated from those answers naturally induce an empirical pair of PN and PS values:
           c = P{Ŷx′ = y ′ |X = x, Ŷ = y}
           PN                                             c = P{Ŷx = y|X = x′ , Ŷ = x′ }
                                                          PS                                        (5)

Why are PN and PS correctness alone not enough? To evaluate reasoning in language models,
González and Nori (2024) use (1) a probabilistic measure (γ-overlap) to assess how well the distri-
butions of PN
           c and PSc match the true PN and PS, and (2) the factual and counterfactual error rates.
We refine this approach by defining unifying metrics that simultaneously take both aspects of the
problem into account, thereby simplifying the evaluation process.
Due to the averaging done by probabilities, achieving a perfect PN-PS with the language model only
requires identifying correct vs. predicted marginal frequencies, without needing individual units to
be accurate. Although this is captured by the factual and counterfactual error rates F-ER and CF-ER,
it is convenient to have a single metric that encapsulates both dimensions of the problem. We address
this by requiring the necessity or sufficiency relationships identified by the language model to be
accurate on a unit-by-unit basis. A unit is a realization of the exogenous variable U . It induces the
values of X and Y as well as the counterfactual outcome YX ′ , where X ′ represents the complement
of the observed X regardless of its value. Note that YX = Y is the factual outcome.
We focus on necessity where a unit/context might exhibit one of three situations: (i) Necessity occurs,
denoted by “N”, meaning that both X and Y occur, X = x and Y = y, and the cause was necessary
for the effect, YX ′ = y ′ . (ii) Necessity does not occur, which we denote by “N′ ”, meaning that both
X and Y occur but the cause was not necessary for the effect, YX ′ ̸= y ′ . (iii) Not relevant case as
necessity is concerned, which we denote by ̸#, when neither X nor Y (or both) did occur. Since
value of the context variable U fully characterizes the unit, we can define unit-wise necessity as
                                                     if X = x ∧ Y = y ∧ YX ′ = y ′
                                            
                                            N
                       N (X, Y, YX ′ ; U ) = N′      if X = x ∧ Y = y ∧ YX ′ ̸= y ′                 (6)
                                              ̸#     if X = x′ ∨ Y = y ′
                                            

The necessity inconsistency rate (N-IR) is the frequency with which the language model estimates
the unit-wise necessity N inaccurately (see Appendix G for an alternative interpretation):
                      N-IR := EP(U ) [N (X, Ŷ , ŶX ′ ; U ) ̸= N (X, Y, YX ′ ; U )],               (7)

where EP(U ) denotes the expectation over U and Ŷ , ŶX ′ are the analogous factual and counterfactuals
to Y , YX ′ estimated from the model. Remark that PN = EP(U ) [N = N|N =         ̸ ̸#] by construction.
Also note that N-IR = 0 implies that P   dN = PN. However, errors made in different units can no
longer ‘balance each other out’ to achieve N-IR = 0. We can also define context-wise sufficiency S in
an analogous way: (i) S = S if X = x′ , Y = y ′ , YX ′ = y, (ii) S = S′ if X = x′ , Y = y ′ , YX ′ ̸= y,
and (iii) S = ̸# otherwise. This induces the sufficiency inconsistency rate S-IR = P{Ŝ =   ̸ S}.
Neither PN and PS nor the inconsistency rates N-IR and S-IR are sensitive to all answers given by the
language model. This is because necessity and sufficiency only concern cases where X = x, Y = y
and X = y ′ , Y = y ′ . For instance, when X = x′ and Y = y and the factual effect has been
estimated correctly such that Ŷ = Y , the counterfactual estimate Ŷx has no impact on PN, PS, N-IR,
or S-IR. Regardless of whether Ŷx = Yx , all four quantities stay the same. To cover all possible
counterfactuals we can ask a language model for, it makes sense to also evaluate counterfactuals
of the type Yx′ = y|X = x, Y = y ′ and Yx = y ′ |X = x′ , Y = y. Of course, the probabilities
of these counterfactuals can be defined by means of PN and PS by changing the default observed
state. However, here we name them as absent necessity and absent sufficiency to be explicit about the


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


two extra cases where language model can make mistakes.5 In our context-based framework, the
corresponding context-wise AN and AS are defined in a similar fashion as N and S, which induce
the inconsistency rates AN-IR = P{AN     ˆ ̸= AN } and AS-IR = P{AS         ˆ ̸= AS}. As a reasoning
metric, we define the average inconsistency rate as Avg-IR = (N-IR + S-IR + AN-IR + AS-IR)/4.
This metric has the following properties: (i) it accounts for all characterizations of the necessity
and sufficiency of the target causal effect, and (ii) it is unit-dependent, so factual and counterfactual
accuracy errors cannot be balanced out.
An Illustrative Example. We illustrate                                    Factually Correct
                                                                                                                               0.7
                                                                   0.55   Uniformly Correct
the difference between correctness and                                    Causally Consistent
                                                                          True PN-PS              Avg-ER=0.200                 0.6
                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.225
causal consistency as follows. Consider


                                                                                                                                                             Sufficiency Inconsistency Rate (S-IR)
                                                                   0.50                           Avg-ER=0.250
                                                                                                                               0.5


                                                                                  Probability of Sufficiency (PS)
                                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.250
                                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.225
                                                                                                                    Sm
the following language models: (i) Factu-                                                                                alle
                                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.200  r ER
                                                                                                                                       |X
                                                                                                                               0.4          =0
ally Correct answers all factual questions                         0.45
                                                                                                                               0.3
correctly (F-ER = 0) but makes occasional
                                                                   0.40                                                        0.2
mistakes in answering counterfactual ques-


                                                                                                                                                 Sm
                                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.200


                                                                                                                                                 alle
tions. This represents an extreme version                                                                                      0.1


                                                                                                                                                  r ER
                                                                                                                  Avg-ER=0.225
                                                                   0.35


                                                                                                                                                      |X
                                                                                                                                                        =1
of the imbalance highlighted in the intro-                                                                        Avg-ER=0.250 0.0
                                                                        0.35         0.40         0.45         0.50       0.55     0.0  0.1    0.2      0.3     0.4     0.5    0.6 0.7
duction. (ii) Uniformly Correct makes both                                          Probability of Necessity (PN)                          Necessity Inconsistency Rate (N-IR)

factual and counterfactual mistakes at equal                                  (a) PN & PS                                              (b) N-IR & S-IR
rates (F-ER = CF-ER), but these mis-
takes happen independently of each other. Figure 3: Causal consistency vs. correctness. Despite having
(iii) Causally Consistent reasons on a unit- the same Avg-ER, different types of error distributions lead to
by-unit basis (as opposed to question-by- widely different PN & PS characteristics.
question) and either gets both the factual question and counterfactual question right or gets both
of them wrong. Suppose the cause never prevents the effect such that (X, Yx , Yx′ ) ∈ {(x, y ′ , y ′ ),
(x, y ′ , y), (x, y, y), (x′ , y ′ , y ′ ), (x′ , y ′ , y), (x′ , y, y)} (with equal probabilities).
Figure 3 shows the PN & PS as well as N-IR & S-IR of these models for fixed levels of Avg-ER
as the error shifts between contexts where the cause may be necessary (i.e. X = x) vs. contexts
where it may be sufficient (i.e. X = x′ ). Despite having the same Avg-ER, the three models induce
widely different PN & PS values, representing different causal interpretations. While Figure 3a might
suggest that the factually correct models are the best performing, this is purely coincidental. Due to
the averaging done by PN & PS, the mistakes made in different units end up balancing each other out.
Looking at N-IR & S-IR in Figure 3b reveals that the causally consistent models are actually the best,
even outperforming models with significantly smaller Avg-ER.

4        F INE - TUNING WITH C OUNTERFACTUAL F EEDBACK
Despite the significant differences between correctness and causal consistency, success in either
metric relies on accurate estimates of counterfactual outcomes. Therefore, to solve the fine-tuning
problem in (2), it is essential to leverage the counterfactual information available in demonstrations
D, irrespective of the metric we aim to target as V. We present a data-centric approach to achieve
this and propose three methods for generating datasets using counterfactual feedback. These datasets
can then be utlised by existing algorithms for fine-tuning such as SFT or DPO. These methods are
summarized in Figure 4.
Supervised Counterfactual Feedback. Recall that we assumed access to an extractor h that can
reduce answers given in natural language to binary outcomes ŷ = h(a) ∈ {y, y ′ }. Now, further
suppose that we can perform this extraction in reverse, denoted as H: Given a question q and the true
outcome ytrue corresponding to this question, we can form a natural language answer a = H(q, ytrue ).
In practice, we achieve this by prompting a language model to provide an answer to question q
that starts with “Yes” or “No” (see the appendix for the full prompt). Based on these answers, we
generate a dataset D of both factual and counterfactual questions and their answers:
                                           D = { qf = q(U ),       af = H(qf , Y ),
                                                qcf = q̃X ′ (U ), acf = H(qcf , YX ′ ) }U,X,Y,YX ′ ∼D
This dataset can directly be used with any SFT algorithm to fine-tune the target model ℓ0 .
    5
      Note that the use of these quantities is an alternative but equivalent characterization of all possible counter-
factual outcomes to the one in Pearl (1999), where the probabilities of disablement Yx′ = y ′ |Y = y and the
probability of enablement Yx = y|Y = y ′ are introduced.


                                                                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Preference-based Counterfactual Feedback.                     SFT can be limited by the quality of answers
generated as ground-truth and their similarity to the model’s original answers. Without access to a
language model that is already better at reasoning than our target model, it might challenging to build
an answer generator H that provides high quality samples. In that case, it is desirable to provide
direct feedback to the answers generated by the target language model. We do so by first generating
multiple answers to different questions (using a high sampling temperature to get sufficient variation):
            D = { U, qf = q(U ),            af [1] ∼ ℓ0 (qf ), . . . , af [N ] ∼ ℓ0 (qf ),
                         qcf = q̃X ′ (U ), acf [1] ∼ ℓ0 (qcf ), . . . , acf [N ] ∼ ℓ0 (qcf ) }U,X,Y,YX ′ ∼D  (8)
Then, we form a preference-based dataset where correct answers are preferred over incorrect answers:
                   af [i] ≻ af [j] ⇐⇒ 1{h(af [i]) = Y } > 1{h(af [j]) = Y }                                  (9)
                  acf [i] ≻ acf [j] ⇐⇒ 1{h(acf [i]) = YX ′ } > 1{h(acf [j]) = YX ′ }                        (10)
The DPO algorithm can directly be used with this dataset to maximize the likelihood of preferred
answers (i.e. a[i]) relative to the answers they are preferred over (i.e. a[j]).
Preference-based Causal Consistency Feedback. Running DPO with preferences determined
by a reward function, where alternatives with higher rewards are preferred over those with lower
rewards, is equivalent to maximizing that reward function (Rafailov et al., 2024). In our case, this
means that running DPO with the above preferences would, in effect, minimize the average error rate
(i.e. Avg-ER), as these preferences are generated by treating correctness (i.e. 1{h(a) = Ŷ = Y })
as a reward function. To target the inconsistency rates introduced in Section 3.2, we propose to
(i) pair factual and counterfactual questions, (ii) prompt the target language model to answer them
simultaneously, and then (iii) elicit preferences based on the joint answer. Formally,
   (af [i], acf [i]) ≻ (af [j], acf [j]) ⇐⇒ R(h(af [i]), h(acf [i]); U ) > R(h(af [j]), h(acf [j]); U ) (11)
where R(Ŷ , ŶX ′ ; U ) = 1{N = N̂ } + 1{S = Ŝ}
+ 1{AN = AN    ˆ } + 1{AS = AS}.    ˆ                                                                                                        
                                         We call                             
                                                                                                               For U , will it be Y ?        
                                                                                                                                              
this causal consistency feedback (CCF) (see Fig-                             
                                                                             Y
                                                                                       Large LM
                                                                                                       Yes, ...
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                              
ure 4b vs. 4c). CFF explicitly targets Avg-IR
                                                                                                          For U , if it had not been X,
rather than Avg-ER and can still be used directly
                                                                             
                                                                                                           would it have been Y ?
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                              
with the DPO algorithm.
                                                                              Y0                       No, ...
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                        Large LM
                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                           (a) Supervised CF
5 E XPERIMENTS                               
                                             
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                          Target LM                                                   Target LM
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                             For U , will it be Y ?                                      For U , will it be Y ?
                                                                                                                                                                  
We begin with a proof-of-concept case study. 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                      Yes                                                         Yes
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                              Ŷ =
                                                                                                                      Ŷ =                                        
We analyze a hand-crafted puzzle to assess 
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         Ŷ = Y
the effectiveness of all fine-tuning techniques
                                                                       For U , if it had not been X,                               For U , if it had not been X,
introduced in Section 4 when trained on dif-
                                                       
                                                          Target LM                                                   Target LM
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                       
                                                                        would it have been Y ?                                      would it have been Y ?        
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                  
ferent types of datasets within the context            
                                                        Ŷ0 =
                                                       
                                                                      No                                           Ŷ0 =          No
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
of the in-domain causal reasoning scenarios                                                                ?
                                                                                                        Ŷ0 = Y0
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   U
(§5.1). We also address the research question                                      (b) Preference-based CF
posed in Section 1, i.e., to what extent the                                                                                                                      
performance improvements in causal reasoning
                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                           Target LM                                                   Target LM
                                                       
                                                                            For U , will it be Y ?                                      For U , will it be Y ?    
                                                                                                                                                                   
achieved through the fine-tuning process gener-
                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                          Ŷ =        Yes                                             Ŷ =        Yes                             
alize across all the generalization modes (§5.2).      
                                                                          If it had not been X,
                                                                         would it have been Y ?
                                                                                                                                      If it had not been X,
                                                                                                                                     would it have been Y ?        
Subsequently, we use three additional real-world       
                                                       
                                                        Ŷ0 =
                                                                      No                                           Ŷ0 =          Yes
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
problems to examine our findings (§5.3).               
                                                       
                                                                                                       R(Ŷ0,1 ; U )
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                   U
5.1   I N - DOMAIN R EASONING                                                     (c) Preference-based CCF
We evaluate all fine-tuning techniques when        Figure 4: Summary of the proposed fine tuning methods.
trained on various types of demonstrations in      Supervised and preference-based counterfactual feed-
a synthetic in-domain reasoning problem.           back (CF) target correctness: the former by generating
                                                   correct answers given each question and the latter by
Experimental Setup.         See Figure 5. The sampling answers and preferring the correct ones over
puzzle describes a candy party. The context is the others. Causal consistency feedback (CCF) targets
defined by the four-dimensional random vector causal consistency instead: Asking both the factual and
U = (NA , NB , NC , ND ) where each element the counterfactual questions within the same dialogue
follows the same uniform distribution U(1, 12). allows us to elicit preferences according to relationships
The causal structure, derived from the narratives, between the factual and counterfactual answers.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is presented in the middle section of the figure. Question: Anna, Bill, Cory, and Dave are going to a party, where the
We selected A: Anna is happy or not as the cause 4host     is going to distribute candies. Anna will be happy if she gets at least
                                                       candies. Bill will be happy if he gets at least 6 candies. Cory will be
(X), and D: Dave is happy or not as the effect happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he gets at least 8 candies.
                                                     Dave will be happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he gets at least
(Y ). The factual questions q(u) are obtained by 10     candies. After distributing the candies, Anna gets NA , Bill gets NB ,
randomly drawing values for the four numerical Cory gets NC , and Dave gets ND . Is Dave happy?
variables from the distribution U, The counter-
factual questions q̃X ′ (u) are generated by intro- Anna is happy? Cory is happy? NA , NB , NC , ND ∼ U(1, . . . , 12)
                                                                                              A = NA ≥ 4
ducing an assumption that negates the cause i.e.              A                    C
                                                                                              B = NB ≥ 6
if in the context A is “Anna is happy” based on               B                    D          C = (A ∧ B) ∨ (NC ≥ 8)
the value of NA , the injected assumption would       Bill is happy?       Dave is happy?     D = (A ∧ B) ∨ (ND ≥ 10)
be “suppose that Anna is not happy”, and vice
versa. Since we are assessing the in-domain rea- Counterfactual Question: Now, suppose that Anna is (not) happy re-
soning scenario, the cause-effect demonstration gardless of the candy distribution. With this assumption, is Dave happy?
used during the fine-tuning phase are likewise Figure 5: Hand-crafted puzzle with the original factual
employed in the evaluation phase.                   question, causal model with structural equations, and a
We first generate dataset D = {(q(u), af )} ∪ counterfactual question. Blue and orange arrows show
                                                    the cause-effect interventions demonstrated to the model
{(q̃X ′ (u), acf )} for each fine-tuning techniques during fine-tuning and evaluation phases.
introduced in Section 4 following the algo-
rithms shown in Appendix C. Then we fine-                                                              0.14                                                                                              0.14
                                                                                       DPO-OnlyCF                      DPO-OnlyF
tune the mini version of Phi-3 (Abdin et al.,              DPO-OnlyF                  Base             DPO-OnlyCF
                                                                                                       0.12                         Base                                                                 0.12
                                                                    Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)


                                                                                                                                                                      Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)
                                                                            SFT-OnlyCF                                SFT-OnlyCF
2024) on D. We include five baselines: the                 SFT-OnlyF                                   0.10
                                                                                                                          SFT-OnlyF
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.10

                                                                                                       0.08                                                                                              0.08
base language model (Phi-3 mini) without fine-                                                         0.06                                                                                              0.06
tuning (Base), the base model fine-tuned using                  DPO-F&CF                              DPO-F&CF
                                                                                                       0.04                                                                                              0.04

the SFT and DPO methods on factual examples               SFT-F&CF
                                                                                                       0.02
                                                                                                                   SFT-F&CF
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.02
                                                             DPO+CCF                                   DPO+CCF
{(q(u), af )} exclusively (SFT-OnlyF and DPO-                                                          0.00
                                                                                                           0.00   0.05   0.10   0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
                                                                                                                                 Factual Error (F-ER)
                                                                                                                                                        0.35   0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.00   0.05   0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Counterfactual Error (CF-ER)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.35

OnlyF), and the base model fine-tuned using the
                                                        (a) S-IR w.r.t. F-ER                        (b) S-IR w.r.t. CF-ER
SFT and DPO methods on counterfactual exam-
ples {(q̃X ′ (u), acf )} exclusively (SFT-OnlyCF    Figure      6:   In-domain         results     in  the candy party puzzle.
and DPO-OnlyCF). For OnlyF and OnlyCF, we           The  y-axis         in both     figures       represents      S-IR, while the
have doubled the number of contexts sampled x-axes represent F-ER and CF-ER, respectively. We
so that every method still has access to the same focus on S-IR because, in this puzzle, the cause is more
                                                    sufficient than necessary for producing the effect.
number of question-answer examples. As our
proposed methods, we include the base model fine-tuned using SFT, DPO, and CCF methods on both
factual and counterfactual examples (SFT-F&CF, DPO-F&CF, and DPO+CCF).
Results.      Figure 6 shows the sufficiency inconsistency rate (S-IR) in relation to the fac-
tual/counterfactual error rates (F/CF-ER) across all approaches.6 SFT and DPO models, trained
exclusively on either factual or counterfactual examples (SFT+OnlyF, SFT+OnlyCF, DPO+OnlyF,
and DPO+OnlyCF) do not improve S-IR, even though they manage to reduce the corresponding
F/CF-ER. However, when given access to both types of examples, DPO+F&CF shows an improve-
ment in S-IR, though this improvement is not as pronounced as the reduction observed in F/CF-ER,
particularly in CF-ER. The SFT+F&CF model shows a significant enhancement in both S-IR and
F-ER, but it fails to make progress in CF-ER. Finally, by directly addressing causal consistency,
with S-IR factored into the reward during fine-tuning, the DPO+CCF model achieves substantial
improvements across F-ER, CF-ER, and S-IR. These results highlight the crucial role of effectively
coordinating factual and counterfactual feedback for advanced reasoning tasks.
5.2     M ODES OF G ENERALIZATION
In this section, we answer the question “to what extent the performance improvements in causal
reasoning achieved through the fine-tuning process generalize across all the generalization modes
defined in Section 2”. As mentioned in Section 2, an in-domain evaluation alone is inadequate
for fully assessing the success of fine-tuning for reasoning and differentiating it from basic recall.
Therefore, we evaluate all fine-tuning methods in the generalization modes introduced in Section 2.
Experimental Setup. To allow for the problem in Figure 5 to reflect all possible generalization
modes we made slight modifications to the puzzle context, creating two variations: chain NDE and
chain WDE (refer to Structure-2 and Structure-3 in Appendix D.1). The top section in Figure 7
    6
      When evaluating models, we sample 10 answers for each question, which gives us a distribution over ER/IR
(rather than just a point estimation).


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   A                       C               A                     C
                                                                                                                                       A                   B            C           A            B             C                                         A                  B           C           A           B             C                                  A                 B           C           A           B             C
                                   B                       D               B                    D

                                   Common-Cause                           Common-Effect                                                    No Direct Effect                        With Direct Effect                                                        No Direct Effect                      With Direct Effect                                                No Direct Effect                     With Direct Effect
                                            (“CC”)                               (“CE”)                                                        (“NDE”)                                   (“WDE”)                                                                     (“NDE”)                             (“WDE”)                                                         (“NDE”)                                (“WDE”)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SFT-F&CF      DPO-F&CF
                                   0.30            DPO-F&CF (CE)                                                                           0.200                                                                                                                          (WDE)           (WDE)                                                                      0.200
                                                                                     Base                                                                                                              Base                                                                DPO+CCF
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (WDE)                                                  0.10          (WDE)                                                                                     0.175                                                         Base
                                                SFT-F&CF (CE)                        (CE)                                                  0.175                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DPO-F&CF                    (WDE)
                                   0.25         DPO+CCF (CE)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (WDE)
Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)


                                                                                                        Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sufficiency Inconsistency (S-IR)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Base
                                                                                                                                           0.150                                                             Base                                                                                                        (NDE)                                       0.150                       DPO+CCF
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (NDE)                                            0.08                                                                                                                                 (WDE)                       Base
                                   0.20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (NDE)
                                                                                                                                           0.125                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.125
                                                                                                                                                         DPO-F&CF                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DPO+CCF
                                                                                                                                                         (WDE)                                                                                               0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (NDE)        SFT-F&CF
                                   0.15                                                                                                    0.100                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.100
                                                                           SFT-F&CF            Base                                                      SFT-F&CF                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DPO-F&CF           (WDE)
                                                              DPO-F&CF       (CC)              (CC)                                        0.075         (WDE)                                                                                                                               DPO+CCF                   Base                                          0.075 SFT-F&CF(NDE)
                                                                   (CC)                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04                                                     (WDE)
                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (NDE)
                                                              DPO+CCF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (NDE)
                                                                  (CC)                                                                     0.050                                                                                                                                      DPO-F&CF                                                                       0.050
                                   0.05                                                                                                            DPO+CCF                                                                                                   0.02                          (NDE)
                                                                                                                                           0.025 (WDE) DPO-F&CF
                                                                                                                                                           (NDE)                                                                                                                     SFT-F&CF                                                                        0.025
                                                                                                                                                                            SFT-F&CF (NDE)
                                                                                                                                                                            DPO+CCF (NDE)                                                                                              (NDE)
                                   0.00                                                                                                    0.000                                                                                                             0.00                                                                                                    0.000
                                          0.0       0.1        0.2          0.3          0.4      0.5                                              0.0         0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5           0.6                                             0.0      0.1     0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5     0.6                                                  0.0       0.1     0.2        0.3       0.4     0.5       0.6
                                                          Necessity Inconsistency (N-IR)                                                                             Necessity Inconsistency (N-IR)                                                                                  Necessity Inconsistency (N-IR)                                                                          Necessity Inconsistency (N-IR)


(a) Common-Cause/Effect                                                                                                                                     (b) Inductive                                                                      (c) Deductive, Cause-B.                                                                                (d) Deductive, Effect-B.
Figure 7: Generalization results in the candy party puzzle. Top: Eight scenarios involving three different
causal structures: the bipartite graph {A, B} → {C, D} (Structure-1 in Appendix D.1) as well as the chain
A → B → C with and without a direct effect from A to C (Structure-2 and Structure-3 in Appendix D.1).
Blue and orange arrows show the cause-effect interventions demonstrated to the model during fine-tuning and
evaluation phases. Bottom: The causal reasoning ability of the fine-tuned models generalizes most effectively in
inductive demonstrations. However, with common-cause/effect and deductive demonstrations, they no longer
show the same reasoning improvements as observed in the in-domain setting.

displays all the causal structures used for each generalization mode, along with the cause-effect
interventions demonstrated during the fine-tuning and evaluation phases. Based on the findings from
the in-domain reasoning experiments (Section 5.1), where both SFT and DPO fine-tuning methods
showed significantly better performance when provided with both factual and counterfactual examples,
we include here only the methods SFT-F&CF, DPO-F&CF, DPO+CCF, and the Base model.
Results. The bottom section in Figure 7 presents the causal reasoning performance of all systems
across the different generalization modes. We observe that: (i) Common-Cause/Effect. Fine-tuning
based on demonstrations that involve just the target cause or the target effect (but not both as in the
in-domain case) no longer leads to improvements in S-IR (unlike the in-domain case). While we do
see improvements in N-IR, this can be attributed to better recall and not necessarily to better reasoning.
The common-effect case leads to the greater improvement in N-IR precisely because the task of identi-
fying factuals remains the same in this mode of generalization. (ii) Induction. Fine-tuning generalizes
best when performed inductively. This is because relationships involving both the target cause and the
target effect have been demonstrated, albeit not together. (iii) Deductions. While harder than induc-
tion, deduction is also possible as long as there are no direct effects that circumvent the intermediate
variable. If there are such effects, deduction based on a shared cause becomes virtually impossible:
Without any intervention on the intermediate variable, it is challenging to tell how much of the shared
cause’s effect is mediated through the intermediate variable vs. how much of it is not. Meanwhile,
this seems to be identifiable to some extent when interventions on the intermediate variable are
demonstrated as in deduction based on a shared effect (see Appendix H for a more detailed analysis).

5.3                                               R EAL - WORLD P ROBLEMS
Experimental Setup. We present three real-world causal reasoning problems: in the Healthcare
domain, we examine breast cancer treatment and develop a simplified problem that determines
how different treatment options—namely, radiotherapy/chemotherapy and surgery—are assigned
to patients based on cancer type, tumor size, and nodal involvement. This model is grounded in a
real-world guideline (MD Anderson Cancer Center) and published statistics on the disease (Orrantia-
Borunda et al., 2022; Sezgın et al., 2020; Carey et al., 2006). In the Engineering domain, we
implement an automatic fault detection algorithm for transmission lines (Reddy et al., 2016). This
algorithm aims to identify the type of fault occurring on a transmission line using three different
measurements. In the Math Benchmarking domain, we select a math question from GSM8K (Cobbe
et al., 2021), a widely used benchmark for evaluating language models on grade school math problems.
A detailed explanation of these three problems, including the context, factual and counterfactual
questions, causal structures, and the cause-effect interventions demonstrated during the fine-tuning
and evaluation phases across different generalization modes, can be found in Appendix D.2, D.3, D.4
respectively. For the real-world problems, we sample the same number of contexts for each method
as this is more likely to be the case in a real-world application, where each context would correspond
to an individual entry (e.g. a single patient in the healthcare domain, see Appendix B for details).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results. The results for all three prob- Table 1: Average generalization performance across three real-
lems across in-domain and different gen- world causal reasoning problems. The scores are normalized
eralization modes are available in Table 2 relative to the Base approach’s scores in each generalization
in Appendix A. Given the extensive num- mode. Higher scores indicate a greater number of errors
ber of experiments in this table, we have made by the approach, with scores above 1.0 meaning that the
summarized the Average Error Rate (Avg- approach makes more mistakes than the Base model, which
                                             has not undergone any fine-tuning.
ER) and Average Inconsistency Rate (Avg-
IR) scores in Table 1. For this summary, Mode                   Metric
                                                                       Base   OnlyF      F&CF (Ours)

we first normalized the scores of each ap-                             Base SFT DPO SFT DPO DPO+CCF
                                                               Avg-ER 1.00 0.82 0.86 0.42 0.53     0.48
proach relative to the scores of the cor- In-Domain            Avg-IR 1.00 0.73 0.72 0.44 0.51     0.47
responding Base approach. Then, for                            Avg-ER 1.00 1.35 1.75 1.17 1.62     2.04
                                             Common-Cause
each generalization mode (including the                        Avg-IR 1.00 1.30 1.49 1.14 1.42     1.80
in-domain scenario), we calculated the av- Common-Effect       Avg-ER 1.00 0.60 0.71 0.53 0.66
                                                               Avg-IR 1.00 0.49 0.60 0.42 0.53
                                                                                                   0.64
                                                                                                   0.50
erage score of each tested method across                       Avg-ER 1.00 0.86 0.79 0.60 0.58     0.69
                                             Inductive
all applicable problems. Not all generaliza-                   Avg-IR 1.00 0.74 0.62 0.51 0.50     0.59
tion modes can be tested for every problem Deductive, Cause-B. Avg-ER 1.00 0.70 0.67 0.61 0.58     0.57
                                                               Avg-IR 1.00 0.62 0.59 0.53 0.53     0.51
due to differences in causal structures, and
                                                               Avg-ER 1.00 0.83 0.83 0.90 0.95     0.77
the average score includes only the prob- Deductive, Effect-B. Avg-IR 1.00 0.91 0.87 0.93 0.89     0.76
lems that were tested for each generaliza-
tion mode. In Table 1, higher scores indicate more errors, and scores above 1.0 signify that the
approach makes more mistakes than the Base model. We observe that: (i) In the in-domain scenario,
when the fine-tuning is guided by both factual and counterfactual examples (-F&CF), the language
models show a significant improvement in causal reasoning ability. (ii) Similar to what we observed in
previous experiments, this improvement generalizes to most generalization modes, with the exception
of common-cause and effect-based deduction. (iii) In most of modes, language models trained with
causal consistency feedback (DPO+CCF) demonstrate a lower error and inconsistency rate.
6 R ELATED W ORK
Reasoning Evaluation. While our work focuses on reasoning elicitation, there is a plethora of
work on reasoning evaluation (Frohberg and Binder, 2021; Wu et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024).
Parmar et al. (2024) evaluate logical reasoning, Cohn and Hernandez-Orallo (2023) evaluate spatial
reasoning, Gandhi et al. (2024) evaluate social reasoning, Li et al. (2022); Jin et al. (2023); Ashwani
et al. (2024); Li et al. (2024); Wang (2024) evaluate causal reasoning, and Maasch et al. (2025)
evaluate compositional reasoning. Being able to determine which models are better at reasoning is an
important aspect of reasoning elicitation. We have explored this aspect in Section 3 building on the
work of González and Nori (2024), which has allowed us to consider relationships like necessity and
sufficiency that require a higher level of reasoning than simply answering counterfactual prompts.
Counterfactual Frameworks. Counterfactual frameworks have been employed to explore aspects
of LLMs other than reasoning elicitation. For instance, Lin et al. (2024b) formulate preference align-
ment as a causal inference problem and develop an alternative approach to algorithms like DPO. In
Wu et al. (2021); Nguyen et al. (2024), counterfactual inputs are used to explain a model’s predictions.
Additionally, Kandpal et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023b) model memorization through counterfactuals.
Fine-tuning with Factual Feedback. While we fine-tune language models for reasoning with
counterfactual feedback, previous work has considered fine-tuning for factuality—that is providing
factually correct answers to questions which do not involve interventions (Tian et al., 2023; Tong et al.,
2024; Lin et al., 2024a). Khalifa et al. (2020); Korbak et al. (2022a;b) propose methods for controlled
generation, which aim to constrain a model’s answers using binary reward functions. While they
suggest using correctness as the reward function to improve factuality, we have shown that targeting
metrics like causal consistency require more fine-grained feedback (beyond a binary reward).
7    C ONCLUSION
This work introduced the problem of fine-tuning for reasoning, along with (i) a taxonomy for general-
ization modes, (ii) multiple metrics that address the limitations of existing performance measures, and
(iii) methods for generating fine-tuning data with counterfactual feedback. We showed that fine-tuning
for reasoning requires both factual and counterfactual examples, and that paring examples related
through a shared context can lead to improvements. A key limitation of our approach is the restriction
of causes and effects to binary variables, which allows us to focus on high-level relationships like
necessity and sufficiency present in human reasoning (see Appendix I for further discussion).


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author J. Maasch acknowledges the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. DGE–2139899.

R EFERENCES
Abdin, M., S. A. Jacobs, A. A. Awan, J. Aneja, A. Awadallah, H. Awadalla, N. Bach, A. Bahree,
 A. Bakhtiari, H. Behl et al., “Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on
 your phone,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219, 2024.
Ahn, J., R. Verma, R. Lou, D. Liu, R. Zhang, and W. Yin, “Large language models for mathematical
  reasoning: Progresses and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00157, 2024.
Ashwani, S., K. Hegde, N. R. Mannuru, M. Jindal, D. S. Sengar, K. C. R. Kathala, D. Banga, V. Jain,
  and A. Chadha, “Cause and effect: Can large language models truly understand causality?” arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2402.18139, 2024.
Bubeck, S., V. Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke, E. Horvitz, E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y. T. Lee, Y. Li,
  S. Lundberg, H. Nori, H. Palangi, M. T. Ribeiro, and Y. Zhang, “Sparks of artificial general
  intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Carey, L. A., C. M. Perou, C. A. Livasy, L. G. Dressler, D. Cowan, K. Conway, G. Karaca, M. A.
  Troester, C. K. Tse, S. Edmiston et al., “Race, breast cancer subtypes, and survival in the carolina
  breast cancer study,” JAMA, vol. 295, no. 21, pp. 2492–2502, 2006.
Chang, Y., X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu, H. Chen, X. Yi, C. Wang, Y. Wang et al., “A
  survey on evaluation of large language models,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
  Technology, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–45, 2024.
Cobbe, K., V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek,
  J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Training verifiers to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Cohn, A. G. and J. Hernandez-Orallo, “Dialectical language model evaluation: An initial appraisal of
  the commonsense spatial reasoning abilities of LLMs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11164, 2023.
Dai, A. M. and Q. V. Le, “Semi-supervised sequence learning,” in Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2015.
Frohberg, J. and F. Binder, “CRASS: A novel data set and benchmark to test counterfactual reasoning
  of large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11941, 2021.
Gan, W., Z. Qi, J. Wu, and J. Lin, “Large language models in education: Vision and opportunities,” in
  IEEE International Conference on Big Data, 2023.
Gandhi, K., J.-P. Fränken, T. Gerstenberg, and N. Goodman, “Understanding social reasoning in
  language models with language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  vol. 36, 2024.
González, J. and A. V. Nori, “Does reasoning emerge? Examining the probabilities of causation in
  large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08210, 2024.
González, J., C. Wong, Z. Gero, J. Bagga, R. Ueno, I. Chien, E. Orakvin, E. Kiciman, A. Nori,
  R. Weerasinghe, R. S. Leidner, B. Piening, T. Naumann, C. Bifulco, and H. Poon, “TRIALSCOPE:
 A unifying causal framework for scaling real-world evidence generation with biomedical language
  models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01301, 2023.
Halpern, J. Y. and J. Pearl, “Causes and explanations: A structural-model approach. Part I: Causes,”
 The British journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2005.
Howard, J. and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification,” in Proceedings
  of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), 2018.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Huang, J. and K. C.-C. Chang, “Towards reasoning in large language models: A survey,” in The 61st
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Jin, Z., Y. Chen, F. Leeb, L. Gresele, O. Kamal, Z. Lyu, K. Blin, F. Gonzalez, M. Kleiman-Weiner,
   M. Sachan, and B. Scholkopf, “Cladder: Assessing causal reasoning in language models,” in
   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Jin, Z., J. Liu, L. Zhiheng, S. Poff, M. Sachan, R. Mihalcea, M. T. Diab, and B. Schölkopf, “Can
   large language models infer causation from correlation?” in The Twelfth International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2024.
Kandpal, N., H. Deng, A. Roberts, E. Wallace, and C. Raffel, “Large language models struggle to
  learn long-tail knowledge,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Kelley, D., The Art of Reasoning with Symbolic Logic.    WW Norton & Co, 1992.
Khalifa, M., H. Elsahar, and M. Dymetman, “A distributional approach to controlled text generation,”
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11635, 2020.
Khandelwal, U., K. Clark, D. Jurafsky, and L. Kaiser, “Sample efficient text summarization using a
  single pre-trained transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08836, 2019.
Kıcıman, E., R. Ness, A. Sharma, and C. Tan, “Causal reasoning and large language models: Opening
  a new frontier for causality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00050, 2023.
Korbak, T., H. Elsahar, G. Kruszewski, and M. Dymetman, “Controlling conditional language models
  without catastrophic forgetting,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022,
  pp. 11 499–11 528.
Korbak, T., H. Elsahar, G. Kruszewski, and M. Dymetman, “On reinforcement learning and distri-
  bution matching for fine-tuning language models with no catastrophic forgetting,” Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 16 203–16 220, 2022.
Lewis, D., “Causation,” Journal of Philosophy, vol. 70, pp. 556–567, 1973.
Li, A. and J. Pearl, “Probabilities of causation with nonbinary treatment and effect,” in Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 18, 2024, pp. 20 465–20 472.
Li, J., L. Yu, and A. Ettinger, “Counterfactual reasoning: Do language models need world knowledge
   for causal inference?” in NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Neuro Causal and Symbolic AI (nCSI), 2022.
Li, J., L. Yu, and A. Ettinger, “Counterfactual reasoning: Testing language models’ understanding
  of hypothetical scenarios,” in The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational
  Linguistics, 2023.
Li, Y., W. Tian, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Eyes can deceive: Benchmarking counterfactual
  reasoning abilities of multi-modal large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12966, 2024.
Lin, S.-C., L. Gao, B. Oguz, W. Xiong, J. Lin, W.-t. Yih, and X. Chen, “Flame: Factuality-aware
  alignment for large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01525, 2024.
Lin, V., E. Ben-Michael, and L.-P. Morency, “Optimizing language models for human preferences is
  a causal inference problem,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14979, 2024.
Maasch, J. R. M. A., A. Hüyük, X. Xu, A. V. Nori, and J. Gonzalez, “Compositional causal reasoning
 evaluation in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04556, 2025.
MacColl, H., “Symbolic reasoning,” Mind, vol. 6, no. 24, pp. 493–510, 1897.
Mackie, J. L., “Causes and conditions,” American Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 245–264,
 1965.
MD Anderson Cancer Center,. Cancer treatment algorithms - breast cancer - invasive stage
 i-iii. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdanderson.org/content/dam/mdanderson/documents/
 for-physicians/algorithms/cancer-treatment/ca-treatment-breast-invasive-web-algorithm.pdf


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nguyen, V. B., P. Youssef, J. Schlötterer, and C. Seifert, “LLMs for generating and evaluating
  counterfactuals: A comprehensive study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00722, 2024.
Orrantia-Borunda, E., P. Anchondo-Nuñez, L. E. Acuña-Aguilar, F. O. Gómez-Valles, and C. A.
  Ramı́rez-Valdespino, “Subtypes of breast cancer,” Breast Cancer [Internet], 2022.
Ouyang, L., J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal,
  K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder,
  P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe, “Training language models to follow instructions with
  human feedback,” Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Parmar, M., N. Patel, N. Varshney, M. Nakamura, M. Luo, S. Mashetty, A. Mitra, and C. Baral,
  “LogicBench: Towards systematic evaluation of logical reasoning ability of large language models,”
  in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Pearl, J., “Probabilities of causation: Three counterfactual interpretations and their identification,”
  Synthese, vol. 121, no. 1–2, pp. 93–149, 1999.
Pearl, J., Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference.    Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Peters, M. E., M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep
  contextualized word representations,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
  1 (Long Papers), 2018.
Radford, A., K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever. (2018) Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training. [Online]. Available: https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.
  com/openai-assets/research-covers/language-unsupervised/language understanding paper.pdf
Rafailov, R., A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn, “Direct preference
  optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model,” Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2024.
Reddy, M. J. B., P. Gopakumar, and D. Mohanta, “A novel transmission line protection using dost
  and svm,” Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal, vol. 19, no. 2, pp.
  1027–1039, 2016.
Seals, S. and V. Shalin, “Evaluating the deductive competence of large language models,” in Proceed-
  ings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Sezgın, G., M. Apaydın, D. Etıt, and M. K. Atahan, “Tumor size estimation of the breast cancer
  molecular subtypes using imaging techniques,” Medicine and Pharmacy Reports, vol. 93, no. 3, p.
  253, 2020.
Simmering, P. F. and P. Huoviala, “Large language models for aspect-based sentiment analysis,”
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18025, 2023.
Tian, K., E. Mitchell, H. Yao, C. D. Manning, and C. Finn, “Fine-tuning language models for
  factuality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08401, 2023.
Tong, Y., D. Li, S. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Teng, and J. Shang, “Can llms learn from previous mistakes?
  investigating llms’ errors to boost for reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20046, 2024.
Toshniwal, S., I. Moshkov, S. Narenthiran, D. Gitman, F. Jia, and I. Gitman, “Openmathinstruct-1: A
  1.8 million math instruction tuning dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10176, 2024.
Wang, Z., “CausalBench: A comprehensive benchmark for evaluating causal reasoning capabilities
 of large language models,” in Proceedings of the 10th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language
 Processing (SIGHAN-10), 2024.
Wei, J., X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-
 thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wong, C., S. Zhang, Y. Gu, C. Moung, J. Abel, N. Usuyama, R. Weerasinghe, B. Piening, T. Naumann,
 C. Bifulco, and H. Poon, “Scaling clinical trial matching using large language models: A case
 study in oncology,” in Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 2023.
Wu, T., M. T. Ribeiro, J. Heer, and D. S. Weld, “Polyjuice: Generating counterfactuals for explaining,
 evaluating, and improving models,” in Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
 for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
 Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2021.
Wu, Z., L. Qiu, A. Ross, E. Akyürek, B. Chen, B. Wang, N. Kim, J. Andreas, and Y. Kim, “Reasoning
 or reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations of language models through counterfactual
 tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02477, 2023.
Zhang, C., S. Bauer, P. Bennett, J. Gao, W. Gong, A. Hilmkil, J. Jennings, C. Ma, T. Minka,
  N. Pawlowski et al., “Understanding causality with large language models: Feasibility and oppor-
  tunities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05524, 2023.
Zhang, C., D. Ippolito, K. Lee, M. Jagielski, F. Tramèr, and N. Carlini, “Counterfactual memorization
  in neural language models,” in Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Ziegler, D. M., N. Stiennon, J. Wu, T. B. Brown, A. Radford, D. Amodei, P. Christiano, and G. Irving,
  “Fine-tuning language models from human preferences,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A                            B REAKDOWN OF THE R ESULTS IN S ECTION 5.3

Table 2: Results of Healthcare, Engineering, and Math Benchmarking problems. For some scenarios in Math
Benchmarking, N-IR and AS-IR are equal to 0.00 for all algorithms because the target cause X is never present
without an intervention due to how these scenarios are structured.
                                                                              Correctness                                         Causal Consistency
    Scenario                                        Alg.
                                                                  F-ER           C-ER        Avg-ER          N-IR          S-IR         AN-IR          AS-IR       Avg-IR
                                                    Base        23.57(0.00)   28.93(0.00)   26.25(0.00)   20.62(0.00)   4.34(0.00)    11.47(0.00)   32.01(0.00)   17.11(0.00)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF    3.12(0.04)   20.82(0.02)   11.97(0.02)   1.50(0.01)    2.09(0.02)    3.01(0.02)    19.93(0.01)    6.63(0.01)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   10.77(1.83)   28.57(2.07)   19.67(1.94)   9.10(2.24)    4.76(0.10)    6.00(0.16)    25.32(1.10)   11.29(0.66)
                                   In-domain        SFT-F&CF     1.64(0.01)    0.08(0.00)    0.86(0.00)   0.85(0.00)    0.80(0.00)    0.82(0.00)     0.87(0.00)    0.84(0.00)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    12.53(5.04)    8.74(1.69)   10.63(3.14)   8.65(3.04)    4.32(0.30)    5.00(0.28)    11.07(4.93)    7.26(1.58)
                                                    DPO+CCF      9.55(1.16)    5.16(0.15)    7.36(0.52)   7.97(1.21)    1.70(0.01)    3.59(0.04)     9.31(1.51)    5.64(0.36)
    Breast Cancer Treatment


                                                    SFT-OnlyF   48.86(3.27)   38.82(0.91)   43.84(1.65)   42.38(2.82)   10.55(0.10)   13.96(0.03)   45.71(2.06)   28.15(0.65)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   64.56(1.93)   67.95(0.19)   66.25(0.70)   53.01(1.45)   13.20(0.06)   14.25(0.00)   64.77(0.58)   36.31(0.28)
          Healthcare


                                   Com-Cause        SFT-F&CF    25.99(0.55)   38.14(0.81)   32.07(0.07)   25.83(0.35)    4.10(0.04)   13.07(0.01)   41.42(0.38)   21.10(0.06)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    53.92(2.45)   63.62(4.52)   58.77(2.10)   46.27(0.44)   14.09(0.01)   14.44(0.04)   53.23(2.34)   32.01(0.33)
                                                    DPO+CCF     80.18(4.78)   72.85(0.21)   76.52(1.55)   70.55(1.67)   15.96(0.03)   14.93(0.00)   68.67(3.67)   42.53(0.69)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   3.16(0.04)    20.87(0.02)   12.01(0.02)    1.45(0.01)   2.21(0.02)    2.94(0.03)    20.06(0.01)    6.67(0.01)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   5.93(0.02)    30.30(2.44)   18.11(0.54)   11.75(2.24)   3.77(0.00)    4.61(0.00)    21.60(0.03)   10.43(0.12)
                                   Com-Effect       SFT-F&CF    1.45(0.01)    20.43(0.02)   10.94(0.00)    1.60(0.00)   0.53(0.00)    1.40(0.00)    19.68(0.01)    5.80(0.00)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    2.96(0.03)    22.44(0.02)   12.70(0.00)    1.40(0.01)   2.08(0.03)    4.14(0.01)    19.84(0.00)    6.86(0.00)
                                                    DPO+CCF     2.17(0.04)    22.78(0.11)   12.48(0.07)    0.36(0.00)   2.58(0.07)    3.16(0.05)    19.60(0.00)    6.42(0.02)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF    1.56(0.01)   20.30(0.01)   10.93(0.01)    1.14(0.00)   0.65(0.01)    1.40(0.01)    20.12(0.00)    5.83(0.00)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   18.52(4.41)   32.93(4.36)   25.73(4.34)   13.03(2.76)   6.52(0.21)    6.80(0.20)    30.30(2.82)   14.16(1.11)
                                   Deductive
                                                    SFT-F&CF     1.32(0.00)   22.37(0.00)   11.84(0.00)    1.28(0.00)   0.15(0.00)    3.07(0.00)    20.48(0.00)    6.24(0.00)
                                   (Cause-Based)
                                                    DPO-F&CF     4.25(0.14)   24.37(0.14)   14.31(0.12)    1.45(0.04)   3.21(0.09)    5.99(0.09)    20.36(0.03)    7.75(0.04)
                                                    DPO+CCF      5.05(0.04)   25.17(0.17)   15.11(0.07)    2.95(0.03)   3.97(0.07)    6.42(0.08)    20.12(0.00)    8.36(0.02)
                                                    Base        16.39(0.00)   27.10(0.00)   21.75(0.00)   13.70(0.00)   27.52(0.00)   2.71(0.00)    13.96(0.00)   14.47(0.00)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF    2.94(0.05)   29.64(0.06)   16.29(0.01)   4.84(0.02)    26.73(0.00)   0.94(0.02)    2.18(0.01)    8.67(0.00)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   3.76(0.05)    31.30(0.06)   17.53(0.00)   6.63(0.01)    26.42(0.00)   1.00(0.00)    3.23(0.05)    9.32(0.00)
                                   In-domain        SFT-F&CF     1.39(0.00)    6.43(0.05)    3.91(0.01)   3.27(0.04)     4.32(0.03)   0.46(0.00)    0.93(0.00)    2.25(0.00)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    10.23(2.60)   33.48(1.15)   21.86(1.76)   6.94(0.29)    30.13(0.77)   5.34(1.23)    6.87(0.82)    12.32(0.72)
    Transmission Line Protection


                                                    DPO+CCF      7.64(0.89)   23.00(0.60)   15.32(0.71)   6.61(0.12)    19.61(0.77)   4.44(0.32)    4.03(0.37)    8.67(0.32)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   14.61(0.08)   30.28(0.17)   22.44(0.11)   13.80(0.08)   27.23(0.00)   0.81(0.00)    14.02(0.07)   13.96(0.02)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   11.25(0.15)   30.78(0.20)   21.02(0.18)   11.04(0.15)   26.60(0.00)   0.21(0.00)    11.73(0.16)   12.39(0.04)
           Engineering


                                   Com-Cause        SFT-F&CF    14.05(0.10)   34.43(0.15)   24.24(0.12)   13.13(0.06)   32.64(0.18)   0.92(0.01)    13.60(0.06)   15.07(0.05)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    12.52(0.17)   31.46(0.10)   21.99(0.11)   10.84(0.12)   31.40(0.12)   1.72(0.08)    11.41(0.11)   13.84(0.06)
                                                    DPO+CCF     14.20(0.09)   35.72(0.00)   24.96(0.02)   13.26(0.07)   35.68(0.01)   0.94(0.01)    13.56(0.06)   15.86(0.02)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   2.71(0.05)    29.26(0.04)   15.99(0.01)   4.39(0.03)    26.73(0.00)   0.78(0.01)    2.07(0.02)    8.49(0.01)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   2.71(0.05)    29.26(0.04)   15.99(0.01)   4.39(0.03)    26.73(0.00)   0.78(0.01)    2.07(0.02)    8.49(0.01)
                                   Com-Effect       SFT-F&CF    0.95(0.00)    26.41(0.00)   13.68(0.00)   0.82(0.00)    26.41(0.00)   0.15(0.00)    0.80(0.00)    7.04(0.00)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    2.28(0.09)    34.30(1.84)   18.29(0.48)   3.04(0.10)    25.71(0.02)   0.46(0.00)    8.74(1.32)    9.49(0.13)
                                                    DPO+CCF     1.51(0.00)    32.98(2.12)   17.25(0.49)   2.41(0.04)    26.55(0.00)   0.22(0.00)    6.50(1.23)    8.92(0.11)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   2.58(0.02)    31.10(0.10)   16.84(0.03)   5.85(0.07)    26.41(0.00)   0.57(0.00)    2.38(0.03)    8.80(0.01)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   2.68(0.05)    31.36(0.07)   17.02(0.00)   6.22(0.00)    25.69(0.01)   0.46(0.00)    2.89(0.06)    8.81(0.00)
                                   Inductive        SFT-F&CF    1.43(0.00)    20.25(0.17)   10.84(0.04)   0.91(0.00)    20.53(0.16)   0.52(0.00)    0.91(0.00)    5.72(0.01)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    2.85(0.02)    22.23(0.69)   12.54(0.22)   2.53(0.03)    22.27(0.67)   0.33(0.00)    2.56(0.03)    6.92(0.07)
                                                    DPO+CCF     2.34(0.06)    26.23(0.01)   14.29(0.02)   1.37(0.01)    26.03(0.01)   1.05(0.04)    1.47(0.01)    7.48(0.01)
                                                    Base        47.35(0.00)   26.32(0.00)   36.84(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    61.50(0.00)   48.24(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    27.44(0.00)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   37.21(0.58)   28.91(0.08)   33.06(0.25)   0.00(0.00)    52.17(0.41)   40.10(0.69)   0.00(0.00)    23.07(0.14)
    Math Benchmarking
     Testing on: S → T


                                                    DPO-OnlyF   28.28(0.95)   57.39(3.22)   42.83(1.84)   0.00(0.00)    66.84(1.15)   29.78(0.79)   0.00(0.00)    24.15(0.24)
                                   In-domain        SFT-F&CF    22.52(0.18)   14.05(0.17)   18.29(0.07)   0.00(0.00)    32.07(0.22)   23.45(0.18)   0.00(0.00)    13.88(0.05)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    14.06(0.10)   26.87(1.71)   20.47(0.32)   0.00(0.00)    37.78(1.52)   15.90(0.07)   0.00(0.00)    13.42(0.07)
                                                    DPO+CCF     19.38(0.04)   36.13(0.44)   27.75(0.19)   0.00(0.00)    50.89(1.13)   21.03(0.02)   0.00(0.00)    17.98(0.09)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   37.25(0.78)   33.46(0.02)   35.36(0.17)   0.00(0.00)    53.39(0.46)   42.11(0.62)   0.00(0.00)    23.88(0.13)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   15.31(0.27)   42.93(0.01)   29.12(0.10)   0.00(0.00)    52.54(0.31)   18.06(0.28)   0.00(0.00)    17.65(0.07)
                                   Inductive        SFT-F&CF    24.27(0.08)   27.13(0.20)   25.70(0.04)   0.00(0.00)    40.98(0.05)   27.00(0.11)   0.00(0.00)    16.99(0.02)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    16.13(1.16)   26.86(1.39)   21.49(0.31)   0.00(0.00)    38.28(0.95)   18.44(1.08)   0.00(0.00)    14.18(0.18)
                                                    DPO+CCF     22.21(1.33)   29.94(1.19)   26.07(0.34)   0.00(0.00)    48.44(1.23)   23.51(1.16)   0.00(0.00)    17.99(0.23)
                                                    Base        50.25(0.00)   51.11(0.00)   50.68(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    67.30(0.00)   58.65(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    31.49(0.00)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   45.16(0.01)   56.90(0.13)   51.03(0.03)   0.00(0.00)    68.02(0.02)   52.95(0.05)   0.00(0.00)    30.24(0.00)
    Math Benchmarking
     Testing on: S → R


                                                    DPO-OnlyF   39.11(0.06)   72.29(0.45)   55.70(0.16)   0.00(0.00)    76.30(0.06)   40.57(0.06)   0.00(0.00)    29.22(0.00)
                                   In-domain        SFT-F&CF    44.55(0.01)   32.88(0.09)   38.71(0.01)   0.00(0.00)    62.18(0.00)   47.15(0.01)   0.00(0.00)    27.33(0.00)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    15.43(3.99)    8.56(0.68)   11.99(1.99)   0.00(0.00)    20.06(5.01)   16.48(3.99)   0.00(0.00)    9.14(1.12)
                                                    DPO+CCF     17.12(1.78)    8.06(0.87)   12.59(1.26)   0.00(0.00)    23.48(4.74)   17.88(1.72)   0.00(0.00)    10.34(0.75)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   46.17(0.03)   42.46(0.18)   44.31(0.05)   0.00(0.00)    66.31(0.04)   49.46(0.10)   0.00(0.00)    28.94(0.00)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   39.36(0.78)   48.96(2.24)   44.16(0.38)   0.00(0.00)    65.83(0.41)   44.21(1.15)   0.00(0.00)    27.51(0.06)
                                   Deductive
                                                    SFT-F&CF    46.57(0.04)   48.58(1.08)   47.57(0.22)   0.00(0.00)    66.05(0.10)   52.63(0.05)   0.00(0.00)    29.67(0.01)
                                   (Effect-Based)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    39.50(0.00)   61.68(4.62)   50.59(1.15)   0.00(0.00)    73.43(0.47)   39.61(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    28.26(0.03)
                                                    DPO+CCF     31.05(0.96)   50.27(4.58)   40.66(1.93)   0.00(0.00)    63.75(2.23)   32.92(0.80)   0.00(0.00)    24.17(0.34)
                                                    Base        47.35(0.00)   58.82(0.00)   53.08(0.00)   28.77(0.00)   50.11(0.00)   25.69(0.00)   22.44(0.00)   31.76(0.00)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   36.07(0.97)   65.96(0.02)   51.01(0.30)   21.32(0.09)   54.11(0.02)   26.60(0.27)    9.97(0.25)   28.00(0.13)
    Math Benchmarking
     Testing on: R → T


                                                    DPO-OnlyF   28.28(0.95)   22.81(0.12)   25.54(0.42)   32.30(0.31)    2.88(0.01)    0.24(0.00)   28.46(0.92)   15.97(0.14)
                                   In-domain        SFT-F&CF    23.12(0.12)   45.03(0.13)   34.08(0.11)   16.87(0.02)   39.39(0.09)   18.67(0.03)    4.76(0.04)   19.92(0.04)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    24.33(2.42)   22.38(0.16)   23.35(0.47)   30.27(0.30)    6.11(0.45)    3.74(0.46)   21.18(1.63)   15.32(0.39)
                                                    DPO+CCF     21.03(0.05)   20.91(0.55)   20.97(0.16)   27.75(0.11)    5.52(0.17)    0.83(0.01)   20.58(0.06)   13.67(0.03)
                                                    SFT-OnlyF   37.87(0.81)   62.75(0.10)   50.31(0.36)   23.38(0.11)   51.63(0.07)   26.27(0.28)   12.13(0.25)   28.35(0.14)
                                                    DPO-OnlyF   15.31(0.27)   19.98(0.03)   17.65(0.08)   23.77(0.23)    4.04(0.02)    0.24(0.00)   15.61(0.28)   10.91(0.06)
                                   Deductive
                                                    SFT-F&CF    25.41(0.10)   53.63(0.15)   39.52(0.05)   19.12(0.04)   44.40(0.03)   18.22(0.07)    7.55(0.12)   22.32(0.02)
                                   (Cause-Based)
                                                    DPO-F&CF    24.33(1.01)   38.62(6.13)   31.48(2.94)   29.16(0.35)   22.64(5.93)    0.66(0.00)   24.69(1.07)   19.29(1.00)
                                                    DPO+CCF     15.97(0.42)   40.45(3.76)   28.21(1.45)   23.14(0.23)   25.35(3.48)    1.85(0.02)   14.88(0.56)   16.31(0.46)


                                                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B                       N UMBER OF C ONTEXT S AMPLES VS . Q UESTION -A NSWER E XAMPLES
When collecting datasets, we always sample the same number of context variables U across all
feedback types, whether it be OnlyF, OnlyCF, F&CF or CCF. This is with the exception of Section 5.1
where we double the number of contexts for OnlyF and OnlyCF to end up with the same number
question-answer examples as other methods. In other words, for those experiments, F&C has access
N context samples with two question-answer examples for each context sample (one factual, one
counterfactual). Meanwhile, OnlyF and OnlyCF have access to 2N context samples with a single
question-answer example for each context (either factual or counterfactual).
This means, for the remainder of the experiments, F&CF has more question-answer examples in its
training dataset, but crucially, each method still sees the same number of problem instances. For
example, in the healthcare domain, OnlyF and F&CF sees the same set of breast cancer patients (each
patient corresponding to a context); the training data for F&CF does not include any new patients;
and the additional CF feedback is provided only for the existing patients. Therefore, the comparison
between OnlyF and F&CF remains fair, which would not have been the case if the context variables
for the factual dataset and the counterfactual dataset were sampled independently.
In Section 5.1, we preferred the setup with the same number of question-answer examples across
methods to be absolutely certain that any improvement we see is due to the type of feedback being
provided. In Sections 5.2 and 5.3, we preferred the setup with the same number of context variables
across methods because this is likely to be the case in practice (for instance, if we apply these methods
in a healthcare setting, the number of patients would be constant for each method).
That being said, for completeness, we report here supplementary generalization results where OnlyF
has access to twice the number of context variables, hence the same number of question-answer
examples (as in Section 5.1). We call these new baselines OnlyFx2 to differentiate them from the
original setup, see Table 3 for a detailed breakdown and Table 4 for a summary.

                              Table 3: Detailed breakdown of the generalization results for SFT-OnlyFx2 and DPO-OnlyFx2.
                                                                           Correctness                                         Causal Consistency
    Scenario                                   Alg.
                                                               F-ER           C-ER        Avg-ER          N-IR          S-IR         AN-IR          AS-IR       Avg-IR
                                               Base          23.57(0.00)   28.93(0.00)   26.25(0.00)   20.62(0.00)   4.34(0.00)    11.47(0.00)   32.01(0.00)   17.11(0.00)
    Breast Cancer Treatment


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   3.09(0.01)    21.41(0.01)   12.25(0.01)   2.39(0.01)    1.15(0.00)    2.82(0.01)    21.06(0.01)   6.86(0.01)
                              In-domain
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   5.18(0.32)    24.70(0.61)   14.94(0.45)   4.21(0.40)    2.75(0.05)    5.09(0.28)    21.68(0.13)   8.43(0.19)
          Healthcare


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   31.45(1.57)   26.48(0.66)   28.97(1.01)   24.84(0.79)    7.86(0.21)    9.75(0.21)   34.45(0.42)   19.22(0.35)
                              Com-Cause
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   76.27(4.04)   68.74(0.09)   72.51(0.99)   65.14(3.45)   13.27(0.06)   14.69(0.00)   70.43(0.86)   40.88(0.55)
                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   2.58(0.01)    21.05(0.03)   11.82(0.01)   2.01(0.01)    1.01(0.00)    2.58(0.02)    20.54(0.00)   6.54(0.01)
                              Com-Effect
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   2.23(0.02)    22.43(0.03)   12.33(0.03)   1.23(0.01)    1.80(0.02)    3.44(0.03)    19.76(0.00)   6.56(0.01)
                              Deductive        SFT-OnlyFx2   2.26(0.00)    22.26(0.02)   12.26(0.01)   1.95(0.00)    0.63(0.00)    3.10(0.02)    20.91(0.00)   6.65(0.00)
                              (Cause-Based)    DPO-OnlyFx2   3.57(0.03)    22.99(0.02)   13.28(0.00)   1.66(0.01)    2.67(0.02)    4.44(0.01)    20.30(0.02)   7.27(0.00)
                                               Base          16.39(0.00)   27.10(0.00)   21.75(0.00)   13.70(0.00)   27.52(0.00)   2.71(0.00)    13.96(0.00)   14.47(0.00)
                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   0.44(0.00)    31.65(0.02)   16.05(0.00)   5.59(0.01)    26.40(0.00)   0.07(0.00)    0.40(0.00)    8.11(0.00)
    Tx. Line Protection


                              In-domain
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   4.21(0.06)    30.13(0.00)   17.17(0.01)   5.54(0.00)    26.77(0.01)   0.92(0.03)    3.49(0.02)    9.18(0.01)
       Engineering


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   16.35(0.00)   35.69(0.00)   26.02(0.00)   15.88(0.00)   26.86(0.00)   0.47(0.00)    16.05(0.01)   14.82(0.00)
                              Com-Cause
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   13.52(0.02)   33.53(0.01)   23.53(0.00)   13.29(0.03)   26.65(0.00)   0.24(0.00)    15.13(0.00)   13.83(0.00)
                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   0.43(0.00)    32.38(0.00)   16.40(0.00)   6.21(0.00)    26.40(0.00)   0.07(0.00)    0.44(0.00)    8.28(0.00)
                              Com-Effect
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   3.01(0.09)    29.61(0.09)   16.31(0.03)   5.13(0.08)    26.69(0.00)   0.44(0.00)    2.69(0.09)    8.74(0.02)
                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   0.94(0.00)    32.55(0.00)   16.75(0.00)   6.51(0.00)    26.32(0.00)   0.43(0.00)    0.75(0.00)    8.50(0.00)
                              Inductive
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   1.72(0.01)    31.98(0.00)   16.85(0.00)   6.11(0.00)    26.37(0.00)   0.08(0.00)    1.68(0.01)    8.56(0.00)
                                               Base          47.35(0.00)   26.32(0.00)   36.84(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    61.50(0.00)   48.24(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    27.44(0.00)
    Math Bench.


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   26.59(0.38)   26.57(0.01)   26.58(0.13)   0.00(0.00)    42.88(0.31)   28.33(0.47)   0.00(0.00)    17.80(0.10)
      S→T


                              In-domain
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   24.47(0.41)   48.01(1.30)   36.24(0.61)   0.00(0.00)    59.29(0.82)   28.08(0.39)   0.00(0.00)    21.84(0.14)
                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   22.30(0.08)   28.04(0.03)   25.17(0.03)   0.00(0.00)    40.63(0.06)   23.93(0.09)   0.00(0.00)    16.14(0.02)
                              Inductive
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   16.72(1.55)   46.65(2.01)   31.69(1.70)   0.00(0.00)    52.99(1.61)   18.49(1.35)   0.00(0.00)    17.87(0.37)
                                               Base          50.25(0.00)   51.11(0.00)   50.68(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    67.30(0.00)   58.65(0.00)   0.00(0.00)    31.49(0.00)
    Math Bench.
      S→R


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2   35.95(0.36)   56.36(0.08)   46.15(0.16)   0.00(0.00)    61.39(0.16)   45.74(0.34)   0.00(0.00)    26.78(0.06)
                              In-domain
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   39.06(0.84)   60.64(1.60)   49.85(0.56)   0.00(0.00)    69.24(0.39)   44.19(1.08)   0.00(0.00)    28.36(0.09)
                              Deductive        SFT-OnlyFx2   45.97(0.01)   45.91(0.21)   45.94(0.04)   0.00(0.00)    66.49(0.05)   50.64(0.07)   0.00(0.00)    29.28(0.00)
                              (Effect-Based)   DPO-OnlyFx2   24.75(2.64)   52.68(2.02)   38.72(1.88)   0.00(0.00)    61.52(1.88)   27.44(2.60)   0.00(0.00)    22.24(0.54)
                                               Base          47.35(0.00)   58.82(0.00)   53.08(0.00)   28.77(0.00)   50.11(0.00)   25.69(0.00)   22.44(0.00)   31.76(0.00)
    Math Bench.


                                               SFT-OnlyFx2    7.80(1.14)   64.03(0.05)   45.92(0.38)   19.43(0.17)   51.94(0.03)   20.63(0.24)    7.58(0.36)   24.90(0.17)
      R→T


                              In-domain
                                               DPO-OnlyFx2   24.47(0.41)   24.54(0.18)   24.50(0.08)   29.80(0.21)    7.40(0.44)    1.74(0.06)   23.25(0.64)   15.55(0.04)
                              Deductive        SFT-OnlyFx2   22.84(0.09)   59.90(0.07)   41.37(0.07)   17.28(0.01)   49.03(0.05)   17.49(0.03)    5.84(0.03)   22.41(0.02)
                              (Cause-Based)    DPO-OnlyFx2   16.72(1.55)   22.86(0.27)   19.79(0.70)   24.01(0.63)    6.87(0.16)    1.15(0.01)   15.90(1.59)   11.98(0.27)


                                                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Table 4: Average generalization performance, including SFT-OnlyFx2 and DPO-OnlyFx2.
                                          Base        OnlyF            OnlyFx2                 F&CF (Ours)
    Mode                       Metric
                                          Base     SFT        DPO     SFT    DPO        SFT     DPO     DPO+CCF
                             Avg-ER       1.00     0.82       0.86    0.74    0.76      0.42    0.53        0.48
    In-Domain
                             Avg-IR       1.00     0.73       0.72    0.65    0.66      0.44    0.51        0.47
                             Avg-ER       1.00     1.35       1.75    1.14    1.92      1.17    1.62        2.04
    Common-Cause
                             Avg-IR       1.00     1.30       1.49    1.07    1.67      1.14    1.42        1.80
                             Avg-ER       1.00     0.60       0.71    0.60    0.60      0.53    0.66        0.64
    Common-Effect
                             Avg-IR       1.00     0.49       0.60    0.47    0.49      0.42    0.53        0.50
                             Avg-ER       1.00     0.86       0.79    0.72    0.81      0.60    0.58        0.69
    Inductive
                             Avg-IR       1.00     0.74       0.62    0.58    0.62      0.51    0.50        0.59
                             Avg-ER       1.00     0.70       0.67    0.62    0.43      0.61    0.58        0.57
    Deductive, Cause-B.
                             Avg-IR       1.00     0.62       0.59    0.54    0.40      0.53    0.53        0.51
                             Avg-ER       1.00     0.83       0.83    0.95    0.78      0.90    0.95        0.77
    Deductive, Effect-B.
                             Avg-IR       1.00     0.91       0.87    0.82    0.73      0.93    0.89        0.76


C     F ORMAL D ESCRIPTION OF THE A LGORITHMS IN S ECTION 4

Algorithm 1 Supervised Counterfactual Feedback
 1: Inputs: Demonstrations D = {PXi →Yi }, question templates q, q̃, answer generator H
 2: Output: Dataset D = {q, a} of questions and answer pairs
 3: D ← {}
 4: for PXi →Yi ∈ D, n ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
 5:    u, X, Y, YX ′ ∼ PXi →Yi                                       ▷ Sample a context, cause, and potential effects
 6:    qf ← q(u), qcf ← q̃X ′ (u)                                           ▷ Generate questions given the context
 7:    af ← H(qf , YX ), acf ← H(qcf , YX ′ )                         ▷ Generate answers given the correct outcome
 8:    D ← D ∪ {(qf , af ), (qcf , acf )}
 9: end for


Algorithm 2 Preference-based Counterfactual Feedback
 1: Inputs: Demonstrations D = {PXi →Yi }, question templates q, q̃, answer extractor h, target model ℓ0
 2: Output: Dataset D = {(q, a) ≻ (q ′ , a′ )} of preferences over question-answer pairs
 3: D ← {}
 4: for PXi →Yi ∈ D, n ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
 5:    u, X, Y, YX ′ ∼ PXi →Yi                                       ▷ Sample a context, cause, and potential effects
 6:    qf ← q(u), qcf ← q̃X ′ (u)                                           ▷ Generate questions given the context
 7:    for m ∈ {1, . . . , M } do
 8:       af [m] ∼ ℓ0 (qf ), acf [m] ∼ ℓ0 (qcf )                        ▷ Collect answers from the language model
 9:       ŶX [m] ← h(af [m]), ŶX ′ [m] ← h(acf [m])                     ▷ Extract outcome estimates from answers
10:    end for
11:    for m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, m′ ∈ {1, . . . , M } do
12:       if YX = ŶX [m] ̸= ŶX [m′ ] then
13:           D ← D ∪ {(qf , af [m]) ≻ (qf , af [m′ ])}                                     ▷ Elicit factual preferences
14:       end if
15:       if YX ′ = ŶX ′ [m] ̸= ŶX ′ [m′ ] then
16:           D ← D ∪ {(qcf , acf [m]) ≻ (qcf , acf [m′ ])}                          ▷ Elicit counterfactual preferences
17:       end if
18:    end for
19: end for


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 Preference-based Causal Consistency Feedback
 1: Inputs: Demonstrations D = {PXi →Yi }, question templates q, q̃, answer extractor h, target model ℓ0
 2: Output: Dataset D = {(qf , af , qcf , acf ) ≻ (qf′ , a′f , qcf′ , a′cf )} of preferences over dialogues
 3: D ← {}
 4: for PXi →Yi ∈ D, n ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
 5:    u, X, Y, YX ′ ∼ PXi →Yi                                         ▷ Sample a context, cause, and potential effects
 6:    qf ← q(u), qcf ← q̃X ′ (u)                                                  ▷ Generate questions given the context
 7:    for m ∈ {1, . . . , M } do
 8:       af [m] ∼ ℓ0 (qf ), acf [m] ∼ ℓ0 (qf , af [m], qcf )                ▷ Collect answers from the language model
 9:       ŶX [m] ← h(af [m]), ŷX ′ [m] ← h(acf [m])                         ▷ Extract outcome estimates from answers
10:       r[m] ← R(ŶX [m], ŶX ′ [m]; u), r[m′ ] ← R(ŶX [m′ ], ŶX ′ [m′ ]; u) ▷ Compute consistency scores
11:    end for
12:    for m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, m′ ∈ {1, . . . , M } do
13:       if r[m] ≥ r[m′ ] then
14:           D ← D ∪ {(qf , af [m], qcf , acf [m]) ≻ (qf , af [m′ ], qcf , acf [m′ ])}               ▷ Elicit preferences
15:       end if
16:    end for
17: end for


D     D ETAILS OF THE E XPERIMENTS

In all our experiments, we specifically used the version of Phi-3 mini available on https:
//huggingface.co/microsoft/Phi-3-mini-128k-instruct. This version has a
context length of 128k and 3.8B parameters, and has been fine-tuned for instruction following.
Table 5 summarizes its performance on various reasoning benchmarks in comparison with other
language models, as reported in the Hugging Face repository. Overall, Phi-3 mini demonstrates
competitive performance on these benchmarks.

      Table 5: Reasoning performance of Phi-3-Mini-128K-Ins in comparison to other language models.
Benchmark                  Phi-3-Mini-128K-Ins   Gemma-7B   Mistral-7B   Mixtral-8x7B   Llama-3-8B-Ins   GPT3.5-Turbo-1106
ARC Challenge 10-shot             85.5               78.3        78.6        87.3            82.8                87.4
BoolQ 0-shot                      77.1                66         72.2        76.6            80.9                79.1
MedQA 2-shot                      56.4               49.6         50         62.2            60.5                63.4
OpenBookQA 10-shot                78.8               78.6        79.8        85.8            82.6                 86
PIQA 5-shot                       80.1               78.1        77.7         86             75.7                86.6
GPQA 0-shot                       29.7                2.9         15          6.9            32.4                29.9
Social IQA 5-shot                 74.7               65.5        74.6        75.9            73.9                68.3
TruthfulQA (MC2) 10-shot          64.8               52.1         53         60.1            63.2                67.7
WinoGrande 5-shot                 71.0               55.6        54.2         62              65                 68.8



When collecting datasets, we always sample 100 contexts per causal relationship and generate 10
answers for each question per context (see Table 6). This is with the exception of Section 5.1
where we double the number of contexts for OnlyF and OnlyCF to end up with the same number
question-answer examples as other methods, and with the exception of OnlyFx2 in Appendix B.

Table 6: Summary of Healthcare, Engineering, and Math Benchmarking problems. We report the number of
context samples for each generalization mode if that generalization mode is available within the corresponding
problem domain. While we sample 100 contexts for each causal relationship but some generalization modes
(namely induction and deduction) involve training on more than one causal relationship.
                                                                                    Math Benchmarking
          Generalization Mode              Healthcare       Engineering
                                                                             S→T         S→R         R→T
          In-Domain                               100             100           100         100           100
          Common-Cause                            100             100          (n/a)       (n/a)         (n/a)
          Common-Effect                           100             100          (n/a)       (n/a)         (n/a)
          Inductive                              (n/a)            200           200        (n/a)         (n/a)
          Deductive (Cause-Based)                 400            (n/a)         (n/a)       (n/a)          200
          Deductive (Effect-Based)               (n/a)           (n/a)         (n/a)        200          (n/a)


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In order to obtain error bars, we repeat each experiment five times. The extractor h is implemented
using Llama 3 8B with the following prompt:

           I will give you a question and its answer. Determine whether the meaning of the
           answer is ‘POSITIVE’ or ‘NEGATIVE’. An answer is ‘POSITIVE’ if it contains
           phrases like ‘yes’, ‘it holds’, ‘correct’, ‘true’, or similar affirmations. An answer is
          ‘NEGATIVE’ if it contains phrases like ‘no’, ‘it does not hold’, ‘incorrect’, ‘false’,
           or similar negations. Respond only with one word: ‘POSITIVE’ or ‘NEGATIVE’.
           Question: ‘{q}’ Answer: ‘{a}’ Is the meaning ‘POSITIVE’ or ‘NEGATIVE’?

Similarly, the answer generator H, in the case of supervised counterfactual feedback, is implemented
using Llama 3 8B with the following prompt:

           I will give you a question and the initial word of its answer. Complete the answer
           starting form the provided word. Respond only with the complete answer. Question:
           {q} Answer: {No/Yes}, ...

D.1     R EASONING P ROBLEM : P UZZLE

This hand-crafted puzzle, centered around a candy party, has been used in the experiments conducted
in Section 5.1 and 5.2. Based on different generalization modes, we developed three variations of this
puzzle, each featuring distinct causal structures:
Structure-1: Bipartite Graph
      • Context: Anna, Bill, Cory, and Dave are going to a party, where the host is going to distribute
        candies. Anna will be happy if she gets at least 4 candies. Bill will be happy if he gets at least 6
        candies. Cory will be happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he gets at least 8 candies. Dave
        will be happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he gets at least 10 candies. After distributing
        the candies, Anna gets {NA }, Bill gets {NB }, Cory gets {NC }, and Dave gets {ND }.
      • Factual Question: Is {Anna/Bill/Cory/Dave} happy? Be as concise as possible.
      • Interventional Question: Now, suppose that {Anna/Bill/Cory/Dave} {is/is not} happy
        regardless of the candy distribution. With this assumption, is {Anna/Bill/Cory/Dave} happy?
        Be as concise as possible.
      • Causal Relationships:
                                           A = NA ≥ 4                                                     (12)
                                           B = NB ≥ 6                                                     (13)
                                           C = (A ∧ B) ∨ (NC ≥ 8)                                         (14)
                                           D = (A ∧ B) ∨ (ND ≥ 10)                                        (15)

      • Causal Structure:


Structure-2: Chain with No Direct Effect (NDE)
      • Context: Anna, Bill, and Cory are going to a party, where the host is going to distribute
        candies. Anna will be happy if she gets at least 5 candies. Bill will be happy if Anna is happy
        or if he gets at least 7 candies. Cory will be happy if Bill is happy or if he gets at least 9 candies.
        After distributing the candies, Anna gets {NA }, Bill gets {NB }, and Cory gets {NC }.
      • Factual Question: Is {Anna/Bill/Cory} happy? Be as concise as possible.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Interventional Question: Now, suppose that {Anna/Bill/Cory} {is/is not} happy regardless
        of the candy distribution. With this assumption, is {Anna/Bill/Cory} happy? Be as concise as
        possible.
      • Causal Relationships:
                                               A = NA ≥ 5                                              (16)
                                               B = A ∨ (NB ≥ 7)                                        (17)
                                               C = B ∨ (NC ≥ 9)                                        (18)

      • Causal Structure:


Structure-3: Chain With Direct Effect (WDE)
      • Context: Anna, Bill, and Cory are going to a party, where the host is going to distribute candies.
        Anna will be happy if she gets at least 5 candies. Bill will be happy if Anna is happy or if he
        gets at least 7 candies. Cory will be happy if Annd and Bill are both happy or if he gets at least 9
        candies. After distributing the candies, Anna gets {NA }, Bill gets {NB }, and Cory gets {NC }.
      • Factual Question: Is {Anna/Bill/Cory} happy? Be as concise as possible.
      • Interventional Question: Now, suppose that {Anna/Bill/Cory} {is/is not} happy regardless
        of the candy distribution. With this assumption, is {Anna/Bill/Cory} happy? Be as concise
        as possible.
      • Causal Relationships:
                                           A = NA ≥ 5                                                  (19)
                                           B = A ∨ (NB ≥ 7)                                            (20)
                                           C = (A ∧ B) ∨ (NC ≥ 9)                                      (21)

      • Causal Structure:


D.2     R EAL - WORLD R EASONING P ROBLEM : H EALTHCARE

In Section 5.3 we introduced three real-world problems to validate our experimental findings from
the proof-of-concept puzzle reasoning problem. Here, we offer a more detailed explanation of one of
these real-world reasoning problems—the Healthcare problem.
      • Context: There are four types of breast cancer patients (based on their ERPR and HER2
        indicators): (1) If a patient is ERPR positive and HER2 negative, they are ‘Luminal A’. All
        luminal A patients should undergo surgery. (2) If a patient is ERPR positive and HER2 positive,
        they are ‘Luminal B’. Luminal B patients should undergo surgery if their tumor is smaller than
        1 cm and there is no nodal involvement. Luminal B patients should undergo therapy if their
        tumor is larger than 1 cm or if there is nodal involvement. (3) If a patient is ERPR negative and
        HER2 positive, they are ‘Enriched’. Enriched patients should undergo surgery if their tumor is
        smaller than 1 cm and there is no nodal involvement. Enriched patients should undergo therapy
        only if their tumor is larger than 1 cm (even if there is nodal involvement). (4) If a patient is
        ERPR negative and HER2 negative, they are ‘Basal’. Basal patients should undergo surgery
        if their tumor is smaller than 1 cm and there is no nodal involvement. Basal patients should
        undergo therapy only if their tumor is larger than 1 cm (even if there is nodal involvement).
        Jane is ERPR {negative/positive} and HER2 {negative/positive}. Her tumor is {Tcm } cm and
        there is {nodal involvement/no nodal involvement}.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   • Factual Question: Will she undergo {surgery/therapy}? Be as concise as possible.
   • Possible Interventional Questions: If {Jane had been ERPR positive/Jane had been ERPR neg-
     ative/Jane had been HER2 positive/Jane had been HER2 negative/the tumor had been larger than
     1 cm/the tumor had been smaller than 1 cm/there had been nodal involvement/there had been no
     nodal involvement}, would she have undergone {surgery/therapy}? Be as concise as possible.
   • Causal Relationships:
                                      
                                       (1, 0) with probability 0.50
                                      
                                        (1, 1) with probability 0.15
                                      
                     HERPR , HHER2 ∼                                                        (22)
                                      (0, 1) with probability 0.20
                                      
                                      
                                        (0, 0) with probability 0.15
                                        Luminal A if HERPR ∧ ¬HHER2
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        Luminal B if HERPR ∧ HHER2
                                      
                              Ctype ∼                                                       (23)
                                      
                                       Enriched    if ¬HERPR ∧ HHER2
                                      
                                        Basal       if ¬HERPR ∧ ¬HHER2
                                        N (µ = 3.07, σ = 2.22) if Luminal A
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                        N (µ = 2.96, σ = 1.45) if Luminal B
                                      
                               Tcm ∼                                                        (24)
                                      
                                       N (µ = 2.42, σ = 1.03) if Enriched
                                      
                                        N (µ = 3.32, σ = 3.64) if Basal
                                   T = (Tcm ≥ 1)                                            (25)
                                         B(p = 86/251) if Luminal A
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                         B(p = 35/79)    if Luminal B
                                       
                                  N∼                                                        (26)
                                       
                                        B(p = 18/32)    if Enriched
                                       
                                         B(p = 41/99)    if Basal
                                       
                                       1           if Luminal A
                             Ysurgery = ¬T ∧ ¬N if Luminal B                                (27)
                                         ¬T ∧ ¬N otherwise
                                       
                                       
                                       0        if Luminal A
                             Ytherapy = T ∨ N if Luminal B                                  (28)
                                       
                                         T       otherwise

   • Causal Structure and In-domain Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


   • Causal Structure and Common-Cause Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Causal Structure and Common-Effect Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Cause-Based Deduction Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


D.3     R EAL -W ORLD R EASONING P ROBLEM : E NGINEERING

In Section 5.3 we introduced three real-world problems to validate our experimental findings from
the proof-of-concept puzzle reasoning problem. Here, we offer a more detailed explanation of one of
these real-world reasoning problems—the Engineering problem.
      • Context: The type of fault on a transmission line is determined through three factors X, Y, and
        Z. These factors are ‘close to zero’ if they are less than 0.1. (1) If only one of the factors is
        close to zero, it is a line-to-line fault. When there is a line-to-line fault, it is BC fault if factor X
        is close to zero, AC fault if factor Y is close to zero, and AB fault if factor Z is close to zero.
        (2) If exactly two of the factors are close to zero, it is a line-to-ground fault. When there is a
        line-to-ground fault, it is AG fault if factors Y and Z are both close to zero, BG fault if factors
        X and Z are both close to zero, and CG fault if factors X and Y are both close to zero. For
        some faulty transmission line, X = X, Y = Y, and Z = Z.
      • Possible Factual Question: {Is there a line-to-line/line-to-ground fault? / Is the fault type
        BC/AC/AB/AG/BG/CG?} Be as concise as possible.
      • Possible Interventional Questions: If factor X/Y/Z had been/had not been close to zero,
        {would there have been a line-to-line/line-to-ground fault? / would the fault have been type
        BC/AC/AB/AG/BG/CG}? Be as concise as possible.
      • Causal Relationships:
            X ∼ N (µ = X̄, σ = 0.1)                                                                         (29)
            Y ∼ N (µ = Ȳ , σ = 0.1)                                                                        (30)
            Z ∼ N (µ = Z̄, σ = 0.1)                                                                         (31)
          X0 = (X < 0.1)                                                                                    (32)
           Y0 = (Y < 0.1)                                                                                   (33)
           Z0 = (Z < 0.1)                                                                                   (34)
          LL = (X0 ∧ ¬Y0 ∧ ¬Z0 ) ∨ (¬X0 ∧ Y0 ∧ ¬Z0 ) ∨ (¬X0 ∧ ¬Y0 ∧ Z0 )                                    (35)
          LG = (¬X0 ∧ Y0 ∧ Z0 ) ∨ (X0 ∧ ¬Y0 ∧ Z0 ) ∨ (X0 ∧ Y0 ∧ ¬Z0 ) ∨ (X0 ∧ Y0 ∧ Z0 )                     (36)
          BC = LL ∧ X0                                                                                      (37)
          AC = LL ∧ Y0                                                                                      (38)
          AB = LL ∧ Z0                                                                                      (39)


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          AG = LG ∧ Y0 ∧ Z0                                                                         (40)
          BG = LG ∧ X0 ∧ Z0                                                                         (41)
          CG = LG ∧ X0 ∧ Y0                                                                         (42)

        where X̄, Ȳ , and C̄ are drawn randomly from the values reported in Reddy et al. (2016).
      • Causal Structure and In-domain Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Common-Cause Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Common-Effect Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Induction Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


D.4     R EAL -W ORLD R EASONING P ROBLEM : M ATH B ENCHMARKING

In Section 5.3 we introduced three real-world problems to validate our experimental findings from
the proof-of-concept puzzle reasoning problem. Here, we offer a more detailed explanation of one of
these real-world reasoning problems—the Math Benchmarking problem.
      • Context: Carla is downloading a {Nsize } GB file. Normally she can download 2 GB/minute,
        but in 100 minutes, Windows will force a restart to install updates, which takes {Nminutes }
        minutes. After the restart, Carla can resume her download.
      • Possible Factual Question: {Will Windows force a restart before the download is com-
        plete? / Will the download take longer than 120 minutes?} Be as concise as possible.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      • Possible Interventional Questions: If {she were downloading a file twice the size / Windows
        had forced a restart before the download was complete / Windows had not forced a restart before
        the download was complete}, would {Windows have forced a restart before the download was
        complete? / the download have taken longer than 120 minutes?} Be as concise as possible.
      • Causal Relationships:
                          Nsize ∼ U(50, 300)                                                      (43)
                          Nminutes ∼ U(10, 30)                                                    (44)
                          S ∼ B(p = 0.5)                                                          (45)
                          Ndownload time = [Nsize ∗ 2 ∗ S + Nsize (1 − S)]/2                      (46)
                          R = (Ndownload time ≥ 100)                                              (47)
                          T = (Ndownload time + R ∗ Nminutes ) ≥ 120)                             (48)
      • Causal Structure and Induction Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Deduction Cause-Based Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


      • Causal Structure and Deduction Effect-Based Fine-tune/Evaluate Relations:


E     M ETHODS B ESIDES F INE -T UNING
E.1     C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPTING

Responses of a language model can be improved in different ways, not just through fine-tuning. For
instance, one could pursue prompt engineering instead. When eliciting reasoning, our focus has been
fine-tuning while chain-of-thought prompting is a form of prompt engineering. These two approaches
mainly differ in terms of what point they intervene on: Prompt engineering modifies the inputs passed
to the language model whereas fine-tuning modifies the language model itself. Importantly, this
means that the use of these two techniques are largely orthogonal to each other and definitely not
mutually exclusive. In our case, chain-of-thought prompting is not a competing method against
ours but rather a separate avenue for further improvement that could be pursued in conjunction with
fine-tuning. Because of this, we did not consider it as a baseline in our experiments.


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notably, when used to elicit reasoning, chain-of-thought prompting would be subject to the same
evaluation challenge that our fine-tuning approach faces: Examples provided in a chain-of-thought
prompt might lead to more accurate answers for “in-domain” questions, however, this does not mean
the examples was successful in eliciting reasoning unless the accuracy generalizes to new problems
(that require forming novel chains using the same concepts).

E.2   F ORMAL R EPRESENTATIONS AND D EDICATED S OLVERS

Since the reasoning problems we consider are straightforward to solve once translated into a formal
representation (like the structural equations in Appendix D), an alternative solution strategy could
be to extract such formal representations from the natural language descriptions of the problem
and rely on dedicated solvers to compute outcomes in an exact manner. However, the extraction of
formal representations would remain a bottleneck for performance in such a strategy as off-the-shelf
language models are not effective at this task. For instance, OpenMathInstruct-1 (Toshniwal et al.,
2024) achieves an accuracy of 84.6% on GSM8K by generating “code-interpreter” solutions, which
list the computations performed to arrive at the final answer in a formal language. However, this
required fine-tuning CodeLlama-70B to generate responses in the style of these code-interpreter
solutions using a custom dataset with 18 million problem-to-code examples.
In short, although extracting formal representations (like code-interpreter solutions) could enable
exact computation of answers thereafter, fine-tuning a language model to accurately extract such
representations is likely a more complex task than fine-tuning the model to provide direct answers.
This challenge is especially pronounced for small language models like Phi-3 mini, which has 3.8B
parameters compared to the 70B of OpenMathInstruct-1. This makes our approach even more suited
to the domain of small language models.
Additionally, our setting poses an even further complication for the formal-representation route: The
reasoning problems we consider are not simple forward computations as in math problems but rather
involve causal systems with multiple possible interventions, each intervention altering the forward
computation necessary to obtain the final answer. In order to highlight all these challenges, we report
a qualitative evaluation of Phi-3 mini in terms of its ability to extract formal representations of causal
scenarios. We designed the following one-shot prompt using the problem in Figure 5 as an example.
We then used this prompt to extract structural equations for our other problem domains: Healthcare,
Engineering, and Math Benchmarking.

         I want you to generate structural equations from a causal scenario described in
         English. Respond only with the structural equations. Here is an example:
         Scenario:
         Anna, Bill, Cory, and Dave are going to a party, where the host is going to distribute
         candies. Anna will be happy if she gets at least 4 candies. Bill will be happy if he
         gets at least 6 candies. Cory will be happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he
         gets at least 8 candies. Dave will be happy if Anna and Bill are both happy or if he
         gets at least 10 candies.
         Structural Equations:
         NA: The number of candies Anna gets
         NB: The number of candies Bill gets
         NC: The number of candies Cory gets
         ND: The number of candies Dave gets
         HA: Happiness of Anna
         HB: Happiness of Bill
         HC: Happiness of Cory
         HD: Happiness of Dave
         HA = (NA >= 4)
         HB = (NB >= 6)
         HC = (HA and HB) or (NC >= 8)
         HD = (HA and HB) or (ND >= 10)
         Scenario:
         {Test Scenario}
         Structural Equations:


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Results for Healthcare.
Test scenario:

         There are four types of breast cancer patients (based on their ERPR and HER2
         indicators): (1) If a patient is ERPR positive and HER2 negative, they are ’Luminal
         A’. All luminal A patients should undergo surgery. (2) If a patient is ERPR positive
         and HER2 positive, they are ’Luminal B’. Luminal B patients should undergo
         surgery if their tumor is smaller than 1 cm and there is no nodal involvement.
         Luminal B patients should undergo therapy if their tumor is larger than 1 cm or if
         there is nodal involvement. (3) If a patient is ERPR negative and HER2 positive,
         they are ’Enriched’. Enriched patients should undergo surgery if their tumor is
         smaller than 1 cm and there is no nodal involvement. Enriched patients should
         undergo therapy only if their tumor is larger than 1 cm (even if there is nodal
         involvement). (4) If a patient is ERPR negative and HER2 negative, they are
         ’Basal’. Basal patients should undergo surgery if their tumor is smaller than 1 cm
         and there is no nodal involvement. Basal patients should undergo therapy only if
         their tumor is larger than 1 cm (even if there is nodal involvement).

Response of Phi-3 mini:

         NA: ERPR status of the patient
         NH: HER2 status of the patient
         TA: Tumor size of the patient
         TN: Nodal involvement of the patient
         SA: Surgery for the patient
         TH: Therapy for the patient
         LA: Luminal A patient
         LB: Luminal B patient
         EN: Enriched patient
         B: Basal patient
         SA = (NA = 'ERPR positive'and NH = 'HER2 negative'and TA <1 cm and TN =
         'No nodal involvement')
         LB = (NA = 'ERPR positive'and NH = 'HER2 positive'and (TA <1 cm and TN =
         'No nodal involvement'or TA >1 cm or TN = 'Nodal involvement'))
         EN = (NA = 'ERPR negative'and NH = 'HER2 positive'and (TA <1 cm and TN =
         'No nodal involvement'or TA >1 cm))
         B = (NA = 'ERPR negative'and NH = 'HER2 negative'and (TA <1 cm and TN =
         'No nodal involvement'or TA >1 cm))
         LA = (NA = 'ERPR positive'and NH = 'HER2 negative')
         LB = (NA = 'ERPR positive'and NH = 'HER2 positive')
         EN = (NA = 'ERPR negative'and NH = 'HER2 positive')
         B = (NA = 'ERPR negative'and NH = 'HER2 negative')
         SA = (LA or LB or EN or B)
         TH = (not SA)

Beyond whether it is accurate or not, this response lacks a clear formal interpretation, as many of the
variables are defined multiple times (causing ambiguity).
Results for Engineering.
Test scenario:

         The type of fault on a transmission line is determined through three factors X, Y,
         and Z. These factors are ’close to zero’ if they are less than 0.1. (1) If only one
         of the factors is close to zero, it is a line-to-line fault. When there is a line-to-line
         fault, it is BC fault if factor X is close to zero, AC fault if factor Y is close to zero,
         and AB fault if factor Z is close to zero. (2) If exactly two of the factors are close
         to zero, it is a line-to-ground fault. When there is a line-to-ground fault, it is AG
         fault if factors Y and Z are both close to zero, BG fault if factors X and Z are both
         close to zero, and CG fault if factors X and Y are both close to zero.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Response of Phi-3 mini:

         XC = (X <0.1) and (Y >= 0.1) and (Z >= 0.1)
         YC = (X >= 0.1) and (Y <0.1) and (Z >= 0.1)
         ZC = (X >= 0.1) and (Y >= 0.1) and (Z <0.1)
         BC fault = XC
         AC fault = YC
         AB fault = ZC
         YZ close = (Y <0.1) and (Z <0.1)
         XZ close = (X <0.1) and (Z <0.1)
         XY close = (X <0.1) and (Y <0.1)
         AG fault = YZ close
         BG fault = XZ close
         CG fault = XY close

This response is accurate except that it marginalizes out the general fault types, namely line-to-line
and line-to-ground. While it is possible to compute factual values for specific fault types using these
equations, the same is not true for the general fault types. Additionally, this limitation prevents us
from performing any interventions on the general fault types.
Results for Math Benchmarking.
Test scenario:

         Carla is downloading a 250 GB file. Normally she can download 2 GB/minute,
         but in 100 minutes, Windows will force a restart to install updates, which takes 20
         minutes. After the restart, Carla can resume her download. Consider how long it
         will take to download the file.

Response of Phi-3-Mini:

         NA: The amount of data Carla downloads before the restart
         NR: The amount of data Carla downloads after the restart
         T: Total time to download the file
         NA = 2 GB/minute * 100 minutes
         NR = (250 GB - NA) / 2 GB/minute
         T = 100 minutes + 20 minutes + NR/2 minutes

This response best underlines the additional challenges involved in extracting causal equations. First
of all, the calculations provided in the response are not entirely accurate, even for the specific instance
of the scenario represented. Setting aside these small inaccuracies, the response assumes that a
restart will necessarily occur. With these equations, it is not possible to reason about outcomes
under interventions such as “What if Windows had not forced a restart?” or “What if Carla had
been downloading a file half the size?”—both of which are types of interventions considered in our
experiments. Even if we were to modify these equations to explicitly include whether a restart occurs
or not as a variable, it may not always be possible to anticipate what other kinds of interventions
will be queried. For instance, these equations also fail to account for potential interventions on the
download speed.

F    D ISAMBIGUATION OF “G ENERALIZATION ”

Generalizing from a few examples to a larger input space, potentially involving never-seen-before
inputs as in the case of 2-4 digit multiplication to 5-7 digit multiplication, is a useful and non-trivial
property for a language model to have. This type of generalization remains a challenge within what
we term the “in-domain” problem. In fact, the results in Figure 5 show how DPO+CCF outperforms
other baselines in this regard.
While there are many notions of generalization, what we argue is that reasoning fundamentally
involves breaking a problem down to its basic components and synthesizing them in novel ways
that enable generalization to entirely new problems. In a causal graph, this may correspond to an


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


understanding of individual edge relations in a way that would enable one to make estimations for
any composite relationship. This is the type of generalization we are interested in. Here, sample
efficiency in learning to solve a fixed problem would not necessarily be indicative of reasoning ability.


G     A N I NTUITIVE E XPLANATION OF O UR I NCONSISTENCY R ATES

An alternative interpretation of the inconsistency rates we introduce is to frame reasoning about
necessity or sufficiency as a classification problem. For instance, focusing on necessity, each context
variable U , along with the cause X and the potential effect Y, YX ′ induced by U , needs to be assigned
to one of three classes:
 (i) N: The cause and the effect both occurred together, and the cause was necessary for the effect to
     occur, meaning the effect would not have occurred otherwise if the cause was prevented. In a
     case like this, one might say “For the observed effect, the cause was a necessary condition.”
(ii) N′ : The cause and the effect both occurred together, but the cause was not necessary for the effect
     to occur, meaning the effect would have occurred anyways even if the cause was prevented. In a
     case like this, one might say “For the observed effect, the cause was not a necessary condition.”
(iii) ∅: It is not meaningful to talk about necessity as either the cause or the effect did not occur.
      Note that the previous cases take the occurrence of the cause and the effect as a given, and make
      statements about what would have happened to the effect if the cause were to be prevented. This
      is consistent with Pearl’s definition of PN as a conditional probability with the condition being
      X = x and Y = y.
According to the underlying causal model, each context has a corresponding ground-truth “label”
as defined in Equation 6 Given a language model, its answers provide estimates for the unknown
potential outcomes, which in turn imply a prediction of this ground-truth “label”. The necessity
inconsistency rate (N-IR) is the error rate for this classification task (how often the predicted label
differs from the ground-truth label).


H     F URTHER A NALYSIS OF T HE G ENERALIZATION R ESULTS

In this section, we expand upon our analysis in Section 5.2, giving more detailed explanations as well
as share new observations.
In Figure 7a, we see that common-effect generalization leads to an asymmetric improvement in N-IR
and S-IR. This is because, in common-effect generalization, the effect of interest is fixed between
training and testing, hence the factual questions regarding this fixed effect remain the same as well
(factual questions do not depend on the cause as there are no interventions involved). Meanwhile, the
cause that is being intervened on changes, hence the fine-tuned model now needs to answer a different
set of counterfactual questions during test time than the ones seen during training time. Therefore, we
would expect common-effect generalization to be more challenging in terms of CF-ER as opposed to
F-ER. Since in our constructed examples, causes tend to be sufficient for effects rather than necessary,
performing well in terms of S-iR is more dependent on counterfactual question answering while N-IR
is more dependent on factual question answering. Most contexts can be dismissed as irrelevant as
far as necessity is concerned (i.e. N = ∅) by estimating the factual outcome to be negative, whereas
determining sufficiency requires determining whether the counterfactual outcome is positive or it is
also negative. Therefore, we see a greater improvement in terms of N-IR.
Across all generalization modes presented in Figure 7, by far the most challenging one is cause-based
deduction with direct effect (“WDE”), where no method strictly improves the base model. This is
due to the problem structure: When A affects C both directly as well as indirectly through B, it is
not possible to separate the two types of effects without seeing any interventions on the intermediary
B. Notice how this stops being an issue for cause-based deduction with no direct effect (“NDE”).
Interestingly, we still see an improvement in terms of N-IR (at the cost of worse performance in
S-IR). This is similar to the previous example: Seeing demonstrations for A → C at least improves
the model’s ability to answer factual questions regarding C, which translates to better F-ER when
reasoning about B → C, which in turn translates to better N-IR as before (B is sufficient for C hence


                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


most contexts can readily be dismissed as irrelevant as far as necessity is concerned just by estimating
the factual outcome correctly).
Finally, when there is no direct effect, we see that cause-based deduction and effect-based deduction
are similarly effective. However, cause-based deduction is slightly better in terms of S-IR whereas
effect-based deduction is slightly better in terms of N-IR. This is again the result of each variable
being sufficient for the next variable. When reasoning about B → C (cause-based deduction),
determining sufficiency requires estimating the outcome under the intervention B = 0 → 1 when
B = 0. Since A is sufficient for B, this intervention can indirectly be performed through the
intervention A = 0 → 1. However, determining sufficiency requires estimating the outcome under
the intervention B = 1 → 0 when B = 1. This can no longer be achieved consistently through A (it
could still be the case that B = 1 even after the intervention A = 1 → 0). Therefore, S-IR is the
easier metric for cause-based deduction. A similar thing happens when reasoning about A → B
(effect-based deduction). Determining necessity requires observing B = 1 → 0 if we perform the
intervention A = 1 → 0. After performing A = 1 → 0, if we observe C = 1 → 0 instead, we can
still conclude this must be because B = 1 → 0 as B is sufficient for C (i.e. B =⇒ C). However,
determining sufficiency requires observing B = 0 → 1 after the intervention A = 0 → 1. Here, it
can already be the case that C = 1 as B is not a necessary condition for B, preventing us to reason
about B indirectly through C.

I     F URTHER D ISCUSSION
I.1   W HAT TO D O W HEN C AUSES AND E FFECTS A RE N ON -B INARY ?

The math benchmarking domain (detailed in Appendix D.4) is a good example of how non-binary
causes and effects can be handled within our formulation. In this domain, we consider a particular
math problem within the GSM8K dataset, which is about Carla downloading a file with a certain
size (denote it with NX ) and how long it would take to download this file in minutes (denote it with
NY ). Note that both of these variables would be non-binary. As an effect, we consider whether the
download takes longer than 120 minutes, that is Y = 1 if NY > 120 and Y = 0 otherwise. As an
intervention, we consider what would have happened if Carla was downloading a file that is twice the
size. For this, we defined X such that X = 1 if the intervention has occurred and X = 0 if it has not;
                                                 ′
and the post-intervention file size is given by NX = X · (2NX ) + (1 − X) · NX .
Generally, when interested in a non-binary outcome NY , one can consider binary events dependent
on that outcome instead. Similarly, when interested in interventions on a non-binary target NX ,
one can decide on a particular intervention and let the cause X be the binary indicator of whether
that intervention has occurred or not. We mainly focused on binary causes and effects because the
concepts of necessity and sufficiency are the most meaningful for binary variables. However, it is
worth mentioning there is also work that aims to extend these concepts to categorical variables (Li
and Pearl, 2024).

I.2   D EFINING FALSE N ECESSITY AND FALSE S UFFICIENCY

We can breakdown necessity and sufficiency inconsistency rates in to finer components such as
false necessity and false sufficiency. In our framework, false necessity and false sufficiency can
be interpreted as the events N̂ = N ∧ N =  ̸ N and Ŝ = S ∧ S ̸= S respectively. However, notice
that both of these events are the same event as Ŷ ̸= Y ∨ ŶX ′ ̸= YX ′ , that is either a factual or a
counterfactual error has been made. These failures are already covered by factual and counterfactual
error rates.
Overall, the individual inconsistency rates we introduce, N-IR, S-IR, AN-IR, and AS-IR, together with
the individual error rates, F-ER and CF-ER, are already a finer breakdown of aggregated metrics like
Avg-IR and Avg-ER, both of which represent general accuracy (the former accounts for correlations
between factual and counterfactual errors whereas the latter looks at them independently).


                                                  29
