Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ATENT ACTION P RETRAINING F ROM V IDEOS
 Seonghyeon Ye1∗† Joel Jang2∗‡
 Byeongguk Jeon1 Sejune Joo1 Jianwei Yang3 Baolin Peng3 Ajay Mandlekar4
 Reuben Tan3 Yu-Wei Chao4 Yuchen Lin5 Lars Liden3
 Kimin Lee1§ Jianfeng Gao3§ Luke Zettlemoyer2§ Dieter Fox2,4§ Minjoon Seo1§
 1
     KAIST 2 University of Washington           3
                                                    Microsoft Research
 4
     NVIDIA 5 Allen Institute for AI



                                                A BSTRACT

           We introduce Latent Action Pretraining, the first unsupervised method for pre-
           training Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models without ground-truth robot ac-
           tion labels. Existing Vision-Language-Action models require action labels typ-
           ically collected by human teleoperators during pretraining, which significantly
           limits possible data sources and scale. In this work, we propose a method to learn
           from internet-scale videos that do not have robot action labels. We first train an
           action quantization model leveraging VQ-VAE-based objective to learn discrete
           latent actions between image frames, then pretrain a latent VLA model to predict
           these latent actions from observations and task descriptions, and finally finetune
           the VLA on small-scale robot manipulation data to map from latent to robot ac-
           tions. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
           existing techniques that train robot manipulation policies from large-scale videos.
           Furthermore, it outperforms the state-of-the-art VLA model trained with robotic
           action labels on real-world manipulation tasks that require language conditioning,
           generalization to unseen objects, and semantic generalization to unseen instruc-
           tions. Training only on human manipulation videos also shows positive transfer,
           opening up the potential for leveraging web-scale data for robotics foundation
           models. We will open-source the model checkpoints and code at latentactionpre-
           training.github.io.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Vision-Language-Action Models (VLA) for robotics (Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024) are
trained by aligning large language models with vision encoders, and then finetuning it on on diverse
robot datasets (Collaboration et al., 2023); this enables generalization to novel instructions, unseen
objects, and distribution shifts (Michał et al., 2024). However, diverse real-world robot datasets
mostly require human teleoperation, which makes scaling difficult. Internet video data, on the other
hand, offers abundant examples of human behavior and physical interactions at scale, presenting a
promising approach to overcome the limitations of small, specialized robotic datasets (Yang et al.,
2024c). However, it is challenging to learn from internet video data for two major challenges:
first, much of the raw data on the web lacks explicit action labels; second, the data distribution
from the web is fundamentally different from the embodiments and environments of typical robotic
systems (McCarthy et al., 2024). We propose Latent Action Pretraining, an unsupervised approach
to pretraining a robotic foundation model without the need for ground-truth robot action labels
(Figure 1).
Latent Action Pretraining consists of two models that are learned sequentially, followed by a fine-
tuning stage to map the latent actions to real robot actions. In the first pretraining stage, we use a
     ∗
       Denotes equal contribution.
     †
       Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
     ‡
       Work done during internship at NVIDIA.
     §
       Denotes equal advising.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Large-Scale Robot Datasets                      Internet-scale Video Data

                           Expensive to collect  ❌              Widely available  ✅
                         Requires robot hardware ❌            Human     robot gap ❌          ✅
                          Contains robot actions ✅             No robot actions   ❌
                                                                                      LAPA   ✅


                                                                       🤖
                                                           Robotic Foundation Model


Figure 1: Problem Formulation. We investigate building a generalist robotic foundation model from human
motion videos without action labels.

VQ-VAE-based objective (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) to learn quantized latent actions between raw
image frames. Analogous to Byte Pair Encoding (Sennrich et al., 2016) used for language modeling,
this can be seen as learning to tokenize atomic actions without requiring predefined action priors
(e.g., end-effector positions, joint positions). In the second stage, we perform behavior cloning by
pretraining a Vision-Language Model to predict latent actions derived from the first stage based
on video observations and task descriptions. Finally, we fine-tune the model on a small-scale robot
manipulation dataset with robot actions to learn the mapping from the latent actions to robot actions.
In this work, we refer to the resulting VLA models as LAPA.
We measure performance on diverse manipulation videos, including existing robot video datasets
(without utilizing ground-truth actions) and human manipulation datasets. Our results show that the
proposed method significantly outperforms baseline methods of training manipulation policies with-
out ground-truth action labels, particularly in cross-environment and cross-embodiment scenarios.
Furthermore, on real-world manipulation tasks, our method leads to a new monolithic VLA model,
outperforming O PEN VLA, the current state-of-the-art model Vision Language Action (VLA) model
trained on a diverse mixture of datasets with ground-truth actions. These results demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of learning unified quantized latent action representations across diverse robotic datasets
featuring different embodiments (shown in Section 5.2). We further demonstrate that Latent Action
Pretraining remains effective even when pretrained on only human manipulation video, outperform-
ing models pretrained on Bridgev2 (Walke et al., 2023), one of the largest open-sourced robotic
datasets. We observe that LAPA effectively captures environment-centric actions, including object
and camera movements, which could be beneficial for downstream tasks like navigation or dynamic,
non-quasistatic tasks. We expect that our method opens up the potential for building foundation
models for robotics by pretraining on much larger web-scale video data.
We summarize our main contributions and findings below:

       • We propose Latent Action Pretraining, an unsupervised approach to pretraining a robotic
         foundation model to encode robotic skills from web-scale video data.
       • Experiments on simulation and real-world robot tasks show that our method not only sig-
         nificantly outperforms baseline methods for training robotic manipulation policies that are
         pretrained without using ground truth action labels, but also leads to a VLA model that
         outperforms the current state-of-the-art VLA model trained with ground-truth actions (by
         +6.22%), while achieving over 30x greater pretraining efficiency.
       • We qualitatively demonstrate that it is possible to use LAPA as the action prediction model
         and decoder of the latent action quantization model as the world model by predicting fu-
         ture frames conditioned on the current observation and the latent action predicted by LAPA,
         effectively building a neural simulation capable of performing closed-loop evaluations en-
         tirely through neural inference.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Vision-Language-Action Models Vision-Language Models (VLMs), trained on large-scale inter-
net datasets of text, images, and videos, have shown strong capabilities in understanding and gen-
erating both text and multimodal data (Liu et al., 2023; Team, 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Abdin et al.,
2024). Leveraging this, recent advancements have introduced monolithic Vision-Language-Action
Models (VLAs), which extend VLMs by fine-tuning them with robotic action data for enhanced
physical grounding (Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Team et al., 2024; Collaboration et al.,


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    x1                                           x2         x1

                 Encoder     z1        Decoder                           VLM         z1                          LAPA   a1

    x2                     0 1 2 3 4                    Knock down
                                                                                          Pick up the milk and
                                                      the water bottle
                   Codebook of Latent Actions                                               put it in the sink

           1. Latent Action Quantization                         2. Latent Pretraining


                                  Latent Action Pretraining                                            Action Finetuning

Figure 2: Overview of Latent Action Pretraining. (1) Latent Action Quantization: We first learn discrete
latent actions in a fully unsupervised manner using the VQ-VAE objective (Detail in Figure 8). (2) Latent
Pretraining: The VLM is trained to predict latent actions, essentially performing behavior cloning. After
pretraining, we finetune LAPA on a small set of action-labeled trajectories to map the latent space to the end
effector delta action space.


2023). Incorporating auxiliary objectives, such as visual traces (Niu et al., 2024), language rea-
soning paths (Michał et al., 2024), or creating conversational-style instruction datasets from robot
trajectories (Li et al., 2024a), have further improved VLA performance. However, these methods
remain dependent on labeled action data, limiting scalability. In contrast, our approach reduces
reliance on human-teleoperated data by requiring labeled actions only for fine-tuning.


Training Robot Policies From Videos Videos offer rich data for robot learning, but most lack
action labels (McCarthy et al., 2024). Related work pretrains a vision encoder on egocentric human
videos (Grauman et al., 2022) to improve visual representations (Nair et al., 2022; Dasari et al.,
2023), or video generative models to generate future robot trajectories (Wu et al., 2024; Liang et al.,
2024; He et al., 2024). Methods also extract diverse features from human videos such as interac-
tions (Zeng et al., 2024), affordances (Bahl et al., 2023; Kannan et al., 2023; Srirama et al., 2024;
Shaw et al., 2023), or visual traces (Wen et al., 2023; Bharadhwaj et al., 2024b). Some perform
retargeting of human motions to robot actions to create robotic policies that involve hand pose es-
timators (Wang et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; Shaw et al., 2023; Bharadhwaj et al., 2023; Ye et al.,
2023; Qin et al., 2022) or motion capture systems (Yang et al., 2024a); these policies are usually
task-specific or need aligned data human to robot data in the same environment. Finally, some train
inverse dynamics models (IDMs), optical flow, or reinforcement learning models that predict actions
from future state rollouts generated by world models (Du et al., 2023; Ko et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024b; Bharadhwaj et al., 2024a) or use the IDM for active learning (Baker et al., 2022).


Latent Actions Previous works have employed latent actions across diverse scenarios. GE-
NIE (Bruce et al., 2024) maps user inputs (ground-truth actions) to a latent space, allowing gen-
erative models to create interactive environments. We adopt a similar latent action model but apply
it to label actionless data for training a monolithic VLA to solve robotic tasks. Similarly, Edwards
et al. (2018) and Schmidt & Jiang (2024) use latent actions to pretrain and fine-tune policies for
video games (Cobbe et al., 2019). In contrast, we focus on learning latent actions from real-world
human motions for more complex, continuous robotic tasks. Unlike other work that leverages latent
actions by converting ground-truth actions into latent to capture better multimodality and task se-
mantics Lynch et al. (2020); Jiang et al. (2023); Lee et al. (2024); Mete et al. (2024), our approach
derives latent actions directly from observations, not ground-truth actions.



3        LAPA: L ATENT ACTION P RETRAINING FOR GENERAL ACTION MODELS

Latent Action Pretraining consists of two models that are learned sequentially: Latent Action Quan-
tization and Latent Pretraining. The overall process is illustrated in Figure 2. Note that we use the
same pretraining dataset for Latent Action Quantization and Latent Pretraining.


                                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1   L ATENT ACTION Q UANTIZATION

To learn latent actions in a fully unsupervised manner, we train a latent action quantization model
following Bruce et al. (2024) with a few modifications. Our latent action quantization model is
an encoder-decoder architecture where the encoder takes the current frame xt and the future frame
xt+H of a video with a fixed window size H and outputs the latent action zt 1 . The decoder is
trained to take the latent action zt and xt and reconstruct xt+H . Unlike Bruce et al. (2024), we
use cross attention to attend zt given xt instead of additive embedding, which empirically leads
to capturing more semantically meaningful latent actions. Our quantization model is a variant of
C-ViViT tokenizer (Villegas et al., 2023) where the encoder includes both spatial and temporal
transformer while the decoder only contains spatial transformer since our model uses only two image
frames as input.
Our latent action quantization training model is based on the VQ-VAE objective (van den Oord et al.,
2017), where the nearest quantized representation from the continuous embedding is retrieved from
an embedding space where each embedding corresponds to a codebook. The VQ-VAE objective
enables the latent action zt to be discrete tokens (codebooks), making it easy for VLMs to predict
zt . The latent action is represented using s sequences from |C| codebook vocabulary space. The
sequence length s is designated by the kernel size, stride and padding value of a CNN network which
is used right before the vector quantization process. To avoid gradient collapse often observed
in VQ-VAE, we utilize NSVQ (Vali & Bäckström, 2022) which replaces the vector quantization
error to a product of original error and a normalized noise vector. We also apply stop gradient to
the patch embedding of the frame xt during decoding to avoid representation collapse. Codebook
replacement technique from NSVQ is applied during early training steps to maximize codebook
utilization. Further model and training details are provided in Appendix A.
We utilize the encoder of our latent action quantization model as an inverse dynamics model in la-
tent pretraining and the decoder for generating neural-based closed-loop rollouts. Unlike previous
works (Bruce et al., 2024; Valevski et al., 2024), our approach trains both a world model that gen-
erates rollouts from the latent actions and a policy model that produces these latent actions through
Latent Pretraining.


3.2   L ATENT P RETRAINING

We use the encoder of the latent action quantization model as an inverse dynamics model to label
all frames xt , given frame xt+1 , with latent action zt . Then, we do action pretraining by using
a pretrained VLM to predict the zt given the language instruction of a video clip and the current
image xt . Instead of using the existing language model head of the VLM, we attach a separate
latent action head (a single MLP layer) of vocab size |C|. By default, we freeze only the vision
encoder and unfreeze the language model during training. Since latent pretraining does not rely on
ground truth actions, it opens the possibility of using any type of raw video paired with language
instructions. Also, in contrast to traditional action granularity used in robotics (e.g. end-effector
positions, joint positions, joint torques, etc.), our approach does not require any priors about the
action hierarchy/granularity and is learned in an end-to-end manner simply by being optimized to
best capture the ‘delta’ of consecutive observations in a given video dataset. We broadly refer to
models having gone through latent pretraining as LAPA.


3.3   ACTION F INETUNING

VLAs that are pretrained to predict latent actions are not directly executable on real-world robots
since latent actions are not actual delta end-effector actions or joint actions. To map latent actions to
actual robot actions, we finetune LAPA on a small set of labeled trajectories that contain ground truth
actions (delta end-effector). For action prediction, we discretize the continuous action space for each
dimension of the robot so that the number of data points allocated for each bin is equal following
Kim et al. (2024); Brohan et al. (2023). We discard the latent action head (a single MLP layer) and

    1
      Although Bruce et al. (2024) conditioned on multiple past observations, we exclude previous frames due
to computational constraints. We leave prepending past observations as future work.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


replace it with a new action head to generate ground truth actions.2 . As with latent pretraining, we
freeze the vision encoder and unfreeze all of the parameters of the underlying language model.3

4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of Latent Action Pretraining as a general-purpose
pretaining method. Specifically, we focus on answering the following questions: Q1. How does
LAPA perform when there are cross-task, cross-environment, and cross-embodiment gaps between
pretaining and fine-tuning? Q2. Can LAPA learn superior priors compared to using ground-truth
actions during pretraining in a multi-embodiment setting? Q3. Can we create a performant LAPA
solely from raw human manipulation videos?

4.1     B ENCHMARKS AND E NVIRONMENTS

We evaluate the effectiveness of LAPA on 9 different task categories in 2 different simulation envi-
ronments and 3 different real-world robotic tasks. Table 3 shows an overview of the pretraining and
fine-tuning dataset for each setup and Figure 9 in Appendix B visualizes the simulation benchmark
and real-world setups. More details of each evaluation setup are provided in Appendix B.
Language Table (Lynch et al., 2023) is a simulation where a robot performs 2 DOF actions to
push blocks (see Figure 9) (a)). It includes 5 subtask categories: BlocktoBlock, BlocktoAbsolute,
BlocktoBlockRelative, BlocktoRelative, and Separate. During evaluation, we evaluate models for
both seen and unseen scenarios, where unseen includes new objects (color and shape) and unseen
combinations of seen objects.
SIMPLER (Li et al., 2024b) is a set of simulated environments for evaluating generalist robot
manipulation policies. We assess our models on 4 tasks (Figure 9 (b)) using the 7 DOF WidowX
robot arm. Since SIMPLER lacks fine-tuning trajectories, we collect 100 multi-task trajectories
using successful rollouts from a VLA model trained on BridgeV2 data (Walke et al., 2023).
Real-World Tabletop Manipulation experiments used a 7 DOF Franka Emika Panda robot
arm in three environments (shown in Figure 9 (c)). We utilize three pretraining data sources:
Bridgev2 (Walke et al., 2023), Open-X (Collaboration et al., 2023), and Something Something
v2 (Goyal et al., 2017). Following Kim et al. (2024), we finetune on three multi-instruction tasks:
(1) ‘Pick <object> into Sink’, (2) ‘Cover <object> with Towel’, and (3) ‘Knock <object> Over’.
Each task involves 150 trajectories across 15 objects. We use a task-specific partial success criterion
for evaluation, following Kim et al. (2024).

4.2     BASELINES

For the underlying VLM, we use the 7B Large World Model (LWM-Chat-1M) (Liu et al., 2024).
S CRATCH denotes the baseline model where we finetune our backbone VLM only on the down-
stream tasks, to quantify the gains we get from the pretraining stage.
U NI P I (Du et al., 2023) uses a video diffusion model during pretraining to generate video rollouts
given a language instruction, which does not require any action labels during pretraining similar to
our approach. For finetuning, an inverse dynamics model (IDM) is trained to extract the ground
truth actions given adjacent frames.4 We also finetune the diffusion model on the downstream task
to match the target distribution.
V PT (Baker et al., 2022) trains an IDM on action labeled data, and uses the IDM model to extract
pseudo actions on raw videos. Then, we use the pseudo actions labeled by the IDM to pretrain our
backbone VLM on the pretraining data, identical to Latent Pretraining of LAPA.
    2
       We also tried leaving the latent action head and adding additional head to decode the latent to ground-truth
actions following Schmidt & Jiang (2024) However, we empirically found that re-initializing the action head
resulted in superior downstream task performance, likely due to the size of the underlying policy model (7B).
     3
       We leave parameter efficient fine-tuning approaches as future work for finetuning (Hu et al., 2022).
     4
       We do not compare with Yang et al. (2024b) since the model is not open-sourced and Ko et al. (2024) since
it is not a behavior cloning baseline.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACTION VLA denotes the baseline that uses the actual ground-truth robot action labels during pre-
training with the same backbone VLM. This may be seen as the upper bound, since it utilizes the
actual ground-truth labels.
O PEN VLA (Kim et al., 2024) is a state-of-the-art VLA model that was pretrained on 970k real-
world robot demonstrations from the Open X-Embodiment Dataset (Collaboration et al., 2023),
mostly collected through human teleoperation. This model has a comparable number of parameters
to LAPA (7B). We compare against O PEN VLA for real-world robot experiments by fine-tuning the
pretrained O PEN VLA on our downstream tasks.
Further details of baseline models are provided in Appendix C.

4.3   L ANGUAGE TABLE R ESULTS

Table 1: Language Table Results. Average Success Rate (%) ± StdErr across the three different pretrain-
finetune combinations from the Language Table benchmark as described in Table 3. We also note the # of
trajectories used for fine-tuning next to each category.

                                  In-domain (1k)          Cross-task (7k)         Cross-env (1k)
                                  Seen     Unseen        Seen       Unseen       Seen      Unseen
                   S CRATCH     15.6±9.2    15.2±8.3   27.2±13.6   22.4±11.0   15.6±9.2    15.2±8.3
                   U NI P I     22.0±12.5   13.2±7.7   20.8±12.0   16.0±9.1    13.6±8.6    12.0±7.5
                   V PT         44.0±7.5    32.8±4.6   72.0±6.8    60.8±6.6    18.0±7.7    18.4±9.7
                   LAPA         62.0±8.7    49.6±9.5   73.2±6.8    54.8±9.1    33.6±12.7   29.6±12.0
                   ACTION VLA   77.0±3.5    58.8±6.6   77.0±3.5    58.8±6.6    64.8±5.2    54.0±7.0

In-Domain Performance First, we assess LAPA’s ability to learn from a small subset of in-
domain action label data by pretraining on 181k trajectories and finetuning on 1k action-labeled
trajectories (0.5%). As shown in Table 1, LAPA largely outperforms S CRATCH and narrows the
gap with ACTION VLA despite not using action labels during pretraining. Additionally, LAPA sur-
passes U NI P I and V PT. Notably, while U NI P I handles simple tasks well, its diffusion model often
generates incorrect plans for longer-horizon tasks, aligning with Du et al. (2024) (see Figure 17 of
Appendix G.1). V PT, with the same backbone VLM as LAPA, outperforms U NI P I, showing the su-
periority of the VLA model, but still underperforms LAPA, highlighting the effectiveness of latent
actions.

Cross-Task Performance We investigate whether LAPA’s broad skills can be retained after fine-
tuning on a specific task. Pretraining LAPA on 181k trajectories and finetuning on only separate
tasks (7k), we evaluate all 5 task categories, similar to the in-domain setup, to assess latent pretrain-
ing’s benefits for unseen tasks. When comparing LAPA and S CRATCH in Table 1 and Table 7, 8
in Appendix G.1, latent pretraining significantly benefits the separate task as well the other 4 task
categories, resulting in a significant boost in both seen and unseen setups. Like before, U NI P I is
constrained by its diffusion model’s planning limitations, while V PT performs strongly, even sur-
passing ACTION VLA in the unseen setting. This is likely due to using more labeled data (7k vs.
1k), helping the IDM generate more accurate pseudo labels.

Cross-Environment Performance We further investigate if Latent Action Pretraining benefits
downstream performance when the pretraining and fine-tuning environments are different. We pre-
train LAPA on 440k real-world trajectories, and then finetune on 1k simulation trajectories, which
can be seen as testing on a setup where a real2sim gap is present (Figure 9 (a)). From Table 1,
we observe that LAPA still significantly outperforms S CRATCH, showing that latent pretraining
leads to positive transfer even on cross-environment setting. Notably, both U NI P I and V PT sig-
nificantly underperforms LAPA, showing that learning to predict latent actions is more robust to
cross-environment transfer. V PT only results in minor positive transfer, indicating that the IDM is
not robust to environment shifts.

4.4   R EAL - WORLD R ESULTS

We pretrain our models on (1) Bridgev2 (Walke et al., 2023) to measure the cross-embodiment
performance (WidowX embodiment for pretraining and Franka embodiment for finetuning) and (2)
Open X-Embodiment Dataset (Collaboration et al., 2023) to measure the effect of pretraining in a


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Scratch                             OpenVLA (Bridge)                OpenVLA (OpenX)
                                                                  ActionVLA (Bridge)                  LAPA (Bridge)                   LAPA (OpenX)
                                                                                                     52.8                                                                              54.2
                                                           50.1                                                                                   51.7
                     50                                                                                                      47.8                                                             45.8
                                                    43.9                                                              42.3          42.4                                        43.1
                     40                      36.8                                             38.9             38.7                        38.6
                                 32.6 30.8                                 33.3



           AVG (%)
                     30
                                                                                  25.0 25.0
                          21.2                                                                                                                                    22.2
                     20                                                                                                                                                  19.4
                                                                    13.9
                                                                                                                                                           11.1
                     10

                     0
                                    Average                          Knock <object> Over                      Cover <object> with Towel                  Pick <object> and put in sink

Figure 3: Real-world Tabletop Manipulation Results. We evaluate on a total of 54 rollouts for each model
encompassing unseen object combinations, unseen objects and unseen instructions. Average success rate (%)
± StdErr are shown (detailed results provided in Appendix G.3).
Table 2: Evaluation Results divided into eval types. We average the success rate across the 3 tasks depending
on what capability we are trying to quantify: (1) seen objects but unseen combinations, (2) unseen objects, and
new instructions requiring semantic reasoning. Best is bolded and second best is underlined.

                                                                                    Seen Obj.                    Unseen                 Seen Obj.
                                                                                                                                                                  AVG
                                                                                  Unseen Combo                    Obj.                 Unseen Instr.
                                  S CRATCH                                                    18.0                    20.3                        25.4            21.2
                                  ACTION VLA (Bridge)                                         38.3                    31.8                        27.7            32.6
                                  O PEN VLA (Bridge)                                          35.6                    34.6                        22.1            30.8
                                  LAPA (Bridge)                                               43.4                    31.4                        35.6            36.8
                                  O PEN VLA (Open-X)                                          46.2                    42.1                        43.4            43.9
                                  LAPA (Open-X)                                               57.8                    43.9                        48.5            50.1
                                  LAPA (Human Videos)                                         36.5                    37.4                        28.1            34.0

multi-embodiment setting. Figure 3 shows the average success rate across the 3 tasks where each
task encompasses unseen object combination, unseen object, and unseen instruction settings. We
provide detailed results depending on the generalization type in Table 2.

Bridgev2 Pretraining We compare models that were pretrained on the Bridgev2 dataset. Similar
to previous results, all models pretrained on Bridgev2 result in significant performance enhancement
compared to S CRATCH. Furthermore, by comparing LAPA which does not leverage action-labeled
trajectories during pretraining with models that use action-labeled trajectories during pretraining
(ACTION VLA and O PEN VLA), we observe an interesting finding: LAPA outperform VLAs that
use action labeled pretraining data on average success rate of the 3 tasks, unlike previous scenar-
ios where VLAs pretrained on the ground-truth actions were upper bounds. LAPA significantly
outperforms the other models in pick-and-place tasks; given that most tasks in Bridgev2 are pick-
and-place, we hypothesize that VLA models pretrained on ground truth action labels have overfitted
to the WidowX action space from the Bridgev2 dataset, hampering cross-embodiment adaptability
to action distribution shifts during fine-tuning. In contrast, LAPA avoids this issue by not relying on
ground truth action labels during pretraining.

Open-X Pretraining From Figure 3, we see that VLAs pretrained on the Open-X dataset out-
performs VLAs pretrained on the Bridgev2 dataset, showing that data scaling during pretraining
demonstrates positive transfer for downstream tasks (Collaboration et al., 2023). This also suggests
there could be significant further improvement when scaling the diversity and scale of the pretraining
data, especially with large web-scale video data.
When comparing LAPA with O PEN VLA, we see that LAPA significantly outperforms O PEN VLA
on 2 out of 3 tasks (Figure 3). Also, as shown in Table 2, LAPA (Open-X) outperforms Open-
VLA (Open-X) on all types of generalization settings. This highlights LAPA’s effectiveness in a
multi-embodiment setting by showcasing its ability to leverage a shared latent action space during
pretraining, akin to how language and image representations are utilized. In contrast, contemporary
action pretraining methods may suffer from reduced positive transfer between datasets due to the
variability in action representation spaces across different embodiments and datasets.
However, for pick and place task, LAPA underperforms O PEN VLA. We observe that most failures
of LAPA are due to early grasping. In fact, LAPA outperforms O PEN VLA in reaching performance
(83.33% vs 66.67%) (reaching performance for each task is provided separately in Appendix G.3).


                                                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This suggests that, although LAPA possesses stronger language conditioning and coarse-grained
planning abilities, there is room for improvement in skills such as grasping. Since grasping occurs
only once or twice in each trajectory, the 150 labeled trajectories may not be sufficient for LAPA to
accurately predict grasp actions based on the physical characteristics of diverse objects.

4.5                          L EARNING FROM H UMAN M ANIPULATION V IDEOS

                             60                                                 Scratch                    OpenVLA (Bridge)              LAPA (Bridge)                 LAPA (Human Videos)
                                                         52.1
                             50
                                                  45.8                   50                                                                       47.8          47.9
                                                                                                                                                                                        43.1
      AVG Success Rate (%)


                             40
                                                                                                                                                         42.4
                                                                         40                  36.8                                          38.7
                                   34.4                                                             34.0
                             30                                                       30.8                                        30.6


                                                                AVG(%)
                                                                         30
                                                                                                                      25.0 25.0                                                                23.6
                                                                               21.2                                                                                              19.4
                             20                                          20
                                                                                                               13.9
                                                                                                                                                                          11.1
                             10                                          10

                                           0.7
                              0                                          0
                                  Scratch UniPi   VPT    LAPA                     Average                             Knock                       Cover                   Pick and place

                     (a) SIMPLER Results                                      (b) Real-world Tabletop Manipulation Robot Results

Figure 4: Pretraining from Human Video Results. Average success rate (%) ± StdErr of LAPA and baselines
pretrained on human manipulation videos where the embodiment and environment gap is extreme. We evaluate
on both simulation (left) and real-world robot setup (right).
In this section, we show results when we extend Latent Action Pretraining to human manipula-
tion videos, which aligns with the main motivation of this work. Unlike robot trajectories, human
videos have two challenges: human videos do not contain action labels, and the distribution of hu-
man videos is distinct from the robot embodiment (McCarthy et al., 2024). We try to investigate
whether our method as well as baseline approaches could address these challenges by pretraining on
Something-Something V2 dataset (Goyal et al., 2017) which consists of 220K videos that includes
human performing actions with everyday objects.
We first evaluate the performance of LAPA pretrained on human videos on SIMPLER. In addition
to S CRATCH, we also compare with U NI P I and V PT pretrained with the same human video dataset.
As shown in Figure 4a, LAPA outperforms S CRATCH, showing that although the distribution of
the pretraining data is distinct from the deployment setup, leveraging human videos for latent action
pretraining results in positive transfer. Also, LAPA performs the best performance by outperforming
U NI P I and V PT, implying that Latent Action Pretraining is robust to human to robot embodiment
shifts. Note that it is impossible to train ACTION VLA because the human videos do not have any
robot action labels.
We report the real-world robot experiments in Figure 4b. Surprisingly, we can see that LAPA trained
with human videos outperforms O PEN VLA (Bridge) on average. Despite the larger embodiment
gap for LAPA (Human to robot vs. Robot to robot), it learns a better prior for robot manipula-
tion. Also, as shown in Table 2, LAPA (Human Videos) shows good generalization performance,
especially for unseen objects. We conjecture that this is because Something Something V2 dataset
interacts with much diverse objects compared to Bridgev2. This result highlights the potential of raw
human manipulation videos from the web compared to expensive robot manipulation data, which re-
quires time-intensive teleoperation to collect. We expect that applying our approach on large-scale
internet videos (e.g., YouTube videos) could unlock the potential for large-scale pretraining of a
generalist action foundational model, similar to foundational models in NLP or Computer Vision.

4.6                          P RETRAINING E FFICIENCY

The benefit of LAPA extends beyond downstream task performance to include pretraining efficiency.
For pretraining LAPA (Open-X), the best-performing model, we use 8 H100 GPUs for 34 hours with
a batch size of 128 (total of 272 H100-hours). In contrast, O PEN VLA required a total of 21,500
A100-hours with a batch size of 2048. Despite being approximately 30-40 times more efficient for
pretraining, LAPA still outperforms O PEN VLA 5 .
    5
      We calculate based on the fact that H100 GPUs lead to 2-3 times speedup compared to A100 GPUs for
training.


                                                                                                      8
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       We believe this efficiency stems from two factors: (1) the use of the Large World Model (Liu et al.,
       2024) as the backbone VLM model, and (2) the coarse-grained actions of LAPA compared to con-
       ventional action pretraining. First, the training objective during LWM pretraining includes generat-
       ing the next state, which corresponds to the next frame in a video. We hypothesize that this objective
       enables the model to implicitly understand high-level actions in a video. Notably, ACTION VLA
       (Bridge), which uses LWM as the backbone, and O PEN VLA (Bridge), which uses Prismatic as the
       backbone, are trained on the same data and objective. However, ACTION VLA reaches optimal per-
       formance (in terms of action token accuracy) in significantly fewer epochs (3 epochs) compared to
       O PEN VLA’s 30 epochs. Second, the action space for LAPA is much smaller than that for O PEN -
       VLA (84 vs. 2567 ), making learning the perception-and-language to action generation problem
       easier to learn. For all LAPA models (BridgeV2, Open-X, Human Videos), we observe that a single
       epoch of training is sufficient to achieve optimal performance.

        5               A BLATION AND A NALYSIS

        5.1               S CALING M ODEL , DATA , AND L ATENT ACTION S IZE

                                                                                                            58
                   57                         55                                 56                         54
AVG Success Rate (%)


                                              50                                 54
                   56                         45                                 52                         50
                                              40                                 50                         46
                   55                         35                                 48                         42
                                              30                                 46
                   54 30 75   150       300        10 30 50            100            1 2   4        9      38 2    4           8
                        (a) Model Scaling           (b) Data Scaling             (c) Latent Action Length   (d) Latent Action Vocab

       Figure 5: Scaling Ablation Results of LAPA. We scale 4 dimensions of LAPA: model parameters (in millions),
       data size (ratio among Bridgev2), and the latent action sequence and vocabulary size, and show the downstream
       average success rate (%) on the SIMPLER fine-tuning tasks.
       Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020), where per-
       formance improves with increases in model size, dataset size, and computational resources used for
       training. Similarly, we attempt to analyze whether LAPA benefits from scaling across three dimen-
       sions: latent action quantization model size, data size, and latent action representation space. For
       a controlled setup, we apply our method to Bridgev2 and then fine-tune it on SIMPLER except for
       Language Table result of Figure 5c.
       As shown in Figure 5, scaling benefits LAPA across the three dimensions. Interestingly, we observe
       that the optimal scale of the latent action space depends on the complexity of the action dimension
       contained in the pretraining dataset. For example, increasing the latent action sequence length is
       less effective compared to increasing the vocabulary for Language Table (Figure 16). Except for
       Language Table, we maintain the generation space of LAPA at 84 throughout all of our main exper-
       iments. These results imply that when scaling pretraining to Internet-scale videos that go beyond
       manipulation videos, scaling LAPA in terms of model, dataset, and latent action space could improve
       performance, especially to capture higher action dimensions such as whole-body control.

        5.2               L ATENT ACTION A NALYSIS

       We qualitatively analyze the alignment of quantized latent actions with real continuous actions. For
       interpretation, we condition the current image observation x1 and each latent action on the decoder
       of the latent action quantization model, and present the reconstructed images.
       In Language Table, we observe that each latent action corresponds to a distinct movement of the
       robot arm, with the distribution of latent actions being well-clustered in the actual 2D action space
       (shown in Figure 12, 13 of Appendix E). Next, for human manipulation videos, we observe that
       camera viewpoints also correspond to a latent action since the viewpoint changes within a video
       (shown in Figure 14 of Appendix E). We also analyze the latent actions learned from the Open-
       X embodiment, which encompasses multiple embodiments, tasks, and environments. As shown
       in Figure 6, even though the embodiment and environment differ, conditioning on the same latent


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                    [1,1,3,2]          [3,2,0,1]          [4,2,4,1]             [5,1,2,7]         [5,3,5,2]            [6,7,0,2]


                    Actions         Down, Left            Up             Right, Rotate           Down             Left, Rotate          Up, Left


Figure 6: Latent Action Analysis. We condition the current observation x1 and quantized latent action to
the decoder of the latent action quantization model. We observe that each latent action can be mapped into
a semantic action. For example, latent action [1,1,3,2] corresponds to going down and left while [3,2,0,1]
corresponds to going up a little bit.

action results in a similar action in the reconstructed image. This supports our previous claim that
latent actions are learned in a shared representation space, regardless of the embodiment or dataset,
facilitating stronger positive transfer across diverse datasets.
               x1             x2̂                x3̂               x4̂                    x5̂               x6̂                  x7̂               x8̂

                                                                              \hat{x}_2


Figure 7: Closed loop rollout of LAPA. LAPA is conditioned on current image x1 and language instruction
of ‘take the broccoli out of the pot’. We generate rollout images by conditioning the decoder of Latent Action
Quantization Model with latent actions generated by LAPA.
We also qualitatively analyze the coarse-grained planning capability of LAPA through a closed-loop
rollout. We use a LAPA model that has only undergone pretraining, without any action finetuning.
Since this model generates latent actions that are not directly executable in the real world, we con-
dition the current observation x1 and the predicted latent action from LAPA with the decoder of the
latent action quantization model. As shown in Figure 7, when conditioned on the current observa-
tion and the instruction to ‘take the broccoli out of the pot’, LAPA generates robot trajectories that
successfully reaches for the broccoli, moves down to grab it, and, as the arm moves away from the
pot, the broccoli disappears. This shows the potential for LAPA as a general-purpose robotic world
model, not only predicting actions but also the outcomes of the actions. For example, this can lead
to an extension of LAPA to act as a Task and Motion planning system, where it can first generate
multiple plans given a natural language task instruction, choose the most optimal trajectory based on
methods of quantifying the success among multiple trajectory candidates (Hwang et al., 2024; Duan
et al., 2024), and perform open-loop / closed-loop inference. This can lead a paradigm where we
aim to improve performance through scaling test-time compute, as with LLMs (Snell et al., 2024).

6    L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce Latent Action Pretraining, a scalable pretraining method for building
VLAs without using ground-truth action labels. Across three benchmarks spanning both simula-
tion and real-world robot experiments, we show that our method significantly improves transfer to
downstream tasks compared to existing approaches. We also present a state-of-the-art VLA model
that surpasses current models trained on 970K action-labeled trajectories. Furthermore, we demon-
strate that our method can be applied purely on human manipulation videos, where explicit action
information is absent, and the embodiment gap is substantial.
We still face certain limitations. First, LAPA underperforms compared to action pretraining when it
comes to fine-grained motion generation tasks like grasping. We believe that increasing the latent
action generation space could help address this issue. Second, similar to prior VLAs, LAPA also en-
counters latency challenges during real-time inference. Adopting a hierarchical architecture, where
a smaller head predicts actions at a higher frequency. Lastly, while we qualitatively demonstrate
that our latent action space captures camera movements (Figure 14), we have not yet explored the
application of LAPA beyond manipulation videos, such as those from self-driving cars, navigation,
or landscape scenes. We leave these explorations for future work.


                                                                             10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Arhan Jain and Marius Memmel for helping out with the robot hardware and teleoperation
setup. Also, we thank Minyoung Hwang, Jiafei Duan, Junsu Kim, and Changyeon Kim for helpful
discussions and constructive feedback. This work was partly supported by Center for Advanced
Urban Systems (CAUS) of Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) funded
by GS E&C (40%) and the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation(IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (RS-2024-00397966, Development
of a Cybersecurity Specialized RAG-based sLLM Model for Suppressing Gen-AI Malfunctions and
Construction of a Publicly Demonstration Platform, 30%; No.RS-2022-II220264, Comprehensive
Video Understanding and Generation with Knowledge-based Deep Logic Neural Network, 20%;
No.RS-2021-II212068, Artificial Intelligence Innovation Hub, 10%).

R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany
 Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical re-
 port: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219,
 2024.

Shikhar Bahl, Russell Mendonca, Lili Chen, Unnat Jain, and Deepak Pathak. Affordances from hu-
  man videos as a versatile representation for robotics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.

Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Suneel Belkhale, Tianli Ding, Ted Xiao, Pierre Sermanet, Quon Vuong, Jonathan Tompson, Yevgen
  Chebotar, Debidatta Dwibedi, and Dorsa Sadigh. Rt-h: Action hierarchies using language. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2403.01823, 2024.

Homanga Bharadhwaj, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, and Vikash Kumar. Zero-shot robot
  manipulation from passive human videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02011, 2023.

Homanga Bharadhwaj, Debidatta Dwibedi, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, Carl Doersch, Ted
  Xiao, Dhruv Shah, Fei Xia, Dorsa Sadigh, and Sean Kirmani. Gen2act: Human video generation
  in novel scenarios enables generalizable robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16283,
  2024a.

Homanga Bharadhwaj, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Track2act: Pre-
  dicting point tracks from internet videos enables diverse zero-shot robot manipulation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2405.01527, 2024b.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.

Jake Bruce, Michael D Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes,
  Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative inter-
  active environments. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural genera-
  tion to benchmark reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01588, 2019.

OX-Embodiment Collaboration, A Padalkar, A Pooley, A Jain, A Bewley, A Herzog, A Irpan,
 A Khazatsky, A Rai, A Singh, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.

Sudeep Dasari, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Unnat Jain, and Abhinav Gupta. An unbiased look at
  datasets for visuo-motor pre-training. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Dale Schu-
  urmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Pete Florence, Fei Xia, Ayzaan Wahid, brian ichter, Pierre Sermanet, Tianhe
  Yu, Pieter Abbeel, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Andy Zeng, and Jonathan Tomp-
  son. Video language planning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2024.
Jiafei Duan, Wilbert Pumacay, Nishanth Kumar, Yi Ru Wang, Shulin Tian, Wentao Yuan, Ranjay
   Krishna, Dieter Fox, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yijie Guo. Aha: A vision-language-model for detecting
   and reasoning over failures in robotic manipulation, 2024.
Ashley D Edwards, Himanshu Sahni, Yannick Schroecker, and Charles L Isbell. Imitating latent
  policies from observation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07914, 2018.
Raghav Goyal, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Joanna Materzynska, Susanne West-
  phal, Heuna Kim, Valentin Haenel, Ingo Fruend, Peter Yianilos, Moritz Mueller-Freitag, et al.
  The” something something” video database for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Gird-
  har, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Haoran He, Chenjia Bai, Ling Pan, Weinan Zhang, Bin Zhao, and Xuelong Li. Learning an action-
  able discrete diffusion policy via large-scale actionless video pre-training. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Minyoung Hwang, Joey Hejna, Dorsa Sadigh, and Yonatan Bisk. Motif: Motion instruction fine-
 tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10683, 2024.
Zhengyao Jiang, Yingchen Xu, Nolan Wagener, Yicheng Luo, Michael Janner, Edward Grefenstette,
  Tim Rocktäschel, and Yuandong Tian. H-gap: Humanoid control with a generalist planner. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.02682, 2023.
Aditya Kannan, Kenneth Shaw, Shikhar Bahl, Pragna Mannam, and Deepak Pathak. Deft: Dexterous
  fine-tuning for real-world hand policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19797, 2023.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Learning to act
  from actionless videos through dense correspondences. In The Twelfth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2024.
Hadas Kress-Gazit, Kunimatsu Hashimoto, Naveen Kuppuswamy, Paarth Shah, Phoebe Horgan,
  Gordon Richardson, Siyuan Feng, and Benjamin Burchfiel. Robot learning as an empirical sci-
  ence: Best practices for policy evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.09491, 2024.
Seungjae Lee, Yibin Wang, Haritheja Etukuru, H Jin Kim, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and
  Lerrel Pinto. Behavior generation with latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03181, 2024.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiang Li, Cristina Mata, Jongwoo Park, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Yoo Sung Jang, Jinghuan Shang,
  Kanchana Ranasinghe, Ryan Burgert, Mu Cai, Yong Jae Lee, et al. Llara: Supercharging robot
  learning data for vision-language policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.20095, 2024a.
Xuanlin Li, Kyle Hsu, Jiayuan Gu, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Homer Rich Walke, Chuyuan Fu,
  Ishikaa Lunawat, Isabel Sieh, Sean Kirmani, et al. Evaluating real-world robot manipulation
  policies in simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05941, 2024b.
Junbang Liang, Ruoshi Liu, Ege Ozguroglu, Sruthi Sudhakar, Achal Dave, Pavel Tokmakov, Shuran
  Song, and Carl Vondrick. Dreamitate: Real-world visuomotor policy learning via video genera-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16862, 2024.
Hao Liu, Wilson Yan, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. World model on million-length video and
  language with ringattention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08268, 2024.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1113–
  1132. PMLR, 2020.
Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis
  Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, pp. 1–8, 2023. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2023.3295255.
Robert McCarthy, Daniel CH Tan, Dominik Schmidt, Fernando Acero, Nathan Herr, Yilun Du,
  Thomas G Thuruthel, and Zhibin Li. Towards generalist robot learning from internet video: A
  survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19664, 2024.
Atharva Mete, Haotian Xue, Albert Wilcox, Yongxin Chen, and Animesh Garg. Quest: Self-
  supervised skill abstractions for learning continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15840,
  2024.
Zawalski Michał, Chen William, Pertsch Karl, Mees Oier, Finn Chelsea, and Levine Sergey. Robotic
  control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693, 2024.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A univer-
  sal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Dantong Niu, Yuvan Sharma, Giscard Biamby, Jerome Quenum, Yutong Bai, Baifeng Shi, Trevor
  Darrell, and Roei Herzig. Llarva: Vision-action instruction tuning enhances robot learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2406.11815, 2024.
Yuzhe Qin, Yueh-Hua Wu, Shaowei Liu, Hanwen Jiang, Ruihan Yang, Yang Fu, and Xiaolong
  Wang. Dexmv: Imitation learning for dexterous manipulation from human videos. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2022.
Dominik Schmidt and Minqi Jiang. Learning to act without actions. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with
  subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2016.
Kenneth Shaw, Shikhar Bahl, and Deepak Pathak. Videodex: Learning dexterity from internet
  videos. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally
  can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
Mohan Kumar Srirama, Sudeep Dasari, Shikhar Bahl, and Abhinav Gupta. Hrp: Human affordances
 for robotic pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18911, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chameleon Team. Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.09818, 2024.
Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
  Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot
  policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024.
Dani Valevski, Yaniv Leviathan, Moab Arar, and Shlomi Fruchter. Diffusion models are real-time
  game engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14837, 2024.
Mohammad Hassan Vali and Tom Bäckström. Nsvq: Noise substitution in vector quantization for
 machine learning. IEEE Access, 10:13598–13610, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3147670.
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.
Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang,
  Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: Variable
  length video generation from open domain textual descriptions. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.
Homer Rich Walke, Kevin Black, Tony Z Zhao, Quan Vuong, Chongyi Zheng, Philippe Hansen-
  Estruch, Andre Wang He, Vivek Myers, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, et al. Bridgedata v2: A dataset
  for robot learning at scale. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Chen Wang, Linxi Fan, Jiankai Sun, Ruohan Zhang, Li Fei-Fei, Danfei Xu, Yuke Zhu, and An-
  ima Anandkumar. Mimicplay: Long-horizon imitation learning by watching human play. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.12422, 2023.
Chuan Wen, Xingyu Lin, John So, Kai Chen, Qi Dou, Yang Gao, and Pieter Abbeel. Any-point
  trajectory modeling for policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025, 2023.
Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu,
  Hang Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot
  manipulation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Jingyun Yang, Zi-ang Cao, Congyue Deng, Rika Antonova, Shuran Song, and Jeannette Bohg.
   Equibot: Sim (3)-equivariant diffusion policy for generalizable and data efficient learning. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2407.01479, 2024a.
Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Pack Kael-
  bling, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. In The
  Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024b.
Sherry Yang, Jacob C Walker, Jack Parker-Holder, Yilun Du, Jake Bruce, Andre Barreto, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Dale Schuurmans. Position: Video as the new language for real-world decision
  making. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024c.
Jianglong Ye, Jiashun Wang, Binghao Huang, Yuzhe Qin, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning contin-
   uous grasping function with a dexterous hand from human demonstrations. IEEE Robotics and
   Automation Letters, 8(5):2882–2889, 2023.
Jia Zeng, Qingwen Bu, Bangjun Wang, Wenke Xia, Li Chen, Hao Dong, Haoming Song, Dong
   Wang, Di Hu, Ping Luo, et al. Learning manipulation by predicting interaction. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2406.00439, 2024.
Yifeng Zhu, Arisrei Lim, Peter Stone, and Yuke Zhu. Vision-based manipulation from single human
  video with open-world object graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20321, 2024.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L ATENT ACTION Q UANTIZATION D ETAILS

                           x1                 x2


                                                                  Latent Actions
                                                                       z1
                        Patch Emb         Patch Emb
                                                                                   NSVQ
                                                                      Spatial
                                                                   Transformer

                          Spatial            Spatial
                       Transformer        Transformer


                                                                    Patch Emb
                                             Causal
                                          Transformer



                                          Discretize


                                                                       x2
                                              z1
                                    Encoder                         Decoder


                Figure 8: Model architecture of our Latent Action Quantization Model.

We show model architecture details of our latent action quantization model in Figure 8. We utilize
the C-ViViT model architecture from Villegas et al. (2022) to replicate the latent action model from
GENIE (Bruce et al., 2024). During the encoding process, both x1 and x2 are gone through a patch
embedding to obtain p1 and p2 and gone through a spatial transformer. To convey temporal infor-
mation, the representations for both outputs of spatial transformer are passed to a causal transformer
(transformer with causal positional encodings) to get e1 and e2 continuous embeddings. We then
define d1 = e2 − e1 and discretize d1 by finding the closest embedding from the codebook z where
the codebook size is determined as a hyperparameter.

                                         z1 = arg min |d1 − zk |2                                  (1)
                                                        zk

When obtaining e1 and e2 , we go through a CNN network. The sequence length is designated by
the kernel size, stride and padding value of a CNN network. After quantization, we apply NSVQ
technique before decoding.

                                                    ∥d1 − z1 ∥
                                         dˆ1 = d1 +            v                                   (2)
                                                       ∥v∥
where v ∼ N (0, 1). For decoding, we go through the following equation:

                                      xˆ2 = D(Attn(sg[p1 ], dˆ1 , dˆ1 )                            (3)
where stop gradient (sg) is applied to p1 to avoid representation collapse and cross attention is used
to attend dˆ1 given p1 . Unlike the encoder, decoder D only include spatial transformer. The training
objective is a L2 reconstruction loss.

                                              L = ∥x2 − xˆ2 ∥22                                    (4)


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Pretraining and fine-tuning dataset for each environment. Cross-Env denotes cross-environment,
Cross-Emb denotes cross-embodiment, and Multi-Emb denotes multi-embodiment. For fine-tuning, MT de-
notes multi-task training and MI denotes tasks with diverse multi-instructions. Category denotes the main
capability we are trying to quantify.

                                                 Pretraining                    Fine-tuning
            Environment      Category
                                               Dataset         # Trajs        Dataset         # Trajs
                            In-Domain     Sim (All 5 tasks)     181k     5 Tasks (MT, MI)       1k
            LangTable       Cross-Task    Sim (All 5 tasks)     181k        1 Task (MI)         7k
                            Cross-Env     Real (All 5 tasks)    442k     5 tasks (MT, MI)       1k
                            In-Domain        Bridgev2            60k      4 Tasks (MT)         100
            SIMPLER
                            Cross-Emb      Something v2         200k      4 Tasks (MT)         100
                            Cross-Emb        Bridgev2            60k       3 tasks (MI)        450
            Real-World      Multi-Emb        Open-X             970k       3 tasks (MI)        450
                            Cross-Emb      Something v2         200k       3 tasks (MI)        450

After latent model training, we utilize the z1 as the latent action label for x1 . The encoder can be
seen as the inverse dynamics model and the decoder can be seen as the world model.

B    D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP


              (a) L ANGUAGE TABLE                              (b) S IMPLER                    (c) R EAL

Figure 9: Experimental Setups. (a) shows an example from the 440k real-world trajectories (top) and the 181k
simulation trajectories (bottom) from the Language Table Benchmark. (b) shows the 4 different evaluation tasks
we use with the SIMPLER environment. (c) shows the three different tasks that we perform in the real-world.

Language Table Experimental Setup Figure 9 (a) shows examples of the Language Table setup.
For Language Table experiments, we train VLA-based models to generate language directions (e.g.
‘move up’) before actual actions following Belkhale et al. (2024), which significantly improved
the performance 6 . For evaluation, we evaluate on 50 evaluation rollouts for each subtask category
where the initial locations of the objects are randomized for each evaluation. Further details can be
found in https://github.com/google-research/language-table.

SIMPLER Experimental Setup Figure 9 (B) shows examples of the SIMPLER setup. The SIM-
PLER environment does not provide any fine-tuning data for their evaluation pipeline, Thus, we first
train our underlying VLM on the Bridgev2 dataset and perform zero-shot rollout on the 4 tasks in
SIMPLER. Note that we use held-out trajectories differing in object orientation and position from
the evaluation setup. We filter 25 successful trajectories for each task (total of 100) and use them
as the fine-tuning dataset for all of our experiments. For evaluation, we evaluate on 24 rollouts
   6
     For 7 DOF robot experiments, we found the benefit of generating language directions to be marginal
compared to the increased inference cost. Therefore, we only generate delta end-effector actions on other
experiments.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


per task while randomizing the initial object locations. We consider Bridgev2 and SIMPLER to be
in-domain since they show a high correlation between real-world and simulation results with their
simulation benchmark. Further details can be found in https://github.com/simpler-env/SimplerEnv.

Real-world Tabletop Manipulation Experimental Setup Figure 9 (C) shows examples of the
real-world tabletop manipulation experimental setup. For the teleoperation, we use the polymetis
robotic stack7 to collect 150 trajectories for each of the tasks. All of the tasks require multi-
instruction following capabilities since there are 3 objects in the scene and the model has to condition
on the task description to infer which object to interact with. Figure 10 shows samples of each task.
For each task, we aim to quantify 3 distinct capabilities:
(1) We test the ability to infer the correct object from the task description between an unseen com-
bination of seen objects during fine-tuninig, (2) We test the ability to infer the correct object from
totally unseen objects during fine-tuning that may or may have not been observed during pretraining.
Specifically, the knocking tasks was conducted with real-world objects that were highly unlikely to
have been in any of the pertaining datasets. (3) We test the ability to infer the correct object (among
seen objects, unseen combinations) from a totally unseen instruction that requires semantic reason-
ing (e.g. Pick up a spicy object). For each evaluation criteria, 6 rollouts are performed for each
models, resulting in a total of 18 rollouts for each task category. Since there are three tasks, each
model is evaluated with 54 rollouts in the real-world. We provide the full list of all of the seen and
unseen objects used for each rollout in Table 13, 14, 15, and the total average success rates in Table
16.
Furthermore, for a fair comparison, we match the image resolution during training of all of our
models and use the exact same object initial positions for all of our evaluation, mostly on the same
day to minimize variability. For evaluation metrics, we adapt a partial success criteria for fine-
grained evaluation, following Kim et al. (2024), which we describe in detail below.
Knock down the <object>.
For knocking, we give 0.5 partial score if the robot reaches to the correct object and 1 if the robot
knocks down the correct object.
Cover the <object> with a towel.
For covering, we give 0.33 partial score if the robot picks up the towel correctly, 0.66 if the robot
reaches to the correct object or if the towel partially covers the object, and 1 if the correct object is
completely covered by the towel.
Pick up the <object> and put it in the sink.
For pick and place, we give 0.25 for reaching to the correct object, 0.5 for grasping the object, 0.75
for grasping and moving the object towards the sink, but failing to place the object in the sink, and
1 for placing the correct object in the sink.

C        BASELINE D ETAILS

For U NI P I, we use diffusion model from (Ko et al., 2024) which can be trained on 4 A100 GPUs.
For all experiments, we train with 128 batch. We use the same inverse dynamics model as V PT
during inference. To mediate estimation errors between the predicted video plans and executed
actions being accumulated, we periodically conduct replanning by regenerating new video plans
after executing two actions. For V PT, we use ResNet18 followed by an MLP layer for the inverse
dynamics model(IDM). The IDM is trained to predict an action when given two frames on a single
A6000 GPU using using Adam optimizer with a learning rate 1e-4. For OpenVLA (Bridge), we
pretrain on Bridgev2 for 30 epochs with a batch size of 1024. For OpenVLA (Open-X), we use the
pretrained checkpoint from Kim et al. (2024). For finetuning, we use LoRA finetuning (Hu et al.,
2022) with batch size of 32. We have observed that full-finetuning and lora finetuning leads to
similar performance, so we use LoRA finetuning as default for efficient fine-tuning. We finetune the
model until the training action accuracy reaches 95%. For ACTION VLA and LAPA, we train with
a batch size of 128 and with image augmentation for real-world finetuning.
    7
        https://github.com/facebookresearch/polymetis


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT A NALYSIS

Table 4: Pretraining trajectories statistics for downstream tasks. Number of trajectories that are the same
task with evaluation task for each pretraining dataset: Bridgev2, Open-X, and Something Something V2 (Sthv2)
dataset.

                             Task             Bridgev2     Open-X      Sthv2
                             Knocking             2         7,969       6,655
                             Covering           898         5,026       6,824
                             Pick & Place      10,892      911,166      3,272


We further analyze the real-world robot results shown in Figures 3 and 4b, focusing on how the
task distribution in pretraining data impacts downstream performance. Table 4 presents the num-
ber of trajectories corresponding to each evaluation task (Knocking, Covering, and Pick & Place)
across pretraining datasets (Bridgev2, Open-X, and Something Something V2 (Sthv2)), determined
through lexical matching. We expect future work to use other methods of analyzing the relationship
between pertaining and fine-tuning task distributions that capture semantics of the task rather than
simple lexical matching. We perform this analysis to get a sense of how the task distribution in the
pretraining data affects downstream task performance.

Knocking There are almost no knocking-related trajectories in Bridgev2. This scarcity may ex-
plain why models trained on Bridgev2 performed worse compared to those trained on Sthv2, despite
a larger embodiment gap in the Sthv2 dataset (Figure 4b).

Covering A similar trend is observed for the covering task. Given that the number of covering tra-
jectories in Bridgev2 is relatively small compared to the Sthv2 dataset, models trained on Bridgev2
occasionally underperform compared to LAPA trained on Sthv2.

Pick & Place For the pick and place task, the trend reverses. The number of pick and place tasks
in Sthv2 is relatively small compared to Bridgev2 and Open-X, which might explain why LAPA
trained on Sthv2 significantly underperforms models trained on Bridgev2 or Open-X. Based on
these results, we expect that pretraining on videos encompassing a wide range of skills will lead
to a more robust generalist policy compared to training on robot videos with narrower skill sets.
We also expect future research to provide a more in-depth analysis of the relationship between task
distribution in pretraining data and performance on downstream tasks.
We also present the win rate of LAPA (Open-X) against OpenVLA (Open-X). As illustrated in Fig-
ure 11, LAPA outperforms OpenVLA in 65.4% when disregarding the ties. When considering the
ties, LAPA outperforms OpenVLA in 31.5% of cases, while OpenVLA prevails in only 16.7%. In-
terestingly, they tie in 51.9% of the trials, suggesting that in about half the instances, both models
either fail or achieve a similar partial success score. Note that these evaluations were performed
while ensuring that the target and distractor objects were in identical initial locations during eval-
uation, alternating the models during evaluation. These results provide insight into the statistical
significance of the comparison, supporting the use of multiple metrics to ensure a more comprehen-
sive evaluation of physical robot performance in real-world scenarios (Kress-Gazit et al., 2024), not
only the average success-rate across all of the evaluation rollouts.


E    D ETAILED L ATENT ACTION A NALYSIS

We provide further qualitative analysis of LAPA. First, we analyze latent actions learned from Lan-
guage Table with vocabulary size of 8 and sequence length of 1. In Figure 12, we show that each
latent action corresponds to a semantic action (0: Move left and forward, 1: Move left and back,
2: Move right and back, 3: Move right slightly, 4: Move right, 5: Move back, 6: Do not move,
7: Move forward). We observe that increasing the latent action vocabulary size leads to capturing
a more fine-grained information. We analyze the relationship between latent actions with ground-
truth 2 DOF actions by mapping each instance into latent action space. As shown in Figure 13,


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we observe that latent actions are well-clustered in the actual 2D action space, indicating that latent
actions are meaningful representations that are highly related to actual continuous actions.
We further analyze the latent actions learned from human manipulation videos using the Something-
Something V2 dataset. As illustrated in Figure 14, these latent actions capture not only hand move-
ments but also camera movements. Since the camera viewpoint varies throughout the videos in the
Something-Something V2 dataset due to the videos being egocentric, our latent action quantization
model also learns to represent camera movements. For instance, latent actions [3,5,2,7] and [5,6,7,6]
correspond to slight downward camera movement, [4,0,0,4] and [2,3,6,6] indicate rightward move-
ment, and [4,2,0,0] and [5,7,0,5] represent subtle upward camera shifts.


F     A DDITIONAL A BLATION R ESULTS

We first analyze the effect of window size H for latent action quantization process. For all robot
manipulation videos, we have determined the window size depending on the fps of the video so that
the next frame models 0.6 seconds ahead from the current frame. For human manipulation videos,
we have set the next frame to be 2.4 seconds ahead since we qualitatively observed that many of the
frames of the human videos contain much less dynamic actions compared to robot videos. (However,
we think that filtering these frames could make the window size the same as robot videos, which we
leave as future work.). We have added an ablation experiment on the window size for robot videos
(Bridgev2) by evaluating on SIMPLER in Figure 15a. Note that the default is H = 3 because
Bridgev2 is collected with 5hz. The results show that LAPA is quite robust to different window
sizes. However, if the window size is extremely large, performance degradation is observed. This
is expected since our quantization model is relatively small (300M parameters), it faces difficulties
modeling latent information when the visual deltas are significant.
We also analyze the data scaling in terms of fine-tuning data by comparing with S CRATCH. We
evaluate on SIMPLER. As shown in Figure 15b, LAPA (Bridge) consistently outperforms S CRATCH
even when the fine-tuning data instances are small while the absolute performance increases with
larger fine-tuning data.
For data scaling, we also analyze the data scaling of human videos. We compare LAPA trained from
10% of Sthv2 human video dataset with LAPA trained from the whole Sthv2 human video dataset.
Results in Table 12 show that scaling the human video datasets boosts the performance for SIMPLER
benchmark not only for the final success for all subtasks. We leave exploring scaling law for human
videos more extensively or future work, since showing scaling law requires intensive computational
resources to do different ablations of model size, data size, and computational resources.
Finally, we vary the latent action length and vocabulary size in Language Table, extending the result
of Figure 5 which was analyzed in Bridgev2 data. As shown in Figure 16, increasing the sequence
and vocab size increases the performance. However, unlike SIMPLER, we observe that the increas-
ing the latent action vocab size is much more effective compared to increasing the latent action
sequence length in terms of absolute performance. This implies that for environments that are visu-
ally simple, increasing the latent action vocabulary might be more effective compared to sequence
length.

G     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

G.1    L ANGUAGE TABLE

We provide the detailed results of the experiments performed on the Language Table benchmark
in Table 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. For all of the tables in the appendix, we bold the best result among the
comparisons and underline the second best. Each value denotes the success rate (%). 50 evaluation
rollouts are performed for each task category, resulting in 250 total evaluation rollouts per model for
each table.
We also show the qualitative result of U NI P I where the diffusion model generates the correct plan
for simple and short-horizon tasks (e.g. separate tasks). However, the diffusion model generates the
wrong plan corresponding to the instruction when the task requires longer horizon planning (Figure
17).


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                          Table 5: Language Table In-Domain Seen Results.

                                      S CRATCH   U NI P I   VPT    LAPA   ACTION VLA
                Block2Block              4.0      14.0      36.0   58.0      76.0
                Block2Absolute           6.0       4.0      38.0   56.0      72.0
                Block2BlockRelative     10.0      12.0      48.0   52.0      76.0
                Block2Relative           6.0      10.0      26.0   48.0      70.0
                Separate                52.0      72.0      70.0   96.0      90.0
                AVG                     15.6      22.4      43.6   62.0      76.8


                        Table 6: Language Table In-Domain Unseen Results.

                                      S CRATCH   U NI P I   VPT    LAPA   ACTION VLA
                Block2Block              8.0       4.0      26.0   50.0      62.0
                Block2Absolute          10.0      6.0       42.0   48.0      58.0
                Block2BlockRelative      2.0      6.0       20.0   28.0      48.0
                Block2Relative           8.0       6.0      32.0   38.0      44.0
                Separate                48.0      44.0      44.0   84.0      82.0
                AVG                     15.2      13.2      32.8   49.6      58.8


                          Table 7: Language Table Cross-Task Seen Results.

                                      S CRATCH   U NI P I   VPT    LAPA   ACTION VLA
                Block2Block             18.0      12.0      74.0   74.0      76.0
                Block2Absolute           8.0       6.0      56.0   62.0      72.0
                Block2BlockRelative      6.0      2.0       62.0   72.0      76.0
                Block2Relative          24.0      16.0      72.0   60.0      70.0
                Separate                80.0      68.0      96.0   98.0      90.0
                AVG                     27.2      20.8      72.0   73.2      76.8


                        Table 8: Language Table Cross-Task Unseen Results.

                                      S CRATCH   U NI P I   VPT    LAPA   ACTION VLA
                Block2Block             16.0       4.0      66.0   46.0      62.0
                Block2Absolute          10.0      10.0      56.0   52.0      58.0
                Block2BlockRelative      8.0      10.0      46.0   48.0      48.0
                Block2Relative          12.0       4.0      52.0   38.0      44.0
                Separate                66.0      52.0      84.0   90.0      82.0
                AVG                     22.4      16.0      60.8   54.8      58.8


                      Table 9: Language Table Cross-Environment Seen Results.

                                      S CRATCH   U NI P I   VPT    LAPA   ACTION VLA
                Block2Block              4.0      4.0       16.0   26.0      66.0
                Block2Absolute           6.0      4.0       8.0    16.0      58.0
                Block2BlockRelative     10.0      8.0       6.0    20.0      62.0
                Block2Relative           6.0      4.0       12.0   22.0      54.0
                Separate                52.0      48.0      48.0   84.0      84.0
                AVG                     15.6      13.6      18.0   33.6      64.8



G.2   SIMPLER

We provide results of various models evaluated on SIMPLER environment. Table 11 shows the
setting where baseline models are pretrained on Bridgev2 and then finetuned on SIMPLER roll-
outs (100 videos). The results show detailed results for each task (stack green to yellow block,
put carrot on plate, put spoon on otowel, put eggplant in basket) and subtasks (grasping and mov-
ing). As shown in Table 11, U NI P I significantly underperforms all other baselines on the SIMPLER
Environment. We observe that, although the generated plans from the diffusion models are quite


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Table 10: Language Table Cross-Environment Unseen Results.

                                         S CRATCH           U NI P I   VPT     LAPA      ACTION VLA
                 Block2Block                   8.0            2.0        2.0    30.0        38.0
                 Block2Absolute               10.0           6.0         4.0    14.0        48.0
                 Block2BlockRelative           2.0           6.0         2.0    10.0        50.0
                 Block2Relative                8.0            4.0       40.0    18.0        54.0
                 Separate                     48.0           42.0       44.0    76.0        80.0
                 AVG                          15.2           12.0       18.4    29.6        54.0



accurate, the IDM lacks the capability to predict 7 DOF continuous actions accurately when given
only 100 action-labeled trajectories. Specifically, we observe that U NI P I often fails to grasp the ob-
ject within the maximum step limit. This implies the effectivness of using VLAs in scenarios with
insufficient action-labeled data. Similar to the results of Section 4.3, LAPA outperforms baseline
models that pretrain without using ground-truth action labels (U NI P I and V PT) and closes the per-
formance gap with ACTION VLA, which is pretrained on all of the 60K action-labeled trajectories
from the Bridgev2 dataset. This highlights the effectiveness of LAPA, even when the complexity
of the action space increases. We also evaluate the performance of O PEN VLA fine-tuned on SIM-
PLER trajecotries for reference. The performance of O PEN VLA (36.4) is similar to Scratch. The
bad performance of O PEN VLA on SIMPLER is a well known issue which is due to O PEN VLA not
being robust to real-to-sim transfer for SIMPLER.
We also provide detailed results of the setting where baseline models are pretrained on human ma-
nipulation videos (Something Something V2 dataset) and then finetuned on SIMPLER rollouts (100
videos) in Table 12. We only compare to U NI P I, V PT, and LAPA since ACTION VLA could not be
trained without ground-truth action labels.

Table 11: SIMPLER results of Bridgev2 Pretraining. Success, Grasping, and Moving Rates (%) in SIM-
PLER environment. We pretrain U NI P I, V PT, and LAPA on Bridgev2 dataset without using ground-truth
action labels and ACTION VLA on Bridgev2 using action labels. We also add the result of O PEN VLA fine-
tuned on SIMPLER trajectories for reference. The main 4 tasks are: stack green to yellow block, put carrot on
plate, put spoon on towel, and put eggplant in basket. Best is bolded and second best is underlined.

                 Success Rate        S CRATCH    U NI P I    V PT      LAPA    ACTION VLA   O PEN VLA
                 Stack G2Y             29.2          2.7     45.8      54.2       75.0        41.6
                 Carrot2Plate          29.2          2.7     37.5      45.8       58.0        50.0
                 Spoon2Towel           50.0          0.0     70.8      70.8       70.8        37.5
                 Eggplant2Bask         29.2          0.0     50.0      58.3       50.0        16.7
                 AVG                   34.4          1.3     51.0      57.3       63.5        36.4
                 Grasping Rate
                 Grasp Green Block     66.6          20.8    62.5      62.5       87.5        50.0
                 Grasp Carrot          45.8          33.2    54.1      58.3       75.0        66.6
                 Grasp Spoon           70.8          22.2    79.2      83.3       83.3        45.8
                 Grasp Eggplant        62.5          16.0    70.8      83.3       75.0        37.5
                 AVG                   61.4          23.1    66.7      71.9       80.2        50.0
                 Moving Rate
                 Move Green Block      58.3          29.1    58.3      66.6       91.6        70.8
                 Move Carrot           45.8          48.6    66.6      70.8       91.6        75.0
                 Move Spoon            70.8          34.6    79.2      83.3       79.2        75.0
                 Move Eggplant         87.5          58.0    70.8      87.5       91.6        50.0
                 AVG                   65.6          42.6    68.7      77.1       88.5        67.7


G.3    R EAL - WORLD

We also provide the full list of objects and the partial success recorded for each of the evaluation
rollout: Knocking (Table 13), Covering (Table 14), and Pick & Place (Table 15). The total average
success rate is provided in Table 16).


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: SIMPLER results of Human Manipulation Video Pretraining. Success, Grasping, and Moving
Rates (%) in SIMPLER environment. We pretrain U NI P I, V PT, and LAPA on Something-Something V2
dataset without using ground-truth action labels. The main 4 tasks are: stack green to yellow block, put carrot
on plate, put spoon on towel, and put eggplant in basket. Best is bolded and second best is underlined.

                         Success Rate          VPT     U NI P I    LAPA       LAPA (10%)
                         StackG2Y              50.0      0.0       50.0          45.8
                         Carrot2Plate          29.1      1.3       50.0          41.6
                         Spoon2Towel           37.5      1.3       50.0          66.6
                         Eggplant2Bask         66.6      0.0       58.3          45.8
                         AVG                   45.8      0.7       52.1          50.0
                         Grasping Rate
                         Grasp Green Block     66.6      2.7       58.3          50.0
                         Grasp Carrot          45.8     31.7       62.5          41.6
                         Grasp Spoon           70.8     21.7       75.0          70.8
                         Grasp Eggplant        91.6      6.8       70.8          62.5
                         AVG                   68.7     15.7       66.7          56.2
                         Moving Rate
                         Move Green Block      62.5      2.7       62.5          50.0
                         Move Carrot           58.3     37.5       70.8          58.3
                         Move Spoon            54.1     18.1       75.0          79.2
                         Move Eggplant         91.6     50.3       83.3          62.5
                         AVG                   66.6     27.1       72.9          62.5


                                        Table 13: Knocking Task Results

                                OpenVLA       LAPA      OpenVLA       LAPA       ActionVLA               LAPA
                                                                                              Scratch
                                (OpenX)      (OpenX)     (Bridge)    (Bridge)     (Bridge)              (Sthv2)
                                  Seen Objects, Unseen Object Combinations
 flamingo                          0           0.5          0.5           0.5            0       0        0.5
 pistachios                       0.5           1           0.5            0             1       0         1
 soft scrub                        0            0            0             0            0.5      0        0.5
 white cup                         1            0            0            0.5           0.5     0.5        0
 mustard                           0            1            0             0             0       0         0
 water bottle                      1            1           0.5            0             0      0.5        0
 SUM                              2.5          3.5          1.5           1             2       1         2
                                                Unseen Objects
 pringles                         0.5          0.5          0.5            0             0       0         0
 hersey’s chocolate syrup          0            0            0             0             0       0         0
 popcorn                           0            1            1             1             1       0         1
 skittles                          0            0            0             0             0       0         0
 green board marker               0.5          0.5          0.5           0.5           0.5     0.5       0.5
 paper towel                       0            0            0             0             0       0         0
 SUM                               1            2              2          1.5           1.5     0.5       1.5
                                        Seen Objects, Unseen Instructions
 a drink that contains orange      0            0            0             0             0       0        0
 food to eat with milk            0.5           0            0             0             0       0        0
 a object used for cleaning        0            1            0             0             0       0        0
 something to wash dishes          1            1            0            0.5            1      0.5       0
 the nuts                          1            1           0.5            1             1      0.5       1
 rectangle object                  1            1           0.5           0.5           0.5      0        1
 SUM                              3.5           4              1          2             2.5     1         2
 Success Rate (Strict)          27.78%       44.44%       5.56%       11.11%       22.22%     0.00%     22.22%
 Success Rate                   38.89%       52.78%      25.00%       25.00%       33.33%     13.89%    30.56%
 Reaching Success Rate          50.00%       61.11%      44.44%       38.89%       44.44%     27.78%    38.89%


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Cover <object>         Pick up <object>
                        Knock <object> down
                                                   with towel          and put it in the sink


       Seen Objects
       Unseen Objects


                             Figure 10: Real-world Tabletop Manipulation Examples.



                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Win rate (%) disregarding ties.                    (b) Win rate (%) with ties.

Figure 11: Pairwise win rate (%). We compare a pairwise win-rate of OpenVLA and LAPA across the 54
evaluation rollouts in the real-world. (a) shows the win-rate while ignoring the ties and (b) shows the ties
together with the individual wins.


                   0           1          2            3           4          5           6           7


    Actions    Forward      Back        Back        Right        Right      Back       Do not     Forward
                & Left      & Left     & Right     Slightly                            Move

Figure 12: Latent Action Analysis in Language Table. We condition the current observation x1 and quantized
latent action to the decoder of the latent action quantization model. We observe that each latent action can be
mapped into a semantic action. For example, latent action 0 corresponds to moving a bit left and forward and
corresponds to moving a bit left and back.


Figure 13: Correlation of latent action with ground-truth actions When we map latent actions to ground-
truth 2 DOF actions of Language Table, we observe that latent actions are well-clustered in the actual 2D action
space.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    [2,3,6,6]           [3,5,2,7]        [4,0,0,4]                             [4,2,0,0]        [5,6,7,6]      [5,7,0,5]


    Camera View                         Right            Down            Right, Down                              Up             Down          Up, Left

Figure 14: Latent Action Analysis in Human Manipulation Videos. We condition the current observation x1
and quantized latent action to the decoder of the latent action quantization model. We observe that each latent
action can be mapped into a semantic action including camera movements. For example, latent action [3,5,2,7]
corresponds to moving the camera a bit down while [4,2,0,0] corresponds to moving the camera slightly up.


                               57                                                                                  LAPA
            AVG Success Rate (%)


                                                                                  AVG Success Rate (%)
                                                                                                     50            Scratch
                               55
                                                                                                     40
                               53
                                                                                                     30
                               51
                                                                                                     20
                               49 1       3         5               10                                    10     30        50           100
                                          (a) Window Size                                                 (b) Fine-tuning Data Scale

Figure 15: Additional Ablation Results of LAPA. We further analyze the performance of LAPA by varying
the window size for latent action quantization and fine-tuning data scale. We report the average success rate in
SIMPLER.


                              59                                                                    64
                              58                                                                    62
                              57                                                                    60
                              56                                                                    58
                              55                                                                    56
                              54                                                                    54
                                    1           2                   4                                     8      256                    1024
                                        (a) Latent Action Seq                                                 (b) Latent Action Vocab

Figure 16: Ablation Results of LAPA in Language Table. We try various latent action vocab and sequences
of LAPA and show the downstream average success rate (%) on the Language Table fine-tuning tasks.


Figure 17: Success and Failure Cases of U NI P I. (Top) Given the instruction of ‘move the green block away
from the red cube and red pentagon’, the diffusion model of U NI P I successfully generates the plan. (Bottom)
Given the instruction of ‘put the blue moon toward the yellow block’, the diffusion model fails to generate the
correct plan.


                                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Table 14: Covering Task Results

                         OpenVLA      LAPA        OpenVLA       LAPA      ActionVLA              LAPA
                                                                                      Scratch
                         (OpenX)     (OpenX)       (Bridge)    (Bridge)    (Bridge)             (Sthv2)
                             Seen Objects, Unseen Object Combinations
 icecream                  0.33        0.33         0.33        0.33        0.33       0.33       0
 strawberry                0.33          1          0.33          1         0.33         1        1
 pepper                    0.33          0          0.33        0.33        0.33       0.33      0.33
 watermelon                0.33        0.33         0.33        0.33        0.33         0       0.33
 blue lego block           0.66          1            1           1           1        0.33      0.33
 pink duck                 0.33          1          0.33        0.33        0.33         0       0.33
 SUM                       2.31        3.66         2.65        3.32        2.65       1.99      2.32
                                              Unseen Objects
 donut                     0.33          1          0.66          1         0.66       0.66      0.33
 orange                    0.33        0.33           1           0         0.33         1        1
 mushroom                  0.33        0.33         0.33        0.33        0.33       0.33      0.33
 yellow lego block         0.33          1            1         0.33          0        0.33      0.33
 peas                        1           0          0.66          1           1        0.33       1
 egg                         0           1          0.33          0         0.66         0        1
 SUM                       2.32        3.66         3.98        2.66        2.98       2.65      3.99
                                   Seen Objects, Unseen Instructions
 drink                     0.33          0          0.66          1         0.33       0.33      0.66
 yellow object             0.66        0.66           0           0         0.33         0       0.33
 fruit                     0.33        0.33         0.33        0.33        0.33       0.33      0.33
 vegetable                 0.33        0.33           0         0.33        0.33       0.33      0.33
 edible object             0.33        0.33         0.66          0         0.33         1       0.33
 condiment                 0.33        0.33         0.33          0         0.33       0.33      0.33
 SUM                       2.31        1.98         1.98        1.66        1.98       2.32      2.31
 Success Rate (Strict)    5.56%      33.33%        16.67%      27.78%      11.11%     16.67%    22.22%
 Success Rate            38.56%      51.67%        47.83%      42.44%      42.28%     38.67%    47.89%
 Reaching Success Rate   16.66%      38.89%        38.89%      27.78%      22.22%     22.22%    27.78%


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Table 15: Pick & Place Sink Task Results

                                 OpenVLA       LAPA      OpenVLA      LAPA      ActionVLA              LAPA
                                                                                            Scratch
                                 (OpenX)      (OpenX)     (Bridge)   (Bridge)    (Bridge)             (Sthv2)
                                   Seen Objects, Unseen Object Combinations
 milk                                1            1             1        1           1        0          1
 orange lego block                   1            1             0        1           0        0          0
 ketchup                           0.25         0.25          0.25     0.25         0         0          0
 corn                                1          0.75            1      0.25        0.25      0.25      0.25
 icecream                          0.25           0             0        0           1        0          1
 salt                                0          0.25            0        1           0        0          0
 SUM                                3.5         3.25          2.25      3.5        2.25      0.25      2.25
                                                  Unseen Objects
 carrot                              1          0.25            0      0.25          1       0.25      0.25
 yellow paprika                      1            1             0      0.25        0.25       0          1
 yellow cube                         1           0.5          0.25     0.5          0         0          0
 salmon sushi                        0          0.25            0      0.5           0        0          0
 orange                              1            0             0        0           0       0.25        0
 blue cube                         0.25         0.25            0        0           0        0          0
 SUM                               4.25         2.25          0.25      1.5        1.25       0.5      1.25
                                          Seen Objects, Unseen Instructions
 an object that is yellow           1             1            0         1         0.25       0          0
 an object that is round            0           0.25           0         0           0       0.25        0
 an object that is a fruit          1             1            1         1           0        1        0.75
 an object that you can drink       0           0.25           0       0.5           0        0          0
 an object that is a vegetable      0             0            0         0           0        0          0
 an object that is an animal        0           0.25           0       0.25        0.25       0          0
 SUM                                2           2.75           1       2.75        0.5       1.25      0.75
 Success Rate (Strict)            50.00%       27.78%     16.67%      27.78%     16.67%     5.56%     16.67%
 Success Rate                     54.17%       45.83%     19.44%      43.06%     22.22%     11.11%    23.61%
 Reaching Success Rate            66.67%       83.33%     27.78%      72.22%     38.89%     27.78%    33.33%


                                 Table 16: Summary of Total Success Rates (%)

                                 OpenVLA      LAPA      OpenVLA       LAPA      ActionVLA              LAPA
                                                                                            Scratch
                                 (OpenX)     (OpenX)     (Bridge)    (Bridge)    (Bridge)             (Sthv2)


 Total Success Rate              43.87%       50.09%      30.76%     36.83%      32.61%     21.22%    34.02%
 Total Success Rate (Strict)     27.78%       35.19%      12.96%     22.22%      16.67%     7.41%     20.37%


                                                         27
