Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OUNTERFACTUAL C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK M ODELS
 Gabriele Dominici                                                                 Pietro Barbiero
 Università della Svizzera italiana                                                IBM Research∗
 gabriele.dominici@usi.ch                                                          pietro.barbiero@ibm.com

 Francesco Giannini                                                                   Martin Gjoreski
 Scuola Normale Superiore                                                             Università della Svizzera italiana
 francesco.giannini@sns.it                                                            martin.gjoreski@usi.ch

 Giuseppe Marra                                                 Marc Langheinrich
 KU Leuven                                                      Università della Svizzera italiana
 giuseppe.marra@kuleuven.be                                     marc.langheinrich@usi.ch



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Current deep learning models are not designed to simultaneously address three
             fundamental questions: predict class labels to solve a given classification task
             (the "What?"), simulate changes in the situation to evaluate how this impacts
             class predictions (the "How?"), and imagine how the scenario should change to
             result in different class predictions (the "Why not?"). While current approaches in
             causal representation learning and concept interpretability are designed to address
             some of these questions individually (such as Concept Bottleneck Models, which
             address both “what” and “how” questions), no current deep learning model is
             specifically built to answer all of them at the same time. To bridge this gap,
             we introduce CounterFactual Concept Bottleneck Models (CF-CBMs), a class
             of models designed to efficiently address the above queries all at once without
             the need to run post-hoc searches. Our experimental results demonstrate that
             CF-CBMs: achieve classification accuracy comparable to black-box models and
             existing CBMs (“What?”), rely on fewer important concepts leading to simpler
             explanations (“How?”), and produce interpretable, concept-based counterfactuals
             (“Why not?”). Additionally, we show that training the counterfactual generator
             jointly with the CBM leads to two key improvements: (i) it alters the model’s
             decision-making process, making the model rely on fewer important concepts
             (leading to simpler explanations), and (ii) it significantly increases the causal effect
             of concept interventions on class predictions, making the model more responsive
             to these changes.


1       I NTRODUCTION                                      Original                        Counterfactuals
                                                        (Pneumothorax)                    (No Pneumothorax)

To calibrate human trust and en-                                                  Why not
                                                                              No Pneumothorax?                          Input level
hance human-machine interactions,                                                                                       No intuitive
                                                                                                                          insights
deep learning (DL) models should
learn how to master three fundamen-
                                                                                  Why not
tal questions: predict class labels for                                       No Pneumothorax?
                                                                                                                       Concept level
new inputs (the “What is the diagno-                        Collapsed Lung                       Collapsed Lung
                                                                                                                        Interpretable
                                                            Visible Pleura Line                  Visible Pleura Line
sis for the X-ray shown in Figure 1?”),                                                                                   changes

simulate changes in the situation to
                                              Figure 1: CF-CBMs generate counterfactuals at the concept level
evaluate how this impacts class pre-
                                              rather than at the input level, as the changes are more interpretable.
dictions (the “How would the absence          On the contrary, identifying the changes in the input level require
of collapsed lung impact the presence         significant more effort from the user. The images are sourced from
of pneumothorax?”), and imagine al-           the SIIM Pneumothorax dataset (Zawacki et al., 2019).
    ∗
        Work conducted while employed at Università della Svizzera italiana.


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Counterfactual CBM. For a given input sample, the task predictor answers “what?” queries predicting
class labels. The concept predictor answers “how?” queries simulating changes in the scenarios through
interventions. When taking the counterfactual latent distribution z ′ , the concept predictor answers “why not?”
queries via concept-based counterfactuals, which are easier to understand then counterfactuals at the input level.


ternative scenarios that would result in different class predictions (the “Why is the patient not having
pneumothorax?”)—also known as counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al., 2017). Currently, no
existing DL model is designed to answer all these questions by design.
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020) are DL architectures designed to answer
both “what?” and “how?” questions. They first predict human-understandable concepts (Kim et al.,
2018), allowing experts to evaluate how intervening on such concepts influences the model’s class
predictions. However, CBMs fall short in answering “why not?” queries as they are not trained
to produce concept-based counterfactuals. More broadly, counterfactuals have been explored in
concept-based models, e.g., for concept discovery (Stammer et al., 2024), while causal inference
addresses this statistically (Louizos et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2022), seeking to discover and/or exploit
the true causal relationships in the data. In contrast, we focus on addressing these questions from the
model’s perspective, shedding light on its decision-making process. From this viewpoint, state-of-
the-art counterfactual generation methods (Wachter et al., 2017; Pawelczyk et al., 2020; Guyomard
et al., 2023; Nemirovsky et al., 2021) answer “what?” and “why not?” but not “how?”, especially
when working with unstructured data such as images. Moreover, in these cases, counterfactual
methods may generate an image that either i) looks nearly identical to the original, or ii) incorporates
pixel-level modifications of difficult interpretation from the human perspective across thousands of
pixels throughout the entire image (as shown in Figure 1). This scattering of modifications makes it
hard to understand the answers to the “why not” questions. In addition, it is difficult to answer “how”
questions because semantically coherent pixel-level interventions are hard to define and perform for
domain experts (e.g., radiologists) (Abid et al., 2022). In summary, input-level counterfactuals often
lack actionable insights, while concept-based models cannot answer counterfactual queries.
Contributions. To bridge these gaps, we introduce CounterFactual Concept Bottleneck Models
(CF-CBM), a class of deep learning models designed to jointly master three fundamental questions for
a classification problem - "What?", "How?" and "Why not?", generating interpretable concept-based
counterfactuals. Our key innovation is a latent process that generates two similar concept vectors: one
predicts the target class label (as in standard CBMs), while the other predicts an alternative class. Our
experiments show that CF-CBMs achieve classification accuracy comparable to black-box models
and existing CBMs (“What?”), rely on fewer important concepts leading to simpler explanations
(“How?”), and produce interpretable, concept-based counterfactuals (“Why not?”). Additionally,
training the counterfactual generator jointly with the CBM leads to two key benefits: (i) it alters
the model’s decision-making, making it rely on fewer important concepts and (ii) it significantly
increases the causal effect of concept interventions on class predictions, making the model more
responsive to these changes. The code of this paper is publicly available1 .


2       BACKGROUND

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs). Concept Bottleneck Models (Koh et al., 2020) are interpretable
architectures that explain their predictions using high-level units of information (i.e., “concepts”).
    1
        https://github.com/gabriele-dominici/Counterfactual-CBM


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given a sample’s raw features x ∈ X ⊆ Rd (e.g., an image’s pixels), a set of r concepts ci ∈
C ⊆ {0, 1}r (e.g., “collapsed lung”, “visible pleural line”), and a set of l class labels yj ∈ Y ⊆
{0, 1}l (e.g.,Qlabels “pneumothorax”   Q or “no pneumothorax”). A CBM estimates the conditional
distribution j p(yj | c1 , . . . , cr ) i p(ci | x) where p(ci | x) is a set of independent Bernoulli
distributions. At test time, human experts may intervene on mispredicted concept labels to improve
CBMs’ task performance, simulating different scenarios. In a probabilistic perspective (Bahadori &
Heckerman, 2020; Misino et al., 2022), (ideal) concepts c represent key factors of variation (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Zarlenga et al., 2023) of observed data x and y, as illustrated in the graphical model
 x     c   y
              .
Counterfactual Explanations. A counterfactual is a hypothetical statement in contrast with actual
events that helps us understand the potential consequences of different choices or circumstances
(Pearl et al., 2016). In the context of machine learning, Wachter et al. (2017) define counterfactual
explanations as an optimization problem representing an answer to a “why not” question. The
optimization aims to find for each observation x the closest datapoint x′ such that a classifier
m : X → Y produces a class label m(x′ ) that is different from the original label m(x).

3      C OUNTERFACTUAL C ONCEPT B OTTLENECK M ODELS
CounterFactual Concept Bottleneck Models (CF-CBMs, Figure 2) is a novel class of interpretable
models designed to generate counterfactuals via variational inference at the concept level. In the
following, we motivate CF-CBMs’ architecture and optimization objective (Section 3.1). Sections 3.2
and 3.3 show how CF-CBMs answer the different questions and how users can act upon generated
counterfactuals.

3.1     G ENERATING C ONCEPT-BASED C OUNTERFACTUALS

To realize concept-based counterfactuals, we extend the graphical model x c y introducing
two additional variables: c′ , representing concept-based counterfactual labels; and y ′ , representing
the counterfactual class label. We represent the counterfactual dependency on the actual concepts c
with an arrow from c to c′ , while y ′ depends on c′ :
                                                                c′        y′


                                                       x        c         y
                                                                                                   (1)
We also notice that multiple counterfactuals can be used to explain any given fact (Wachter et al.,
2017; Pearl, 2000). To address this, an ideal solution would be to use a generative approach modeling
the discrete distributions over c and c′ . However, modeling such distributions directly might be
unfeasible in practice (Richardson & Domingos, 2006) as it requires either modelling complex
concept dependencies with discrete distributions which scale exponentially with the number of
concepts, or assuming that concepts are independent of each other, an often unrealistic assumption.
For this reason, we use a latent variable approach (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to model concept
dependencies in a continuous latent distribution, which allows us to model discrete concept values as
independent of each other given the latent variable.
Architecture. CF-CBMs are latent variable models generating counterfactuals via variational
inference. To this end, they add two random variables z and z ′ to Diagram 1. These variables
represent latent factors of variation whose probability distributions are easier to model and sample
compared to those for c and c′ . We also include arrows from c and y to the counterfactual latent
distribution z ′ in order to explicitly model the dependency of z ′ on the symbolic values of actual
concept c and class labels y, resulting in the following overall probabilistic graphical model:
                                                           z′        c′        y′


                                                   x       z         c         y
                                                                                                                        (2)
This way, the generative distribution factorizes as:
   p(c, y, z, c′ , y ′ , z ′ , x) = p(c, y|z)p(c′ , y ′ |z ′ )p(x|z)p(z|c, y)                                           (3)
                                           ′   ′   ′            ′    ′         ′    ′                       ′
      p(c, y|z) = p(y|c)p(c|z),        p(c , y |z ) = p(y |c )p(c |z ),                 p(z|c, y) = p(z)p(z |z, c, y)   (4)


                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In our approach, p(y|c) and p(y ′ |c′ ) are modeled as categorical distributions parametrized by the
same task predictor f ; p(c|z) and p(c′ |z ′ ) as sets of Bernoulli distributions parametrized by the same
concept predictor ϕz . In practice, we assume that the input x is always observed at test time, making
the p(x|z) term irrelevant. This allows z and z′ to encode only the most salient information about the
concepts c and c′, rather than all the details needed to reconstruct x. As a result, the optimization
process is significantly simplified, enabling efficient counterfactual generation for complex data
like images. Finally, p(z) is a normal prior distribution and p(z ′ |z, c, y) is a learnable normal prior
whose mean and variance are parametrized by neural networks ϕpµ and ϕpσ . The added complexity
introduced with these additional black-box components is limited to the stages before concept
extraction, enabling the encoding of information about possible counterfactuals. Thus, our model
retains the interpretability of CBMs while providing the additional capability to explain decisions
through counterfactuals.
Amortized inference. CF-CBMs amortize inference needed for training by introducing two approxi-
mate Gaussian posteriors q(z|x) and q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ ) whose mean and variance are parametrized by a
pair of neural networks (ϕµ , ϕσ ) ((ϕµ′ , ϕσ′ ), respectively). The corresponding inference graphical
model (i.e. the encoder) is shown in Appendix A.
Optimization problem. CF-CBMs are trained to optimize the log-likelihood of tuples (c, y, y ′ ),
where y ′ is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution for each observation of x, simulating a
scenario in which a user requests the generation of a counterfactual for a specific label. Following a
variational inference approach, we optimize the evidence lower bound of the log-likelihood, which
results (see Appendix A) in the following objective function to maximize:
                           reconstruction of c and y                   prior regularization on z
              z                 }|                 { z          }|         {
          L = λ1 Ez∼q(z|x) [log p(c|z)] + log p(y|c) − λ2 DKL [q(z|x)||p(z)]
                                  reconstruction of y ′                              prior regularization on z ′
               z                          }|                           { z                }|                 {
             + λ3 Ez,z′ ,c′ ∼p(c′ |z′ )q(z′ |α)q(z|x)) [log p(y ′ |c′ )] − λ4 DKL [q(z ′ |α)||p(z ′ |z, c, y)]
where DKL is the Kullback–Leibler divergence, α = (z, c, y, y ′ ) and λi are hyperparameters.
Moreover, in order to enforce concept-based counterfactuals to be as close as possible to the current
concept labels, we add an additional term to the objective (Kingma & Welling, 2022):
                                        posterior distance                       prior distance
                           z         }|             { z            }|                {
                   Ldz = − λ5 DKL [q(z|x)||q(z ′ |α)] − λ6 DKL [p(z)||p(z ′ |z, c, y)]                             (5)

3.2    A NSWERING “ WHAT ?”, “ HOW ?” AND “ WHY NOT ?” QUERIES

CF-CBMs design allows them to answer “what?”, “how?” and “why not?” queries through the
following steps (Figure 2):
1. What? Predict concept and class labels:

      (a) Sample from latent concept posterior: z ∼ N (ϕµ (x), ϕσ (x))
      (b) Sample to predict concept and class labels: ŷ ∼ Cat(f (ĉ)), ĉ ∼ Ber(ϕz (z))

2. How? Simulate changes in the situation and evaluate the impact on the outcome. Similar to
standard CBMs, it is possible to intervene at the concept level—since these concepts are inherently
interpretable—and analyze how these modifications impact the model’s prediction:

      (a) Simulate changes intervening on concept values: ĉi := c̃i ∀i ∈ I where c̃i is the
          intervened value for each concept i in the set I of the intervened concepts.
      (b) Sample to predict class labels based on the intervened concepts: ỹ ∼ Cat(f (ĉ))

3. Why not? Imagine interpretable counterfactuals via the generation of new concept tuples:

      (a) Sample from latent counterfactual posterior:
             z ′ ∼ N (ϕµ′ (α), ϕσ′ (α)),           α = (z, ĉ, ŷ, y ′ ),    y ′ ∼ Categorical(v), v ∼ U{0, |y|}
      (b) Sample to predict counterfactual labels: ŷ ′ ∼ Cat(f (ĉ′ )), ĉ′ ∼ Ber(ϕz (z ′ ))


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The following example illustrates a concrete scenario.
Example. Consider a lung X-ray scan with the task of classifying if a patient has pneu-
mothorax or not. Additionally, we have access to two key concepts: “collapsed lung”
and “visible pleural line”, which are critical in determining if a patient has pneumothorax
or not. A CF-CBM addresses the three interpretability questions as follows: Predict: the
model predicts concept labels ĉ = ĉCollapsedLung = 1, ĉV isibleP leuralLine = 1 and class labels
ŷN oP neumothorax = 0, ŷP neumothorax = 1, indicating the presence of both concepts and a Pneu-
mothorax classification. Simulate: it is possible to intervene on the concept "collapsed lung"
ĉCollapsedLung = 0, simulating a different scenario, and observe that the model still pre-
dicts the same class, presence of Pneumothorax, showing the model’s robustness to changes
in one concept. Imagine: generate the counterfactual where the desired class changes to
  ′                         ′
ŷN oP neumothorax = 1, ŷP neumothorax = 0. The corresponding concept-level counterfactual would
     ′                     ′
be ĉCollapsedLung = 1, ĉV isibleP leuralLine = 0, demonstrating how modifying these concepts could
lead to a different classification.

3.3   T EST- TIME F UNCTIONALITIES

In contrast to standard CBMs, CF-CBMs can either sample or estimate the most probable counterfac-
tual to: (i) explain the effect of concept interventions on tasks, (ii) show users how to get a desired
class label, and (iii) propose concept interventions via “task-driven” interventions.
Counterfactuals explain the effect of concept interventions on downstream tasks. Plain concept-
based explanations indicate the presence or absence of a concept for a given class prediction. However,
the complexity of plain explanations grows quickly with the number of concepts. Concept-based
counterfactuals, instead, induce simpler, sparser explanations (via Eq. 5) representing minimal
modifications of concept labels that would have led to a different class prediction.
Act upon concept-based counterfactuals. Concept-based counterfactuals can guide users towards
achieving desired outcomes (indicated by class labels), especially when users do not know how
to alter their status (represented by concepts). In this scenario: (i) a user specifies a desired class
label y ′ for the downstream task representing their goal (e.g., get a loan), (ii) CF-CBMs generate a
concept-based counterfactual p(c′ |y ′ , ŷ, ĉ) representing minimal concept modifications changing the
class label from the predicted ŷ to the desired y ′ (e.g., save 10% more each month), (iii) the user can
act upon the counterfactual c′ to accomplish the goal represented by y ′ .
Task-driven interventions fix mispredicted concepts. A key feature of CBMs is enabling human-
in-the-loop interventions: at test time, users can correct mispredicted concept labels to enhance
downstream task performance (c → y intervention). Concept interventions can be useful when
intervening on concepts is easier than intervening on the downstream task. For instance, it might be
easier to identify if the lung is collapsed (c) in a lung X-ray scan than to provide an accurate prediction
if a patient has or not pneumothorax (y). While still supporting concept interventions, CF-CBMs
may also invert this mechanism via task-driven interventions (y → c), exploiting its counterfactual
generation abilities. Task-driven interventions can be used to correct mispredicted class labels when
intervening on the downstream task is easier than intervening on concepts. For instance, it might
be easier to identify a mispredicted Parkinson’s disease (y) rather than intervening in the genetic
pathways (c) leading to the disease. In this scenario, users can intervene on the class label (rather
than on the concepts) suggesting a correct y ′ . Considering this additional information, CF-CBMs
propose a more accurate set of concept labels ĉ′ representing potential concept intervention previously
unknown to the user.


4     E XPERIMENTS

Our experiments aim to answer the following questions:

       • What? prediction generalization: Do CF-CBMs attain similar task/concept accuracy as
         standard CBMs?
       • How? intervention impact: Does optimizing counterfactual generation end-to-end with
         the predictor alter the importance assigned by the model to each concept?


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          • Why not? counterfactual actionability: Can CF-CBMs produce valid, plausible, efficient
            counterfactuals? Can CF-CBMs generate accurate task-driven interventions?

This section describes essential information about experiments. We provide further details in Ap-
pendix C.

Data & task setup In our experiments we use five different datasets commonly used to evaluate
CBMs: dSprites (Matthey et al., 2017), where the task is to predict specific combinations of objects
having different shapes, positions, sizes and colours; MNIST addition (Manhaeve et al., 2018), where
the task is to predict the sum of two digits; and CUB (Welinder et al., 2010), where the task is to
predict bird species based on bird characteristics; CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al.), where the task is to
classify the object in the image, and SIIM Pneumothorax (Zawacki et al., 2019), where the task is
to determine whether the X-ray scan indicates Pneumothorax. These two datasets do not include
concept annotations, so we extract them following the method proposed in Oikarinen et al. (2023). In
all experiments, images are encoded using a pre-trained ResNet18 (He et al., 2015) (dSpties, MNIST
Add, CUB), CLIP ViTB16 (Radford et al., 2021)(CIFAR10) or CXR-CLIP (You et al., 2023) (SIIM
Pneumothorax).

Evaluation In our analysis we use the following metrics. What? (prediction generalization):
we compute the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (Hand & Till, 2001) for
concepts and tasks (ROC AUC (↑)2 ). How? (intervention impact): we assess the influence of
concepts on the downstream task using the Causal Concept Effect (CaCE) (Goyal et al., 2019), which
quantifies the degree to which each concept is critical for a class. This allows us to evaluate the
impact of optimizing counterfactuals end-to-end versus using post-hoc methods. Additionally, in
scenarios where confounders are present, CaCE can help determine whether the impact of these
confounders is high or low. Why not? (counterfactual actionability): drawing from previous works
on counterfactuals, we compute: (i) the validity3 (↑) (Wachter et al., 2017) by checking whether the
model predicts the desired class labels based on the generated counterfactual; (ii) the proximity
(↓) (Pawelczyk et al., 2020) which evaluates counterfactuals’ “reliability” as their similarity w.r.t.
training samples; (iii) the time (↓) (Romashov et al., 2022) to generate counterfactuals (see Appendix
D for the results on this metric). In addition, we propose the following metrics to assess the quality
of counterfactuals: (i) the ∆-Sparsity (↓) which evaluates user’s “wasted efforts” by counting the
number concepts changed (Guo et al., 2023) w.r.t. the minimal number of changes that would have
generated a counterfactual according to the dataset; (ii) the “plausibility” (Wachter et al., 2017) as the
Intersection over Union (IoU (↑)) (Jaccard, 1912) between counterfactuals and ground-truth concept
vectors; (iii) the variability (↑) which evaluates counterfactuals’ “diversity”, as the cardinality ratio
between the set of counterfactuals generated and the set of training concept vectors; (iv) finally,
we measure the concept accuracy of generated interventions (Acc Int. (↑)) w.r.t. ground-truth
optimal interventions that evaluate the model’s ability to generate potential concept interventions.
Following Espinosa Zarlenga et al. (2022), we inject noise on predicted concepts to reduce task
accuracy, then we sample counterfactuals, conditioning on the ground-truth label, and use them to fix
mispredicted concept labels automatically. All metrics are reported using the mean and the standard
error over five different runs with different initializations. Additionally, in Appendix E, we provide
examples of counterfactuals generated by our models and the baselines across various datasets.

Baselines In our experiments, we compare CF-CBM with a Black Box model, a standard CBM and
a more powerful CBM as Concept Embedding Model (CEM) (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022) in terms
of generalization performance. To ensure a fair comparison, we create counterfactual baselines by
adapting post-hoc methods to standard CBMs, allowing for a direct comparison between our approach
and other state-of-the-art models. We propose this experimental design for two main reasons. First,
standard CBMs cannot generate counterfactuals by design, hence they need an external generator.
Second, the standard, direct application of post-hoc methods on unstructured data types (e.g., image
pixels rather than concepts) would have significantly compromised counterfactuals’ interpretability
and difficult comparison between the generated results. We remark that this already represents an
undocumented procedure in the current literature, as post-hoc methods typically derive counterfactuals
from input features, not in the concept space. However, this also enables us to compare post-hoc
   2
       (↑): the higher the better. (↓): the lower the better.
   3
       A.k.a. “correctness” (Abid et al., 2022).


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


counterfactual methods with our model, which incorporates counterfactual constraints during training.
Among post-hoc approaches we select: (i) the Bayesian Counterfactual (BayCon) (Romashov et al.,
2022), which generates counterfactuals via probabilistic feature sampling and Bayesian optimization;
(ii) the Counterfactual Conditional Heterogeneous Variational AutoEncoder (C-CHVAE) (Pawelczyk
et al., 2020), which iteratively perturbs the latent space of a VAE until it finds counterfactuals; (iii) the
VAE CounterFactual (VAE-CF) (Mahajan et al., 2020), which improves C-CHVAE by conditioning
counterfactuals on model’s predictions; (iv) the Variational Counter Net (VCNet) (Guyomard et al.,
2023), which conditions latent counterfactual sampling on a specific target label y ′ .


5     K EY F INDINGS & R ESULTS

5.1    W HAT ? P REDICTION G ENERALIZATION

CF-CBMs achieve generalization performance that is close to standard CBMs. CF-CBMs
attain both concept and task ROC AUC similar to Black Box, standard CBM and CEM, a more
expressive CBM (details in Appendix D). This shows that generating counterfactuals does not have
a negative impact on classification performance on the datasets we considered. Our goal was not
to improve performance but to improve interpretability. This outcome highlights how CF-CBMs
generalise standard CBM architectures by matching their predictive accuracy while introducing new
fundamental functionalities (i.e., counterfactual explanations and task-driven interventions).

5.2    H OW ? I NTERVENTION IMPACT

Jointly training counterfactuals’ generator
and CBMs makes the model rely on fewer Table 1: CF-CBMs ignore the confounding concept
important concepts leading to simpler expla- on the modified dSprites dataset.
nations (Table 1) Following Koh et al. (2020),
CF-CBMs allow users to intervene directly on                                        Post-hoc       Joint (ours)
the concepts, enabling simulation of diverse sce-            Shape 1                0.16 ±  0.03   0.30  ± 0.15
                                                             Shape 2                0.13 ± 0.03 0.18 ± 0.08
narios and observation of their effects on the               Shape 3                0.16 ± 0.03 0.32 ± 0.09
model’s final prediction, as quantified by the               Two obj                0.04 ± 0.01 0.16 ± 0.07
Causal Concept Effect (CaCE) (Goyal et al.,                  Colours (confounder) 0.17 ± 0.03 0.02 ± 0.01
2019). To assess the impact of CF-CBMs joint Table 2: Compared to CBMs, CF-CBMs assign
training design on how the model perceives the greater importance to a small fraction of concepts,
importance of each concept we conducted exper- while the majority of concepts receive less importance
iments using a modified dSprites dataset, follow- on CUB.
ing Goyal et al. (2019), where a high correlation
was introduced between an object’s color and its     Dataset      Percentile   Mean Post-hoc    Mean Joint (ours) p-value
                                                                 Top 10% (↑)  0.1589 ± 0.0203 0.1827 ± 0.0676 0.0001
class label. While standard CBM explanations         MNIST
                                                               Bottom 50% (↓) 0.0308 ± 0.0175 0.0257 ± 0.0143 0.2437
weighted shape and color (confounders) equally       CUB
                                                                 Top 10% (↑)  0.0093 ± 0.0029 0.0131 ± 0.0044       0.0
for class prediction, CF-CBMs correctly priori-                Bottom 50% (↓) 0.0016 ± 0.0006 0.0013 ± 0.0008       0.0

tized shape as the primary predictor, as shown in
Table 1. Specifically, altering color in standard CBMs resulted in a CaCE score of 0.17, demonstrating
a 17% chance of prediction change due to this confounding factor. This reveals that standard CBMs
are susceptible to relying on shortcuts in decision-making (Marconato et al., 2023). In contrast, CF-
CBMs showed minimal sensitivity to color changes, with a CaCE score of just 0.02, demonstrating
significantly higher robustness against confounding features. Additionally, CF-CBMs assigned higher
CaCE scores to shape concepts, indicating a stronger reliance on these critical features, unlike the
post-hoc version. This trend was consistently observed across the other datasets: MNIST (p-value =
0.003) and CUB (p-value = 0.000), where CF-CBMs and CBMs exhibited distinct CaCE distributions
as confirmed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (the distributions are shown in App. D). Table 2 further
illustrates that CF-CBMs achieved a higher mean CaCE for the top 10% of concepts, signifying that
the model concentrates on a smaller subset of highly relevant concepts. This focus results in more con-
cise and interpretable explanations by engaging a reduced number of concepts. Moreover, CF-CBMs
exhibited a lower mean CaCE for the bottom 50% of concepts, suggesting that the model learned
to disregard less critical features, thereby enhancing robustness against concept perturbations. The
Mann-Whitney U test results reveal that three out of four comparisons were statistically significant,
underscoring the impact of joint training. This shift in decision-making comes from the CF-CBM’s


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



       Table 3: CF-CBMs outperform all baselines in counterfactuals’ validity across all datasets.

                           dSprites (↑)   MNIST add (↑)    CUB (↑)     CIFAR10 (↑)   SIIM Pneumothorax (↑)   avg. (↑)
           CBM+BayCon      100.0 ± 0.0     94.6 ± 0.5     66.2 ± 0.5    91.0 ± 3.3       100.0 ± 0.0         90.4 ± 0.7
           CBM+CCHVAE       98.4 ± 0.6     94.7 ± 0.2     78.7 ± 0.4    93.6 ± 0.1         93.0 ± 0.6        91.7 ± 0.2
           CBM+VAECF       100.0 ± 0.0     82.0 ± 5.9     95.2 ± 0.2    91.0 ± 0.8       100.0 ± 0.0         93.4 ± 1.2
           CBM+VCNET       100.0 ± 0.0     89.9 ± 0.9     93.1 ± 0.5   100.0 ± 0.0       100.0 ± 0.0         96.6 ± 0.2
           CF-CBM (ours)   100.0 ± 0.0     96.4 ± 0.7     99.0 ± 0.1   100.0 ± 0.0        99.9 ± 0.1         99.06 ± 0.1


objective of generating counterfactuals that alter only the minimal subset of concept labels required
to change the class prediction—e.g., adjusting shape but not color. Consequently, the model’s task
predictor is forced to focus on the minimal set of decisive features. For additional details on the CaCE
score distributions, refer to Appendix D. Overall, our findings suggest that jointly training CF-CBMs
not only improves model interpretability but also yields a more robust decision-making process.

5.3   W HY NOT ? C OUNTERFACTUAL ACTIONABILITY

CF-CBMs outperform baselines in counterfactuals’ validity. (Table 3) CF-CBMs attain the
highest counterfactual validity across all datasets when compared to counterfactual generation
baselines applied to the concept space of standard CBMs. This result shows that CF-CBMs can
effectively generate concept vectors that lead to user-requested class labels. The gap w.r.t. baselines
increases in complex datasets involving a vast search space over multiple concepts and classes. In the
MNIST addition dataset (20 concepts, 19 classes), CF-CBMs achieve +14 percentage points (p.p.)
higher validity than VAECF and +7 p.p. higher than VCNet. In CUB (118 concepts, 200 classes),
CF-CBMs find solutions with a significantly higher validity w.r.t. iterative methods: +33 p.p. higher
than BayCon and +20 p.p. higher than C-CHVAE. Lastly, in the CIFAR10 and SIIM Pneumothorax
datasets, CF-CBMs continue to achieve the highest validity.
CF-CBMs balance counterfactuals’ reliability with minimal user effort. (Figure 3) High-quality
counterfactuals should satisfy two key properties simultaneously: to be reliable and to require the
least amount of users’ effort to act upon. However, minimizing user’s effort alone might lead to
learning shortcuts producing less reliable counterfactuals, while optimizing reliability might generate
counterfactuals that change the values of multiple concepts and represent a significant burden for
users to take actions. For this reason, these two properties should be evaluated together:

       • CF-CBMs generate reliable counterfactuals: When processing large datasets, the training
         distribution covers a large portion of the feasible action space. For this reason, counterfactual
         solutions close to training samples are likely to be more reliable, as discussed by Pawelczyk
         et al. (2020); Laugel et al. (2019); Wachter et al. (2017). Our results show that CF-CBMs
         generate highly reliable counterfactuals across all datasets. Baseline models instead struggle
         to produce counterfactual close to training samples in at least one dataset.
       • CF-CBMs generate counterfactuals requiring minimal user effort to act upon: CF-
         CBMs consistently generate counterfactuals close to the optimal sparsity i.e., the fewest
         possible concept changes to alter the class prediction. This represents a significant result in
         terms of actionability because each concept modification requires user effort. For this reason,
         should a counterfactual require many concept label changes compared to the original concept
         vector, it would lead to a substantial unnecessary effort. Across all datasets, CF-CBMs
         stand out for their consistency in this aspect: their counterfactuals are either the sparsest or
         very close to the sparsest. This makes them highly effective and user-friendly, avoiding the
         burden of unnecessary actions.

CF-CBMs calibrate the variability-plausibility trade-off. (Figure 4) Another key trade-off
in generating counterfactuals corresponds to the tension between producing counterfactuals with
high diversity, allowing users to pick among different roadmaps to action, and producing plausible
counterfactuals corresponding to user actions that are likely to be feasible in practice. However,
learning shortcuts might lead to trivial solutions with a poor variability-plausibility trade-off. For
instance, once a plausible counterfactual is found, a trivial solution could be to generate always the
same counterfacual, thus leading to minimal diversity, while maximizing the variability increases the
chance of generating less plausible counterfactuals. In practice, these two properties are measured by
variability and IoU between counterfactuals and ground-truth concept vectors. A higher variability
implies that our model can produce a wider range of counterfactuals. A higher IoU value suggests that


                                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          dSprites                               MNIST add                                      CUB                                 CIFAR10               SIIM PNEUMOTHORAX
                               15                                       6                                                                                                                   40


        ∆ Sparsity (%)
                                                                                                                   10                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                               10                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                    5                                    10
                                5                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                            10

                                0                                       0                                           0                                     0                                  0
                         BEST (↓)                                BEST (↓)                                    BEST (↓)                              BEST (↓)                           BEST (↓)
                                 0              10          20           0               5              10           0            10         20            0          20       40             0         20        40
                              BEST (←)                                BEST (←)                                    BEST (←)                              BEST (←)                           BEST (←)
                                         Proximity (%)                            Proximity (%)                              Proximity (%)                         Proximity (%)                      Proximity (%)


                                                     CF-CBM                     CBM + BayCon                       CBM + CCHVAE                      CBM + VAECF                    CBM + VCNET



Figure 3: CF-CBMs balance the trade off between counterfactuals’ reliability (proximity) and user effort
(∆-Sparsity). The arrow (→) points towards optimal values. Pareto-optimal models form the frontier of the
shaded region, whereas dominated solutions are located within the shaded region.

                              1.5
                                        dSprites                      2.0
                                                                                MNIST add                         1.5
                                                                                                                               CUB                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                   CIFAR10                SIIM PNEUMOTHORAX
                                                                                                                                                                                            2.0
                         BEST (↑)                                BEST (↑)                                    BEST (↑)                              BEST (↑)                            BEST (↑)
                                                                      1.5                                                                                                                   1.5
        Variability


                              1.0                                                                                  1.0                                   1.0
                                                                      1.0                                                                                                                   1.0
                              0.5                                                                                  0.5                                   0.5
                                                                      0.5                                                                                                                   0.5

                              0.0                                     0.0                                          0.0                                   0.0                                0.0
                                    0      25       50                      0       25          50                       0        5        10                  0          1                       0          10           20
                                                 BEST (→)                                    BEST (→)                                   BEST (→)                       BEST (→)                                        BEST (→)
                                          IoU (%)                                  IoU (%)                                    IoU (%)                                IoU (%)                            IoU (%)
                                                                      CF-CBM                       CF-CBM 10                          CBM + BayCon                    CBM + VAECF
                                                                      CF-CBM 5                     CF-CBM 100                         CBM + CCHVAE                    CBM + VCNET



Figure 4: CF-CBMs calibrate the trade off between counterfactuals’ diversity (variability) and plausibility
(IoU). The arrow (→) points towards optimal values. Pareto-optimal models form the frontier of the shaded
region, whereas dominated solutions are located within the shaded region. “CF-CBM n” samples n counterfac-
tuals from the latent distribution as described in App. B.


generated counterfactuals are also representative of the training distribution which contains plausible
solutions. Our results show that CF-CBMs balance the optimization of these two properties better
than existing methods. The gap w.r.t. BayCon and VCNet is already significant on dSprites where
CF-CBMs produce counterfactuals with +25 p.p. higher IoU (plausibility) and ×3 more variable.
In MNIST addition the VAECF’s performances significantly deteriorate, while C-CHVAE mainly
struggles in CUB. On CIFAR10, all baselines perform poorly on the IoU metric, while on the SIIM
Pneumothorax dataset, they also struggle with variability, with the exception of C-CHVAE.
CF-CBMs generate accurate task-driven interventions. (Figure 5) CF-CBMs enable task-driven
interventions, showing users how to modify concepts to get the desired class label. This represents
a novel crucial feature when users know the desired outcome but lack the knowledge to intervene
on concepts. CF-CBM significantly outperforms other baselines in concept accuracy of task-driven
interventions by up to 78 p.p. Such performance can be explained as the generation of task-driven
interventions is conditioned on a user-provided target class label which provides fundamental infor-
mation for the model to search in the latent concept distribution. Appendix D shows that CF-CBMs
attain similar results while applying different levels of noise on predicted concept labels.


6    D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

Limitations. CF-CBMs combine features from CBMs and generative models, carrying forward
their strengths and limitations. From generative models, CF-CBMs inherit the ability to efficiently
approximate the data distribution. However, this approximation does not guarantee counterfactuals’
optimality when compared to exact methods (Wachter et al., 2017). Besides, CF-CBMs require
concept annotators (humans or machines (Oikarinen et al., 2023)) to ground explanations, as standard
CBMs. Reasoning shortcuts (Marconato et al., 2023), concept impurities (Zarlenga et al., 2023),
and information bottlenecks (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022) are also typical limitations of CBM
architectures, especially when the concept bottleneck is not complete (Yeh et al., 2020).
Relations with concept-based models. CF-CBMs share common ground with existing CBMs in
modeling concepts in latent spaces. However, current models use the latent concept space to improve
task accuracy (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022; Barbiero et al., 2023; Debot et al., 2024), promote
concept disentanglement (Misino et al., 2022; Marconato et al., 2022), model concept interactions (Xu
et al., 2024; Barbiero et al., 2024), or estimate task confidence intervals (Kim et al., 2023). Differently,


                                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                          dSprites               −40
                                                                           MNIST add                   50
                                                                                                                   CUB                  −80
                                                                                                                                                    CIFAR10                SIIM PNEUMOTHORAX
                                 0                           BEST (↑)                            BEST (↑)                           BEST (↑)


        Acc Int 50% (%)
                          BEST (↑)                                                                                                                                        −80
                                                                                                                                        −85
                              −25                                −60                                    0

                              −50                                                                                                       −90
                                                                                                                                                                          −90
                                                                 −80                                 −50
                              −75                                                                                                       −95

                             −100                               −100                                −100                               −100                               −100
                                  0        20     40                 0        10       20                0        20     40                 0        25     50       75       0        20     40
                               BEST (←)                           BEST (←)                            BEST (←)                           BEST (←)                          BEST (←)
                                     Proximity Int 50% (%)              Proximity Int 50% (%)               Proximity Int 50% (%)              Proximity Int 50% (%)             Proximity Int 50% (%)


                                                                 CF-CBM                     CBM + CCHVAE               CBM + VAECF                   CBM + VCNET



Figure 5: CF-CBMs generate reliable (proximity) and accurate interventions (ROC AUC Int.). The arrow
(→) points towards optimal values. Pareto-optimal models form the frontier of the shaded region, whereas
dominated solutions are located within the shaded region.

Table 4: CF-CBMs efficiently address “what?”, “how?”, and “why not?” questions while supporting both
concept and task-interventions, as opposed to existing CBMs and counterfactual generators.

                                                                    CF-CBM (ours)                   CBM           Black Box            BayCon             C-CHVAE            VAE-CF            VCNet
                  What?                                                            ✓                   ✓                ✓                                                                          ✓
                  How?                                                             ✓                   ✓
                  Why not?                                                         ✓                                                           ✓                 ✓                ✓                ✓
                  Concept interventions                                            ✓                   ✓
                  Task-driven interventions                                        ✓
                  Real-time                                                        ✓                   ✓                                                                          ✓                ✓



CF-CBMs leverage the latent concept space to extend CBMs’ capabilities by introducing two key
functionalities (Table 4): counterfactual explanations and task-driven interventions.
Relations with generative structured models. CF-CBMs are latent generative models characterized
by a structured latent space. This characterization aligns them with other methodologies utilizing
hierarchical priors (Sønderby et al. (2016); Maaløe et al. (2019); Vahdat & Kautz (2020); Klushyn
et al. (2019)), mixture priors (Bauer & Mnih (2019)), and autoregressive priors (Chen et al. (2017);
van den Oord et al. (2017); Razavi et al. (2019)). However, the structure of CF-CBMs’ latent variables
explicitly captures both the concept and the counterfactual latent space, thus promoting structural
interpretability, unlike existing structured latent variable models.
Relation with counterfactual models. Existing DL methods generating counterfactuals typically
offer post-hoc explanations (Ghandeharioun et al., 2021; Abid et al., 2022) or require interpretable
input features (Guyomard et al., 2023; Pawelczyk et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2020). However,
applying post-hoc methods to unstructured data (e.g., pixels instead of concepts) significantly reduces
counterfactuals’ interpretability (Kim et al., 2018). In contrast, CF-CBMs: (i) are data-agnostic, ex-
tracting interpretable counterfactuals regardless of data type, (ii) provide answers to “how?” questions
by allowing interventions, (iii) modify the decision-making process by optimizing counterfactuals
through joint optimization leading to relying on fewer concepts and (iv) support both concept and
task-driven interventions (Table 4). As a side effect, concept-based counterfactuals may also introduce
benefits in terms of privacy as sensitive and unique details embedded in input data (e.g., the image of
a radiography) remain concealed, thus mitigating the risk of data extraction through repeated model
queries (Goethals et al., 2023; Naretto et al., 2022; Pawelczyk et al., 2022).
Broader Impact. The ability to answer all the three questions represents a fundamental step to
calibrate human trust and enhance human-machine interactions. In this work, we show how combining
existing interpretable models (such as CBMs) and post-hoc counterfactual generators may represent a
possible solution to address “what?”, “how?”, and “why not?” queries. Experimental results show that
training the counterfactual generator jointly with the CBM leads to two key improvements: (i) it alters
the model’s decision-making process, making the model rely on fewer important concepts (leading
to simpler explanations), and (ii) it significantly increases the causal effect of concept interventions
on class predictions, making the model more responsive to these changes. Besides, the ability to
perform task-driven interventions may provide actionable insights to improve CF-CBMs’ predictions
whenever users observe a mispredicted class label but do not know how to intervene on concepts.
Finally, the proposed latent variable approach enables to efficiently model concept dependencies
while generating multiple counterfactuals for a given input. This represents a key advantage w.r.t.
iterative methods in practical applications where proposing a variety of interpretable counterfactuals
on the fly represents a fundamental advantage.


                                                                                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GD acknowledges support from the European Union’s Horizon Europe project SmartCHANGE
(No. 101080965). PB acknowledges support from Swiss National Science Foundation projects
TRUST-ME (No. 205121L_214991) and IMAGINE (No. TMPFP2_224226). FG has been supported
by the Partnership Extended PE00000013 - “FAIR - Future Artificial Intelligence Research” - Spoke 1
“Human-centered AI”. MG acknowledges support from Swiss National Science Foundation projects
XAI-PAC (No. PZ00P2_216405). GM acknowledges support from the KU Leuven Research Fund
(STG/22/021, CELSA/24/008) and from the Flemish Government under the "Onderzoeksprogramma
Artificiële Intelligentie (AI) Vlaanderen" programme. This work was also supported by the EU
Framework Program for Research and Innovation Horizon under the Grant Agreement No 101073307
(MSCA-DN LeMuR).

R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Mert Yuksekgonul, and James Zou. Meaningfully debugging model mistakes using
  conceptual counterfactual explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  66–88. PMLR, 2022.
Mohammad Taha Bahadori and David E Heckerman. Debiasing concept-based explanations with
 causal analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11500, 2020.
Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Francesco Giannini, Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Lucie Charlotte
  Magister, Alberto Tonda, Pietro Lió, Frederic Precioso, Mateja Jamnik, and Giuseppe Marra. Inter-
  pretable neural-symbolic concept reasoning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1801–1825. PMLR, 2023.
Pietro Barbiero, Francesco Giannini, Gabriele Ciravegna, Michelangelo Diligenti, and Giuseppe
  Marra. Relational concept bottleneck models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  37 (NeurIPS 2024), 2024.
Matthias Bauer and Andriy Mnih. Resampled Priors for Variational Autoencoders. In AISTATS, pp.
 66–75, 2019.
Xi Chen, Diederik P. Kingma, Tim Salimans, Yan Duan, Prafulla Dhariwal, John Schulman, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational Lossy Autoencoder. In ICLR, 2017.
David Debot, Pietro Barbiero, Francesco Giannini, Gabriele Ciravegna, Michelangelo Diligenti, and
  Giuseppe Marra. Interpretable concept-based memory reasoning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024), 2024.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Pietro Barbiero, Gabriele Ciravegna, Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Giannini,
 Michelangelo Diligenti, Zohreh Shams, Frederic Precioso, Stefano Melacci, Adrian Weller, Pietro
 Lio, and Mateja Jamnik. Concept embedding models: Beyond the accuracy-explainability trade-off.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Asma Ghandeharioun, Been Kim, Chun-Liang Li, Brendan Jou, Brian Eoff, and Rosalind W Pi-
  card. Dissect: Disentangled simultaneous explanations via concept traversals. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.15164, 2021.
Sofie Goethals, Kenneth Sörensen, and David Martens. The privacy issue of counterfactual ex-
  planations: Explanation linkage attacks. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 14(5), 2023. ISSN
  2157-6904. doi: 10.1145/3608482. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3608482.
Yash Goyal, Amir Feder, Uri Shalit, and Been Kim. Explaining classifiers with causal concept effect
  (cace). arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07165, 2019.
Hangzhi Guo, Thanh H Nguyen, and Amulya Yadav. Counternet: End-to-end training of prediction
  aware counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 577–589, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Victor Guyomard, Françoise Fessant, Thomas Guyet, Tassadit Bouadi, and Alexandre Termier.
  Vcnet: A self-explaining model for realistic counterfactual generation. In Massih-Reza Amini,
  Stéphane Canu, Asja Fischer, Tias Guns, Petra Kralj Novak, and Grigorios Tsoumakas (eds.),
  Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 437–453, Cham, 2023. Springer
  International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-031-26387-3.
David J. Hand and Robert J. Till. A simple generalisation of the area under the roc curve for multiple
  class classification problems. Mach. Learn., 45(2):171–186, oct 2001. ISSN 0885-6125. doi:
  10.1023/A:1010920819831. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010920819831.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition, 2015.
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):
   90–95, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
Paul Jaccard. The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone. 1. New phytologist, 11(2):37–50, 1912.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (tcav). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677. PMLR, 2018.
Eunji Kim, Dahuin Jung, Sangha Park, Siwon Kim, and Sungroh Yoon. Probabilistic concept
  bottleneck models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01574, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
Alexej Klushyn, Nutan Chen, Richard Kurle, Botond Cseke, and Patrick van der Smagt. Learning
  Hierarchical Priors in VAEs. In NeurIPS, pp. 2866–2875, 2019.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
  Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. Cifar-10 (canadian institute for advanced
  research). URL http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
Thibault Laugel, Marie-Jeanne Lesot, Christophe Marsala, and Marcin Detyniecki. Issues with
  post-hoc counterfactual explanations: a discussion, 2019.
Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris M Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max
  Welling. Causal effect inference with deep latent-variable models. In I. Guyon, U. Von
  Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.   URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/
  file/94b5bde6de888ddf9cde6748ad2523d1-Paper.pdf.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. BIVA: A Very Deep Hierarchy of
  Latent Variables for Generative Modeling. In NeurIPS, pp. 6548–6558, 2019.
Divyat Mahajan, Chenhao Tan, and Amit Sharma. Preserving causal constraints in counterfactual
  explanations for machine learning classifiers, 2020.
Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Dumancic, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas Demeester, and Luc De Raedt.
  DeepProbLog: Neural Probabilistic Logic Programming. In NeurIPS, pp. 3753–3763, 2018.
Emanuele Marconato, Andrea Passerini, and Stefano Teso. Glancenets: Interpretable, leak-proof
 concept-based models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21212–21227,
 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Emanuele Marconato, Stefano Teso, and Andrea Passerini. Neuro-symbolic reasoning shortcuts:
 Mitigation strategies and their limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12578, 2023.
Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dsprites: Disentanglement
  testing sprites dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/dsprites-dataset/, 2017.
Eleonora Misino, Giuseppe Marra, and Emanuele Sansone. Vael: Bridging variational autoencoders
  and probabilistic logic programming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  4667–4679, 2022.
Francesca Naretto, Anna Monreale, and Fosca Giannotti. Evaluating the privacy exposure of
  interpretable global explainers. In 2022 IEEE 4th International Conference on Cognitive Machine
  Intelligence (CogMI), pp. 13–19, 2022. doi: 10.1109/CogMI56440.2022.00012.
Daniel Nemirovsky, Nicolas Thiebaut, Ye Xu, and Abhishek Gupta. Countergan: Generating realistic
  counterfactuals with residual generative adversarial nets, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2009.05199.
Tuomas Oikarinen, Subhro Das, Lam M. Nguyen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Label-free concept bottleneck
  models, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan,
 Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas
  Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy,
  Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
  9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.
  pdf.
Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, WWW ’20. ACM, April
 2020. doi: 10.1145/3366423.3380087. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3366423.
 3380087.
Martin Pawelczyk, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Seth Neel. On the privacy risks of algorithmic recourse,
 2022.
Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Judea Pearl, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P Jewell. Causal inference in statistics: A primer. John
  Wiley & Sons, 2016.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Ali Razavi, Aäron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating Diverse High-Fidelity Images with
  VQ-VAE-2. In NeurIPS, pp. 14837–14847, 2019.
Matthew Richardson and Pedro Domingos. Markov logic networks. Machine learning, 62:107–136,
 2006.
Piotr Romashov, Martin Gjoreski, Kacper Sokol, Maria Vanina Martinez, and Marc Langheinrich.
  Baycon: Model-agnostic bayesian counterfactual generator. In Lud De Raedt (ed.), Proceedings of
  the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 740–746.
  International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2022. doi: 10.24963/
  ijcai.2022/104. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/104. Main Track.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  Variational Autoencoders. In NeurIPS, pp. 3738–3746, 2016.
Wolfgang Stammer, Antonia Wüst, David Steinmann, and Kristian Kersting. Neural concept binder,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09949.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. NVAE: A Deep Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder. In NeurIPS,
  2020.
Aäron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural Discrete Representation
  Learning. In NeurIPS, pp. 6306–6315, 2017.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without opening
  the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harv. JL & Tech., 31:841, 2017.
Peter Welinder, Steve Branson, Takeshi Mita, Catherine Wah, Florian Schroff, Serge Be-
  longie, and Pietro Perona. Caltech-ucsd birds 200. Technical Report CNS-TR-201, Caltech,
  2010. URL /se3/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/WelinderEtal10_CUB-200.
  pdf,http://www.vision.caltech.edu/visipedia/CUB-200.html.
Kevin Xia, Yushu Pan, and Elias Bareinboim. Neural causal models for counterfactual identification
  and estimation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00035.
Xinyue Xu, Yi Qin, Lu Mi, Hao Wang, and Xiaomeng Li. Energy-based concept bottleneck
  models: unifying prediction, concept intervention, and conditional interpretations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.14142, 2024.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Been Kim, Sercan Arik, Chun-Liang Li, Tomas Pfister, and Pradeep Raviku-
  mar. On completeness-aware concept-based explanations in deep neural networks. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 20554–20565. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/ecb287ff763c169694f682af52c1f309-Paper.pdf.
Kihyun You, Jawook Gu, Jiyeon Ham, Beomhee Park, Jiho Kim, Eun K. Hong, Woonhyuk Baek,
  and Byungseok Roh. CXR-CLIP: Toward Large Scale Chest X-ray Language-Image Pre-training,
  pp. 101–111. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023. ISBN 9783031438950. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-031-43895-0_10. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43895-0_
  10.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models. In ICLR
 2022 Workshop on PAIR^2Struct: Privacy, Accountability, Interpretability, Robustness, Reasoning
 on Structured Data, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HAMeOIRD_g9.
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Pietro Barbiero, Zohreh Shams, Dmitry Kazhdan, Umang Bhatt, Adrian
 Weller, and Mateja Jamnik. Towards robust metrics for concept representation evaluation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2301.10367, 2023.
Anna Zawacki, Carol Wu, George Shih, Julia Elliott, Mikhail Fomitchev, Mohannad
  Hussain, Paras Lakhani, Phil Culliton, and Shunxing Bao.   Siim-acr pneumotho-
  rax segmentation 2019, 2019. URL https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/
  siim-acr-pneumothorax-segmentation/.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A MMORTIZED INFERENCE AND ELBO D ERIVATION
To derive the ELBO objective function defined in Section 3.1, we start from the maximization of the
log-likelihood of the tuple (c, y, y ′ ):
                                                           Z
                                           ′
                          log p(c, y, y ) = log                         p(c, c′ , y, y ′ , z, z ′ )dc′ dzdz ′
                                                            c′ ,z,z ′
where p(c, c′ , y, y ′ , z, z ′ ) factorizes as in Section 3.1. We consider the variational approximation
q(z, z ′ , c′ |x, y, c, y ′ ) = q(z|x)q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )p(c′ |z ′ ) thus exploiting the observation of x to better
infer z:

                                                               z′                   y′


                                                    x           z          c         y

We have:

                                                               q(z|x)q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )p(c′ |z ′ )
                                                        Z
                                       ′
                         log p(c, y, y ) = log                                                        ·
                                                               q(z|x)q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )p(c′ |z ′ )
                                                                    · p(c, c′ , y, y ′ , z, z ′ )dc′ dzdz ′

and, given the Jensen’s inequality, we obtain:

                                               Z
                                   ′
                     log p(c, y, y ) ≥             q(z|x)q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )p(c′ |z ′ )·

                                                                p(c, c′ , y, y ′ , z, z ′ )
                                                   · log                                          dc′ dzdz ′
                                                           q(z|x)q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )p(c′ |z ′ )
that can be rewritten as:
                                log p(c, y, y ′ ) ≥Ez [log(c|z)]+
                                                   log p(y|c)+
                                                            Ez,z′ ,c′ [log p(y ′ |c′ )]−
                                                            DKL [p(z)|q(z|x)]−
                                                            DKL [p(z ′ )|q(z ′ |z, c, y, y ′ )].

B     TAKE THE BEST BET OR CONTEMPLATE A MULTIVERSE ?
 All these functionalities can be used in two ways: the “best bet” mode and “multiverse” mode. In the
“best bet” mode, CF-CBMs provide maximum a posteriori estimates by taking the mode of posterior
distributions. Using this mode, users will be provided with the most probable counterfactual for each
input. In “multiverse” mode instead, CF-CBMs sample from posterior distributions. This allows the
model to generate multiple counterfactuals for each input, thus allowing users to choose among a
variety of actions/interventions. For instance, in a healthcare scenario, the “best bet” mode might
suggest the most probable alternative treatment plan based on patient data, while the “multiverse”
mode could present a range of treatment strategies under varying clinical conditions, each representing
a different plausible future.

C     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
C.1    DATA & TASK SETUP

In our experiments we use five different datasets commonly used to evaluate CBMs:


                                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • dSprites (Matthey et al., 2017) — It is composed of images of one of three objects (square,
         ellipse, heart) in different positions and of different sizes. Starting from it, we design a
         binary task, which is to predict if in the image there is at least a square or a heart. We also
         combine initial images to obtain new ones with more than one object. The concepts for this
         task are: (1) the presence of a square, (2) the presence of an ellipse, (3) the presence of a
         heart, (4) the presence of two objects, (5) objects are red, (6) objects are green, (7) objects
         are blue.
       • MNIST addition — The task of this dataset is to predict the sum of two MNIST digits (Deng,
         2012). The concepts of this task are the one-hot encoding of the first and the second digits
         concatenated together.
       • CUB (Welinder et al., 2010) — It contains pictures of birds and the final task is to predict
         their species (among 200 species). The concepts are 118 bird features that human annotators
         selected.
       • CIFAR10(Krizhevsky et al.) — This dataset contains images of objects, with the task of
         classifying them into one of 10 classes. Concepts are automatically extracted using the
         method proposed in Oikarinen et al. (2023), resulting in 143 concepts.
       • SIIM Pneumothorax(Zawacki et al., 2019) — This dataset contains X-ray scans of lungs,
         with the task of determining whether the patient has pneumothorax. Concepts are automat-
         ically extracted following Oikarinen et al. (2023), leveraging CXR-CLIP, resulting in 19
         concepts.

C.2    E VALUATION M ETRICS

In our analysis we use the following metrics. What? (prediction generalization): we compute
the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (Hand & Till, 2001) for concepts and
tasks (ROC AUC (↑). How? (intervention impact): we compute the impact of each concept on
the downstream task, inspecting the task predictor f (Yuksekgonul et al., 2022). For each class, we
look at the related weights of the task predictor (a Linear layer), one weight for each concept. In this
way, it is visible the impact of each concept on each specific class. Then, we evaluate the impact
of intervening on confounding concepts for class predictions (Koh et al., 2020). We modify the
dSprites task to highly correlate the colors with the shapes and therefore the task label. For instance,
in 85% of samples with a positive label (presence of at least one square or heart), the objects are
green, while in 85% of the samples with a negative label, the objects are red or blue. Why not?
(counterfactual actionability): drawing from previous works on counterfactuals, we compute: (i)
the validity(↑) (Wachter et al., 2017) by checking whether the model predicts the desired class labels
based on the generated counterfactual; (ii) the proximity (↓) (Pawelczyk et al., 2020) which evaluates
counterfactuals’ “reliability” as their similarity w.r.t. training samples; (iii) the time (↓) (Romashov
et al., 2022) to generate a counterfactual for a set of samples.
In addition, we propose the following metrics to assess the quality of counterfactuals: (i) the ∆-
Sparsity (↓) which evaluates user’s “wasted efforts” by counting the number concepts changed (Guo
et al., 2023) w.r.t. the minimal number of changes that would have generated a counterfactual
according to the dataset:
                            ∆Sparsity = |OptimalSparsity − Sparsity|
where OptimalSparsity represents the mean Hamming distance between each concept vector in
the test set and the closest concept vector of a drawn random class y ′ , found using a “brute-force"
approach and Sparsity represents the mean Hamming distance between the predicted concepts
ĉ and the predicted concept counterfactuals cˆ′ ; (ii) the “plausibility” (Wachter et al., 2017) as the
Intersection over Union (IoU (↑)) (Jaccard, 1912) between counterfactuals and ground-truth concept
vectors; (iii) the variability (↑) which evaluates counterfactuals’ “diversity”, as the cardinality ratio
between the set of counterfactuals generated and the set of training concept vectors
                                                              |c′ |
                                            V ariability =
                                                               |c|
where |c′ | represents the cardinality of the set composed by all cˆ′ , while |c| represents the cardinality of
the set composed by all c; (iv) finally, we measure the concept accuracy of generated interventions


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Model Hyperparameters shared across all models. During the training, we select the best checkpoint for
each model.

        Hyperparams       dSprites     MNIST add        CUB      CIFAR10       SIIM Pneumothorax
        Epochs                75           150           150         30                  100
        Learning rate       0.005         0.005         0.005      0.005                0.005
        Hidden size          128           128           128        128                  128
        Batch size          1024          1024          1024       1024                 1024


(Acc Int. (↑)) w.r.t. ground-truth optimal interventions that evaluate the model’s ability to generate
potential concept interventions. Following Espinosa Zarlenga et al. (2022), we inject noise on
predicted concepts ĉ to reduce task accuracy (randomly flip the value of some concepts), then we
sample counterfactuals, conditioning on the ground-truth label y, and use them to fix mispredicted
concept labels automatically.                       P
                                                      i∈c 1ci =cˆ′i
                                       AccInt. =
                                                        |c|
where ci represents the concept ground truth for the sample i, while cˆ′i represents the counterfactual
generated for the sample i that tries to recover c.

C.3    BASELINES AND I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Hyperparameters To train our models and the baselines we selected the best hyperparameters
according to our experiments. Table 5 shows the number of epochs, learning rate, and embedding
size in the latent space, batch size for each dataset. They are shared among the baselines, and we
took the best checkpoint out of the entire training for each model. In addition, Table 6 illustrates the
parameters used to weight each term in the loss for all the methods. These hyperparameters were
chosen through validation on a subset of the training to achieve the best possible trade-off across all
metrics important for counterfactual evaluation, such as validity, proximity, and sparsity, for both our
method and the baselines. While our method introduces more hyperparameters, it provides greater
flexibility to specify the desired objective. As counterfactual metrics often conflict, creating inherent
trade-offs (as shown in our experiments), there is no one-size-fits-all solution. Thus, optimizing the
counterfactual generator based on the metric of interest is crucial, and our method facilitates this.
Each hyperparameter in the loss has a specific role in steering the model toward a particular behavior:

       • λ1 (task-related) and λ2 (concept-related) are important in all configurations as it remains
         the main goal of the model.
       • λ3 prioritizes validity, encouraging counterfactuals with predictions matching y′, though
         potentially compromising proximity or sparsity.
       • λ4 and λ5 emphasize generating more realistic counterfactuals, potentially reducing proxim-
         ity, which may trade off against validity and sparsity.
       • λ6 and λ7 promotes sparsity by reducing the number of changes from the input, which
         may trade off against validity. However, we observed that λ6 has minimal influence on the
         optimization process, with λ7 being the key hyperparameter driving this behaviour.

This flexibility makes our model more versatile and practical compared to baselines, which have
limited or partial support for these trade-offs (e.g., VAECF has the possibility to be flexible on
validity). To show these behaviours we perform an ablation study on MNIST add that is shown in
Table 7.
Counterfactual CBM implementation details To improve the training process of our models we
decided to relax some assumptions we made in Section 3.1. Employing a Bernoulli distribution
to predict concepts and a Categorical distribution for the class prediction would make the training
process more difficult, ruining the gradient in the backpropagation process. Therefore, we predict
them directly with the output of the concept predictor and the task predictor applying a Sigmoid
function and a Softamx on top of them, respectively. To optimise them, we choose to use a Binary
Cross Entropy loss for the concept loss, and a Cross Entropy Loss for the task loss. All this is


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                              Table 6: Loss weights

                    Method                                            Dataset
                      Loss Term            dSprites   MNIST add   CUB     CIFAR10      SIIM Pneumothorax
                      Concept                1.0         1.0       1.0          1.0             1.0
           CBM
                      Task                   0.1         0.1       0.1          0.1             0.1
                      Reconstruction         1.0         1.0       1.0          1.0             1.0
           CCHVAE
                      KL                     0.5         0.5       0.5          0.5             0.5
                      Reconstruction        3.0          1.3        1.0        1.3               1.3
           VAECF      KL                     1.0         1.0        2.0        1.0               1.0
                      Validity              15.0        15.0       15.0       20.0              20.0
                      Concept                1.0         1.0       1.0          1.0             2.0
                      Task                   0.5         0.5       0.5          0.5             0.5
           VCNET
                      Reconstruction         0.5         0.5       0.5                          0.2
                      KL                     0.8         0.8       0.8          0.8             0.8
                      Concept               10.0        10.0        1.0       10.0              10.0
                      Task                   0.7         1.0        0.1        1.0               1.0
                      Validity               0.3         0.2       0.02        0.2               0.2
           CF-CBM     z KL                  1.2         2.0        0.2        2.0               2.0
                      z ′ KL                1.2          2.0       0.2         2.0              2.0
                      Prior distance         1.0         1.7        0.2        1.7               1.7
                      Posterior distance    0.6         0.55       0.03        0.4               0.4


Table 7: Performance comparison for different objective focuses with varying λ values on the MNIST add
dataset.

           Objective Focus          λ3     λ4 & λ5      λ7     Validity (%)      Sparsity (%)    Proximity (%)
      Higher focus on validity      0.4        2       0.55     99.1 ± 0.2        19.0 ± 0.4           4.3 ± 0.7
      Higher focus on proximity     0.2        4       0.55     93.6 ± 1.6        14.2 ± 0.4           3.6 ± 0.0
      Higher focus on sparsity      0.2        2       0.70    74.4 ± 0.01        6.1 ± 0.4            2.6 ± 0.0



done in a jointly training to fully leverage the advantages outlined in Section 5.2. This means that
all component are trained together. However, it is also possible to train the model in a post-hoc
manner—first training the concept encoder and predictor, followed by the counterfactual generator,
or performing a warm-up phase for the encoder and predictor to better initialize their weights before
continuing with joint training.
Code, licenses and hardware For our experiments, we implement all baselines and methods in
Python 3.9 and relied upon open-source libraries such as PyTorch 2.0 (Paszke et al., 2019) (BSD
license), PytorchLightning v2.1.2 (Apache Licence 2.0), Sklearn 1.2 (Pedregosa et al., 2011) (BSD
license). In addition, we used Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007) 3.7 (BSD license) to produce the plots shown
in this paper. The datasets we used are freely available on the web with licenses: dSprites (Apache
2.0) MNIST (CC 3.0 DEED) and CUB (MIT License). We will publicly release the code with all the
details used to reproduce all the experiments under an MIT license. The experiments were performed
on a device equipped with an M3 Max and 36GB of RAM, without the use of a GPU. Approximately
80 hours of computational time were utilized from the start of the project, whereas reproducing the
experiments detailed here requires only 10 hours.


D    F URTHER METRICS AND RESULTS

In addition to the result present in Section 5, Table 8 shows the task and concept performance of
our model and the baselines. Moreover, Figure 6 illustrates the Acc Int. achieved by all models
with different levels of noise injected at the concept level. It is visible how CF-CBM achieves
stable Acc Int. results with different level of noise injected at the concept level. This is not the
case for the other baselines. Figure 7 shows the distribution of the CaCE score obtained in MNIST
add and CUB in the post-hoc and joint fashions. It allows to directly see the distributions used to
compute the metrics in Table 2. Finally, Figure 8 shows the time efficency of all the method in
generating counterfactuals. Generation efficiency is a key feature for real-time applications. In this
respect, CF-CBMs significantly outperform iterative models such as C-CHVAE and BayCon. These
models quickly struggle in large search spaces involving a high number of concepts: generating a


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 8: CF-CBM attains generalization performance of standard CBMs on concepts and class labels.

                                    dsprites                         MNIST add                                  CUB                                  CIFAR10                         SIIM Pneumothorax
              Task (%) (↑)              Concept (%) (↑)     Task (%) (↑)   Concept (%) (↑)     Task (%) (↑)      Concept (%) (↑)         Task (%) (↑)       Concept (%) (↑)   Task (%) (↑)   Concept (%) (↑)
 Black Box    99.9 ± 0.0                         -           98.4 ± 0.0           -                94.4 ± 0.0              -             99.7 ± 0.0                -          95.1 ± 0.2
 CBM          99.6 ± 0.1                    98.8 ± 0.1       98.4 ± 0.0      99.7 ± 0.0            93.0 ± 0.0         85.3 ± 0.1         99.3 ± 0.0           99.1 ± 0.0      89.4 ± 0.6       99.6 ± 0.1
 CEM          99.8 ± 0.1                    98.6 ± 0.1       98.4 ± 0.0      99.5 ± 0.0            93.3 ± 0.1         85.7 ± 0.1         99.8 ± 0.0           99.2 ± 0.0      94.2 ± 0.1       99.5 ± 0.0
 BayCon       99.6 ± 0.0                    98.7 ± 0.1       98.4 ± 0.0      99.7 ± 0.0            93.1 ± 0.1         85.3 ± 0.1         99.4 ± 0.0           99.1 ± 0.0      89.3 ± 0.8       99.6 ± 0.1
 CCHVAE       99.5 ± 0.1                    98.9 ± 0.1       98.4 ± 0.0      99.7 ± 0.0            93.2 ± 0.1         85.4 ± 0.1         99.3 ± 0.0           99.2 ± 0.0      89.6 ± 0.5       99.3 ± 0.1
 VAECF        99.5 ± 0.0                    98.8 ± 0.1       98.4 ± 0.0      99.7 ± 0.0            92.9 ± 0.2         85.4 ± 0.1         99.3 ± 0.0           99.2 ± 0.0      89.5 ± 0.8       99.6 ± 0.1
 VCNET        99.7 ± 0.0                    98.6 ± 0.1       98.2 ± 0.0      99.6 ± 0.0            89.6 ± 0.5         80.7 ± 0.1         99.1 ± 0.1           97.4 ± 0.2      91.4 ± 0.7       99.2 ± 0.0
 CF-CBM       99.7 ± 0.0                    98.7 ± 0.1       97.0 ± 0.1      99.3 ± 0.0            91.4 ± 0.2         84.8 ± 0.2         99.4 ± 0.0           96.6 ± 0.0      92.0 ± 0.5       98.2 ± 0.0



                                                         dSprites                    −40
                                                                                                      MNIST add                                                       CUB
                                                                                 BEST (↑)                                                       40
                                        0
                                 BEST (↑)                                                                                                 BEST (↑)
                                                                                     −50
                                                                                                                                                20
                  Acc Int. (%)


                                     −20
                                                                                     −60                                                         0

                                     −40                                                                                                      −20
                                                                                     −70
                                                                                                                                              −40
                                     −60
                                                                                     −80
                                                                                                                                              −60
                                     −80                                             −90
                                                                                                                                              −80

                                    −100                                            −100                                                     −100
                                            0.1     0.2     0.3     0.4    0.5               0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4       0.5                0.1       0.2    0.3     0.4     0.5
                                                         Noise (%)                                        Noise (%)                                               Noise (%)


Figure 6: CF-CBMs attain similar CBM
               CF-CBM            results while applying different
                                      + CCHVAE                    levels of noise onCBM
                                                          CBM + VAECF                predicted concept labels.
                                                                                         + VCNET



counterfactual takes more than a minute on dSprites (7 concepts) and up to a few hours on CUB (118
concepts). CF-CBMs instead scale well with the size of the data set by requiring less than a second
on dSprites and a few seconds on CUB, on par with VAECF and VCNet. This efficiency enables a
wider range of applications requiring a high number of concepts and quick feedbacks.

E      C OUNTERFACTUALS
Tables 9 and 10 present the top-3 most common counterfactual examples for each method on dSprites,
MNIST addition, and SIIM Pneumothorax, respectively. The tables display only the active concepts
to maintain clarity, as including all concepts would make them difficult to interpret. All other concepts
are considered inactive. Examining these three tables—especially the first two, which are easier
to understand without requiring domain-specific knowledge—it is clear that the counterfactuals
generated by CF-CBM are the most reasonable. In Table 9, CF-CBM consistently generates feasible
states by modifying the minimum number of concepts. In contrast, VCNET fails to activate any color
concepts, leading to suboptimal changes and unfeasible states. Similarly, CCHVAE activates the “Two
obj” concept, which is irrelevant and fails to influence the prediction, effectively wasting a change.
For MNIST addition, CF-CBM once again generates valid counterfactuals, while other baselines
occasionally produce counterfactuals with zero, one, or three active concepts—an impossible scenario,
as each sample must always contain two digits. This issue is particularly prominent in VCNET
and VAECF, which rely heavily on the fuzziness of concept values for decision-making, allowing
scenarios where no active concepts still predict different labels. Lastly, we include a single example
of counterfactuals per model for CUB and CIFAR10 for completeness. Due to the large number of
concepts in these datasets, presenting multiple examples in an organized format would be challenging.

CUB:

             • Baycon:
                       – Factual: Bill Shape - Hooked (Seabird), Wing Color - Grey, Underparts Color - White,
                         Breast Pattern - Solid, Breast Color - White, Throat Color - White, Eye Color - Black,
                         Bill Length - Same as Head, Nape Color - White, Belly Color - White, Size - Medium
                         (9-16 in), Back Pattern - Solid, Tail Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern - Solid, Wing Pattern
                         - Solid - Task: Brandt Cormorant
                       – Counterfactual: CF: Bill Shape - Hooked (Seabird), Wing Color - Grey, Upperparts
                         Color - Black, Underparts Color - Black, Breast Pattern - Solid, Breast Pattern - Striped,
                         Upper Tail Color - White, Head Pattern - Plain, Breast Color - Black, Throat Color -


                                                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                         CUB                                                MNIST add
                                 0.25
                                                                                        0.15
                                 0.20


                     Frequency
                                 0.15                                                   0.10

                                 0.10
                                                                                        0.05
                                 0.05

                                 0.00                                                   0.00
                                        0.00            0.02              0.04                 0.0               0.2              0.4
                                               Causal Concept Effect                                  Causal Concept Effect
                                                               Joint (ours)                                 Post-hoc

Figure 7: The distribution of the CaCE score of the CUB and MNIST add dataset obtained by the end-to-end
(Joint) approach and by the post-hoc one.

                    dSprites                         MNIST add                      CUB                        CIFAR10       SIIM PNEUMOTHORAX
            102                                103                                                    104
                                                                     104                                                    102
            101                                102                                                    103
                                                                     103
                                                                                                                            101
Time (s)


                                               101                   10   2                           102
            100
                                                                                                                            100
                                               100                   101                              101
           10−1
                                                                     10   0                                                10−1
                                            10−1                                                      100
           10−2                                                     10−1                                                   10−2
                                                                                                     10−1
                                            10−2


                                   CF-CBM            CBM + BayCon             CBM + CCHVAE             CBM + VAECF       CBM + VCNET


            Figure 8: CF-CBMs efficiently generate counterfactuals on the fly, on par with the fastest generators.


                                 Yellow, Eye Color - Black, Bill Length - Same as Head, Forehead Color - White, Under
                                 Tail Color - Black, Nape Color - Yellow, Belly Color - Grey, Belly Color - Black, Size -
                                 Medium (9-16 in), Back Pattern - Solid, Tail Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern - Solid, Leg
                                 Color - Black, Wing Pattern - Solid - Task: Black Footed Albatross
                  • CCHVAE:
                        – Factual: Bill Shape - Cone, Wing Color - Brown, Upperparts Color - Brown, Upperparts
                          Color - Buff, Underparts Color - White, Breast Pattern - Striped, Back Color - Brown,
                          Tail Shape - Notched, Upper Tail Color - Brown, Upper Tail Color - Buff, Breast Color
                          - White, Throat Color - White, Eye Color - Black, Bill Length - Shorter than Head,
                          Forehead Color - Brown, Belly Color - White, Wing Shape - Rounded, Size - Small
                          (5-9 in), Body Shape - Perching-like, Back Pattern - Striped, Primary Color - Brown,
                          Crown Color - Brown, Wing Pattern - Striped, - Task: Purple Finch
                        – Counterfactual: Bill Shape - Hooked, Wing Color - Black, Upperparts Color - Black,
                          Underparts Color - Black, Breast Pattern - Solid, Back Color - Black, Upper Tail Color
                          - Black, Head Pattern - Plain, Breast Color - Black, Throat Color - Black, Eye Color
                          - Black, Bill Length - Shorter than Head, Forehead Color - Black, Under Tail Color -
                          Black, Nape Color - Black, Belly Color - Black, Wing Shape - Rounded, Size - Small
                          (5-9 in), Body Shape - Perching-like, Back Pattern - Solid, Tail Pattern - Solid, Belly
                          Pattern - Solid, Primary Color - Black, Leg Color - Black, Bill Color - Black, Crown
                          Color - Black, Wing Pattern - Solid, Task: Shiny Cowbird
                  • VAECF:
                        – Factual: Breast Pattern - Solid, Eye Color - Black, Bill Length - Shorter than Head,
                          Size - Small (5-9 in), Size - Very Small (3-5 in), Back Pattern - Solid, Tail Pattern
                          - Solid, Belly Pattern - Solid, Leg Color - Black, Bill Color - Black, Wing Pattern -
                          Multi-Colored - Task: Rufous Hummingbird


                                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           – Counterfactual: Wing Color - Black, Upperparts Color - Black, Underparts Color -
             Black, Breast Pattern - Solid, Back Color - Black, Upper Tail Color - Black, Head
             Pattern - Plain, Breast Color - Black, Throat Color - Black, Eye Color - Black, Bill
             Length - Same as Head, Forehead Color - Black, Under Tail Color - Black, Nape Color
             - Black, Belly Color - Black, Back Pattern - Solid, Tail Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern
             - Solid, Primary Color - Black, Leg Color - Black, Bill Color - Black, Crown Color -
             Black, Wing Pattern - Solid - Task: American Crow
      • VCNET:
           – Factual: Underparts Color - White, Breast Pattern - Solid, Eye Color - Black, Bill
              Length - Shorter than Head, Belly Color - White, Size - Small (5-9 in), Body Shape -
              Perching-like, Back Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern - Solid - Task: White Pelican
           – Counterfactual: Bill Shape - Dagger, Wing Color - Grey, Wing Color - White, Up-
              perparts Color - Grey, Upperparts Color - White, Underparts Color - White, Breast
              Pattern - Solid, Back Color - Grey, Back Color - White, Upper Tail Color - White,
              Head Pattern - Plain, Breast Color - White, Throat Color - White, Eye Color - Black,
              Bill Length - Same as Head, Forehead Color - White, Under Tail Color - White, Nape
              Color - White, Belly Color - White, Size - Medium (9-16 in), Back Pattern - Solid,
              Back Pattern - Multi-Colored, Tail Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern - Solid, Primary Color
             - Grey, Primary Color - White, Crown Color - White, Wing Pattern - Solid - Task: Ivory
              Gull
      • CF-CBM:
           – Factual: Bill Shape - Cone, Wing Color - Brown, Wing Color - Buff, Upperparts Color
             - Brown, Upperparts Color - Black, Upperparts Color - Buff, Underparts Color - White,
              Breast Pattern - Striped, Back Color - Brown, Back Color - Buff, Tail Shape - Notched,
              Upper Tail Color - Brown, Upper Tail Color - Buff, Breast Color - Buff, Throat Color
             - Buff, Eye Color - Black, Bill Length - Shorter than Head, Under Tail Color - Buff,
             Wing Shape - Rounded, Size - Small (5-9 in), Body Shape - Perching-like, Back Pattern
             - Striped, Belly Pattern - Solid, Primary Color - Brown, Bill Color - Buff, Wing Pattern
             - Striped - Task: Harris Sparrow
           – Counterfactual: Bill Shape - Dagger, Wing Color - Grey, Wing Color - White, Upper-
              parts Color - Grey, Upperparts Color - White, Underparts Color - White, Breast Pattern
             - Solid, Back Color - Grey, Back Color - White, Upper Tail Color - White, Head Pattern
             - Plain, Breast Color - White, Throat Color - White, Eye Color - Black, Bill Length -
              Same as Head, Forehead Color - White, Under Tail Color - White, Nape Color - White,
              Belly Color - White, Size - Medium (9-16 in), Back Pattern - Solid, Belly Pattern
             - Solid, Primary Color - Grey, Primary Color - White, Crown Color - White - Task:
             Western Gull

CIFAR10:

      • Baycon:
           – Factual: Hunter, beak, bed, birdfeeder, birdhouse, bit, branch, cage, captain, cat bed,
             cat food dish, cat toy, collar, crew, dashboard, deck, dog bowl, fly, food bowl, forest,
             four-legged mammal, gear shift, green or brown body, grille, hitch, lead rope, leaf, litter
             box, long neck, mane and tail, mast, mosquito, nest, net, nose, pedal, person, pointed
             front end, pond, port, reddish-brown coat, rifle, scratching post, seat, seatbelt, short,
             stocky build, small, lithe body, spider, steering wheel, tail, tire, tough, durable frame,
             tree, wet nose, wheel, wide mouth, worm, an engine, animal, cargo, engines, engines on
             the wings, feathers, food, four legs, four round, black tires, fur, grass, hooves, insects,
             large sails or engines, large, brown eyes, large, bulging eyes, lily pads, living thing,
             long ears, machine, mammal, multiple decks, multiple sails, nature, object, organism,
             passengers, pointed ears, quadruped, side windows, the ocean, trees, two headlights,
             vertebrate, vessel, webbed feet, whiskers, white spots on the coat, wings, woods - Task:
             Cat
           – Counterfactual: Hunter, beak, bed, beetle, bird feeder, birdfeeder, birdhouse, bit, boat,
             branch, captain, cat food dish, cat toy, collar, copilot, crew, dashboard, deck, dog
             bowl, field, flat back end, flat front and back, flight attendant, fly, food bowl, gear


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             shift, grille, hitch, large size, leaf, leash, lily pad, litter box, long neck, mast, mosquito,
             net, nose, passenger, pedal, person, pilot, pointed front end, port, rider, rifle, road,
             rudder, runway, saddle, seat, seatbelt, spider, steering wheel, suitcase, tail, tire, toy,
             tree, wet nose, wheel, wide mouth, windshield, worm, an engine, animal, antlers,
             cargo, engines, engines on the wings, feathers, food, four round, black tires, fur, grass,
             hooves, insects, landing gear, large sails or engines, large, brown eyes, large, bulging
             eyes, lily pads, living thing, machine, mammal, multiple decks, multiple sails, object,
             organism, passengers, pointed ears, quadruped, side windows, the ability to fly, the
             ocean, transportation, trees, two headlights, vertebrate, vessel, watercraft, webbed feet,
             whiskers, white spots on the coat, wings - Task: Airplane
      • CCHVAE:
         – Factual: boat, captain, deck, dock, port, large sails or engines, multiple decks, multiple
           sails, the ocean, vessel, watercraft - Task: Ship
         – Counterfactual: None - Task: Horse
      • VAECF:
          – Factual: beak, bed, bed for carrying cargo, beetle, bird feeder, birdfeeder, birdhouse,
            bit, boat, branch, cage, captain, cat bed, cat toy, collar, copilot, crew, dashboard, deck,
            dock, dog bowl, field, flat back end, flat front and back, flight attendant, fly, gear shift,
            grille, halter, hitch, large body, large, metal body, lead rope, leash, litter box, long
            neck, mast, mosquito, net, pedal, person, pilot, pointed front end, port, rifle, road,
            rudder, runway, saddle, scratching post, seat, seatbelt, short, stocky build, small, lithe
            body, spider, steering wheel, suitcase, tail, tire, tough, durable frame, toy, tree, wheel,
            windshield, worm, an engine, cargo, engines, engines on the wings, four legs, four
            round, black tires, four wheels, fur, grass, hooves, insects, landing gear, large sails
            or engines, large, bulging eyes, long hind legs for jumping, long, thin legs, machine,
            mammal, multiple decks, multiple sails, object, organism, passengers, quadruped, the
            ability to fly, the ocean, transportation, trees, vertebrate, vessel, watercraft, webbed
            feet, wings - Task: Airplane
          – Counterfactual: runway, the ability to fly - Task: Horse
      • VCNET:
          – Factual: barn, bed, bed for carrying cargo, beetle, cab for the driver, copilot, dashboard,
            deck, driver, flat back end, flat front and back, gear shift, green or brown body, grille,
            hitch, large body, large, metal body, large, rectangular body, passenger, pointed front
            end, road, seatbelt, short, stocky build, steering wheel, suitcase, tire, tough, durable
            frame, trailer, wheel, windshield, an engine, cargo, engines, four round, black tires,
            four wheels, multiple decks, passengers, side windows, taillights, transportation, two
            headlights, vessel - Task: Cat
          – Counterfactual: bed for carrying cargo, boat, captain, crew, deck, dock, flat front and
            back, mast, port, rudder, an engine, cargo, engines, large sails or engines, multiple
            decks, multiple sails, passengers, side windows, the ocean, transportation, vessel,
            watercraft - Task: Ship
      • CF-CBM:
          – Factual: bed for carrying cargo, boat, captain, deck, dock, mast, port, rudder, an engine,
            engines, large sails or engines, multiple decks, multiple sails, passengers, side windows,
            the ocean, transportation, vessel, watercraft - Task: Ship
          – Counterfactual: barn, bridle, field, four-legged mammal, halter, lead rope, leash, mane
            and tail, pasture, reins, rider, saddle, animal, four legs, hooves, long ears, long hind
            legs for jumping, long, thin legs, quadruped, white spots on the coat - Task: Horse


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: Comparison of the most three common counterfactuals for different models on the dSprites dataset. We
are showing just the active concepts.

                 Model                    Factual                             Counterfactuals
                                      Concepts               Task              Concepts         Task
                                     Heart Green                 1     Ellipse Heart Green       0
                 BayCon
                                     Square Green                1     Ellipse Heart Green       0
                                     Ellipse Blue                0     Square Ellipse Blue       1
                                     Heart Green                 1            Ellipse Red        0
                 CCHVAE
                                     Heart Green                 1          Ellipse Green        0
                                     Heart Green                 1    Ellipse Two obj Green      0
                                     Heart Green                 1              Ellipse          0
                 VAECF
                                     Heart Green                 1            Ellipse Red        0
                                     Square Blue                 1          Ellipse Blue         0
                                     Heart Green                 1              Ellipse          0
                 VCNET
                                      Heart Red                  1              Ellipse          0
                                     Ellipse Red                 0          Square Heart         1
                                     Heart Green                 1          Ellipse Green        0
                 CF-CBM
                                      Heart Red                  1            Ellipse Red        0
                             Square Heart Two obj Green          1    Ellipse Two obj Green      0


Table 10: Comparison of the most three common counterfactuals for different models on the MNIST add dataset.
We are showing just the active concepts.

                             Model                Factual            Counterfactuals
                                           Concepts     Task         Concepts       Task
                                                 5          10         7, 4           0
                             BayCon
                                              2, 0          2         0, 4, 0         0
                                              8, 7          15        4, 0, 7         0
                                              1, 2          3          0, 0           0
                             CCHVAE
                                              2, 9          11         9, 9          18
                                              1, 1          2           9            17
                                              1, 1          2           8            16
                             VAECF
                                              7, 3          10         1, 1           2
                                              2, 1          3         None           10
                                              2, 9          10        None           12
                             VCNET
                                              0, 6          7          9, 9          18
                                              3, 8          7         None           15
                                              6, 6          12         9, 9          18
                             CF-CBM
                                              5, 0          5          7, 8          15
                                              0, 1          1          0, 2           2


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 11: Comparison of the most three common counterfactuals for different models on the X-ray dataset. We
are showing just the active concepts.

 Model                                                  Factual                                                                                    Counterfactuals
                                                   Concepts                                               Task                                     Concepts                                        Task
                                 Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                                 1                        Diaphragmatic contour, Pleural effusion                         0
 BayCon                                Collapsed lung, Mediastinal shift                                   1     Collapsed lung, Mediastinal shift, Lung consolidation, Air distribution pattern    0
                                                                                                                       Diaphragmatic contour, Rib fractures, Emphysematous changes,
                     Subcutaneous emphysema, Pleural effusion, Emphysematous changes                       1         Cardiac shadow abnormality, Deep sulcus sign, Radiodensity changes             0
          Visible pleural line, Rib fractures, Absent lung markings, Lung fibrosis, Mediastinal contour
          Cardiac shadow abnormality, Deep sulcus sign, Symmetry analysis, Air distribution pattern        0                                    Pleural effusion                                    1
 CCHVAE
                                                     None                                                  0                                         None                                           1
                  Visible pleural line, Diaphragmatic contour, Rib fractures, Pleural effusion,
                           Deep sulcus sign, Hyperinflated lung, Symmetry analysis                         0                     Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                          1
                                                Pleural effusion                                           0                   Emphysematous changes, Air distribution pattern                      1
 VAECF
                             Subcutaneous emphysema, Emphysematous changes                                 1                                   Deep sulcus sign                                     0
                             Collapsed lung, Pleural effusion, Lung consolidation                          0       Emphysematous changes, Radiodensity changes, Air distribution pattern            1
                                                Pleural effusion                                           1                     Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                          0
 VCNET
                             Collapsed lung, Pleural effusion, Lung consolidation                          0       Subcutaneous emphysema, Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                1
                                 Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                                 1                                  Lung consolidation                                    0
                                           Emphysematous changes                                           1                                         None                                           0
 CF-CBM
                                                     None                                                  0                 Subcutaneous emphysema, Emphysematous changes                          1
                       Absent lung markings, Lung fibrosis, Cardiac shadow abnormality                     0       Subcutaneous emphysema, Emphysematous changes, Hyperinflated lung                1


                                                                                                  24
