Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D O I K NOW T HIS E NTITY ? K NOWLEDGE AWARENESS
AND H ALLUCINATIONS IN L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Javier Ferrando1,2∗        Oscar Obeso3∗         Senthooran Rajamanoharan            Neel Nanda
 1                                  2                                       3
     U. Politècnica de Catalunya        Barcelona Supercomputing Center         ETH Zürich



                                               A BSTRACT
           Hallucinations in large language models are a widespread problem, yet the mech-
           anisms behind whether models will hallucinate are poorly understood, limiting
           our ability to solve this problem. Using sparse autoencoders as an interpretability
           tool, we discover that a key part of these mechanisms is entity recognition, where
           the model detects if an entity is one it can recall facts about. Sparse autoencoders
           uncover meaningful directions in the representation space, these detect whether
           the model recognizes an entity, e.g. detecting it doesn’t know about an athlete or a
           movie. This suggests that models might have self-knowledge: internal representa-
           tions about their own capabilities. These directions are causally relevant: capable
           of steering the model to refuse to answer questions about known entities, or to
           hallucinate attributes of unknown entities when it would otherwise refuse. We
           demonstrate that despite the sparse autoencoders being trained on the base model,
           these directions have a causal effect on the chat model’s refusal behavior, suggest-
           ing that chat finetuning has repurposed this existing mechanism. Furthermore, we
           provide an initial exploration into the mechanistic role of these directions in the
           model, finding that they disrupt the attention of downstream heads that typically
           move entity attributes to the final token.1


1      I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have remarkable capabilities (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2023) yet have a propensity to hallucinate: generat-
ing text that is fluent but factually incorrect or unsupported by available information (Ji et al., 2023;
Minaee et al., 2024). This significantly limits their application in real-world settings where factuality
is crucial, such as healthcare. Despite the prevalence and importance of this issue, the mechanistic
understanding of whether LLMs will hallucinate on a given prompt remains limited. While there
has been much work interpreting factual recall (Geva et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Chughtai et al.,
2024; Yu et al., 2023), it has mainly focused on the mechanism behind recalling known facts, not on
hallucinations or refusals to answer, leaving a significant gap in our understanding.
Language models can produce hallucinations due to various factors, including flawed data sources
or outdated factual knowledge (Huang et al., 2023). However, an important subset of hallucinations
occurs when models are prompted to generate information they don’t possess. We operationalize
this phenomenon by considering queries about entities of different types (movies, cities, players,
and songs). Given a question about an unknown entity, the model either hallucinates or refuses to
answer. In this work, we find linear directions in the representation space that potentially encode a
form of self-knowledge: assessing their own knowledge or lack thereof regarding specific entities.
These directions are causally relevant for whether it refuses to answer. We note that the existence
of this kind of knowledge awareness does not necessarily imply the existence of other forms of
self-knowledge, and may be specific to the factual recall mechanism.
We find these directions using Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) (Bricken et al., 2023; Huben et al.,
2024). SAEs are an interpretability tool for finding a sparse, interpretable decomposition of model
   ∗
     Equal contribution. Work done as part of the ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS) Program. Corre-
spondence to jferrandomonsonis@gmail.com, balcells.oscar@gmail.com.
   1
     We make the codebase available at https://github.com/javiferran/sae_entities.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Known Entity Latent Activations                     Unknown Entity Latent Activations
         Michael Jordan                                      Michael Joordan
         When was the player LeBron James born?              When was the player Wilson Brown born?
         He was born in the city of San Francisco            He was born in the city of Anthon
         I just watched the movie 12 Angry Men               I just watched the movie 20 Angry Men
         The Beatles song ‘Yellow Submarine‘                 The Beatles song ‘Turquoise Submarine’


Table 1: Pair of sparse autoencoder latents that activate on known (left) and unknown entities (right)
respectively. They fire consistently across entity types (movies, cities, songs, and players).


representations. They are motivated by the Linear Representation Hypothesis (Park et al., 2023;
Mikolov et al., 2013): that interpretable properties of the input (features) such as sentiment (Tigges
et al., 2023) or truthfulness (Li et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023) are encoded as linear directions in
the representation space, and that model representations are sparse linear combinations of these
directions. We use Gemma Scope (Lieberum et al., 2024), which offers a suite of SAEs trained on
every layer of Gemma 2 models (Team et al., 2024), and find internal representations that suggest to
encode knowledge awareness in Gemma 2 2B and 9B. Additionally, we reproduce these findings for
the Llama 3.1 8B model (Grattafiori et al., 2024) using LlamaScope’s SAE suite (He et al., 2024),
with results presented in Appendix Q.
Arditi et al. (2024) discovered that the decision to refuse a harmful request is mediated by a single
direction. Building on this work, we demonstrate that a model’s refusal to answer requests about
attributes of entities (knowledge refusal) can similarly be steered with our found entity recognition
directions. This finding is particularly intriguing given that Gemma Scope SAEs were trained on the
base model on pre-training data. Yet, SAE-derived directions have a causal effect on knowledge-
based refusal in the chat model-a behavior incentivized in the finetuning stage. This insight provides
additional evidence for the hypothesis that finetuning often repurposes existing mechanisms (Jain
et al., 2024; Prakash et al., 2024; Kissane et al., 2024).
Overall, our contributions are as follows:

           • Using sparse autoencoders (SAEs) we discover directions in the representation space
             on the final token of an entity, detecting whether the model can recall facts about the
             entity, suggesting they encode a form of knowledge awareness.
           • Our findings show that entity recognition directions generalize across diverse entity
             types: players, films, songs, cities, and more.
           • We demonstrate that these directions causally affect knowledge refusal in the chat model,
             i.e. by steering with these directions, we can cause the model to hallucinate rather than
             refuse on unknown entities, and refuse to answer questions about known entities.
           • We find that unknown entity recognition directions disrupt the factual recall mech-
             anism, by suppressing the attention of attribute extraction heads, shown in prior work
             (Nanda et al., 2023; Geva et al., 2023) to be a key part of the mechanism.
           • We go beyond merely understanding knowledge refusal, and find SAE latents, seemingly
             representing uncertainty, that are predictive of incorrect answers.

2       S PARSE AUTOENCODERS

Dictionary learning (Olshausen & Field, 1997) offers a powerful approach for disentangling features
in superposition. Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have proven to be effective for this task (Sharkey
et al., 2022; Bricken et al., 2023). SAEs project model representations x ∈ Rd into a larger dimen-
sional space a(x) ∈ RdSAE . In this work, we use the SAEs from Gemma Scope (Lieberum et al.,
2024)2 , which use the JumpReLU SAE architecture (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024), which defines the
    2
        We use the default sparsity for each layer, the ones available in Neuronpedia (Lin & Bloom, 2024).


                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                             Increase latent activation
                                                                                                               When was the player Wilson Brown born?
                                    SAE                                                SAE                     Generation
                                                                                                               Unfortunately, I don't have access
                                                                                                               to real-time information, including
        Unknown entity latents
                                                                                                               personal details like birthdates.
           High
                                                                                                               Generation after intervention
             Known entity latents
                                                                                                               The   player     Wilson    Brown   is   a
              High
                                                                                                               professional baseball player. **He
                                                                                                               was born on August 1, 1994.**


                                                                     ... Wilson Brown           born       ?
                                                                              Unknown entity


Figure 1: We identify SAE latents in the final token of the entity residual stream (i.e. hidden state)
that almost exclusively activate on either unknown or known entities (scatter plot on the left). Mod-
ulating the activation values of these latents, e.g. increasing the known entity latent when asking a
question about a made-up athlete increases the tendency to hallucinate.


function
                                               SAE(x) = a(x)Wdec + bdec ,                                                                              (1)
where
                                          a(x) = JumpReLUθ xWenc + benc ,                                                                              (2)
with the activation function (Erichson et al., 2019) JumpReLUθ (x) = x ⊙ H(x − θ), composed by
H, the Heaviside step function, and θ, a learnable vector acting as a threshold. Intuitively, this is
zero below the threshold, and then the identity, with a discontinuous jump at the threshold. Wenc ,
benc and Wdec , bdec are the weight matrices and bias of the encoder and decoder respectively. We
refer to latent activation to a component in a(x), while we reserve the term latent direction to a
(row) vector in the dictionary Wdec .
Equation (1) shows that the model representation can be approximately reconstructed by a linear
combination of the SAE decoder latents, which often represent monosemantic features (Huben et al.,
2024; Bricken et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024). By incorporating a sparsity
penalty into the training loss function, we can constrain this reconstruction to be a sparse linear
combination, thereby enhancing interpretability:
                                                                                   2
                                          L(x) = ∥x − SAE(x)∥2 + λ ∥a(x)∥0 .                                                                           (3)
                                                 |     {z    } | {z }
                                                              Lreconstruction                  Lsparsity


Steering with SAE Latents. Recall from Equation (1) that SAEs reconstruct a model’s represen-
tation as x ≈ a(x)Wdec + bdec . This means that the  Preconstruction is a linear combination of the de-
coder latents (rows) of Wdec plus a bias, i.e. x ≈ j aj (x)Wdec [j, :]. Thus, increasing/decreasing
the activation value of an SAE latent, aj (x), is equivalent to doing activation steering (Turner et al.,
2023) with the decoder latent vector, i.e. updating the residual stream as follows:
                                                          xnew ← x + αdj .                                                                             (4)

3   M ETHODOLOGY

To study how language models reflect knowledge awareness about entities, we build a dataset with
four different entity types: (basketball) players, movies, cities, and songs from Wikidata (Vrandečić
& Krötzsch, 2024). For each entity, we extract associated attributes available in Wikidata. Then, we
create templates of the form (entity type, entity name, relation, attribute) and prompt Gemma 2 2B
and 9B models (Team et al., 2024) to predict the attribute given (entity type, relation, entity name),
for instance:


                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                      Top 5 Known Separation Scores Latents                          Top 5 Unknown Separation Scores Latents
                                                                                              Player               0.8                                         Player
                                                                                              Song                 0.6                                         Song
                                                                                              City                                                             City


                                      Score


                                                                                                           Score
                                                0.5
                                                                                              Movie                0.4                                         Movie
                                                                                              MaxMin                                                           MaxMin
                                                                                                                   0.2

                                                 0                                                                  0
                                                           5     10       15    20    25                                   5     10       15   20     25

                                                                      Layer                                                           Layer

    Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js


Figure 2: Layerwise evolution of the Top 5 latents in Gemma 2 2B SAEs, as measured by their
known (left) and unknown (right) latent separation scores (sknown and sunknown ). Error bars show
maximum and minimum scores. MaxMin (red line) refers to the minimum separation score across
entities of the best latent. This represents how entity-agnostic is the most general latent per layer. In
both cases, the middle layers provide the best-performing latents.

                                                                Entity type                                              Relation
                                                                      The movie 12 Angry Men was directed by                                                            (5)
                                                                               Entity name                                              Attribute

We then categorize entities into ‘known’ or ‘unknown’. Known entities are those where the model
gets at least two attributes correct, while unknown are where it gets them all wrong, we discard
any in-between. To measure correctness we use fuzzy string matching.3 See Appendix A for a
description of the process. We acknowledge that this methodology might introduce some labeling
inaccuracies, as the model could ‘guess’ some attributes despite not knowing about the entity or fail
to recall the specific attributes we consider while knowing about the entity. However, our primary
objective is to achieve a reasonable differentiation between entities rather than striving for perfect
classification accuracy. Finally, we split the entities into train/validation/test (50%, 10%, 40%) sets.
We run the model on the set of prompts containing known and unknown entities. Inspired by Meng
et al. (2022a); Geva et al. (2023); Nanda et al. (2023) we use the residual stream of the final token
of the entity, xknown and xunknown . In each layer (l), we compute the activations of each latent in the
SAE, i.e. al,j (xknown
                  l     ) and al,j (xunknown
                                     l       ). For each latent, we obtain the fraction of the time that it is
active (i.e. has a value greater than zero) on known and unknown entities respectively:
                    PN known                                       PN unknown
          known       i      1[al,j (xknown
                                       l,i  ) > 0]       unknown      i       1[al,j (xunknown
                                                                                       l,i     ) > 0]
        fl,j =                                     ,   fl,j      =                                    ,   (6)
                               N known                                         N unknown
where N known and N unknown are the total number of prompts in each subset. Then, we
take the difference, obtaining the latent separation scores sknown   l,j
                                                                               known
                                                                            = fl,j      unknown
                                                                                     − fl,j     and
sunknown
 l,j     = f unknown
            l,j      − f known
                        l,j    , for detecting known and unknown entities respectively.

4                                              S PARSE AUTOENCODERS U NCOVER E NTITY R ECOGNITION D IRECTIONS
We find that the separation scores of some of the SAE latents in the training set are high, i.e. they
fire almost exclusively on tokens of either known or unknown entities, as depicted in the scatter plot
in Figure 1 for Gemma 2 2B and Figure 8, Appendix C for Gemma 2 9B. An interesting observa-
tion is that latent separation scores reveal a consistent pattern across all entity types, with scores
increasing throughout the model and reaching a peak around layer 9 before plateauing (Figure 2).
This indicates that latents better distinguishing between known and unknown entities are found in
the middle layers.
We also examine the level of generality of the latents by measuring their minimum separation score
across entity types (t): players, song, cities and movies. A high minimum separation score indicates
that a latent performs robustly across entity types, suggesting strong generalization capabilities. For
this purpose, for each layer (l) we compute MaxMinknown,l = maxj mint sknown,t
                                                                             l,j    , and similarly for
unknown entities. The increasing trend shown in the MaxMin (red) line in Figure 2 for Gemma 2
2B and in Figure 9, Appendix D for Gemma 2 9B suggests that more generalized latents—those
that distinguish between known and unknown entities across various entity types—are concentrated
                          3
                                        https://github.com/seatgeek/thefuzz.


                                                                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in these intermediate layers. This observation is replicated on Llama 3.1 8B in Appendix Q. This
finding points to a hierarchical organization of entity representation within the model, with more
specialized, worse quality, latents in earlier layers and more generalized, higher quality entity-type-
agnostic features emerging in the middle layers.
Next, we compute the minimum separation scores by considering every SAE latent in every layer,
i.e. mint sknown,t
           l,j     for 1 ≤ l ≤ L and 1 ≤ j ≤ dSAE , and equivalently for unknown entities.
To ensure specificity to entity tokens, we exclude latents that activate frequently (>2%) on random
tokens sampled from the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020). The latents with highest minimum separation
scores exhibit the most generalized behavior out of all latents, and will be the focus of our subsequent
analysis:
known entity latent = arg max min sknown
                                   l,j
                                         ,t
                                            and unknown entity latent = arg max min sunknown
                                                                                      l,j
                                                                                             ,t
                                                                                                . (7)
                         l,j    t                                          l,j   t  |     {z  }
                              |   {z      }
                               min known separation score                                min unknown separation score
                             of latent l, j across entity types                          of latent l, j across entity types


 Table 1 demonstrates the activation patterns of the Gemma 2 2B topmost known entity latent
on prompts with well-known entities (left), and the patterns for the topmost unknown entity la-
tent (right), firing across entities of different types that cannot be recognized. In Appendix B we
provide the activations of these latents on sentences containing a diverse set of entity types, sug-
gesting that indeed they are highly general. To validate these latents’ reliability, we analyze their
activation frequencies on 283 song titles released after the models’ knowledge cutoff (August 2024).
As hypothesized, unknown entity latents show higher activation rates, while known entity latents ex-
hibit lower activation frequencies (Appendix R). While we acknowledge potential overlap between
these song titles and pre-training data, the consistent activation patterns across multiple models
strengthen our confidence in these latents’ ability to distinguish between known and unknown infor-
mation. In the following sections, we explore how these primary entity recognition latents influence
the model’s overall behavior.

5       E NTITY R ECOGNITION D IRECTIONS C AUSALLY A FFECT K NOWLEDGE
        R EFUSAL
We define knowledge refusal as the model declining to answer a question due to reasons like a lack of
information or database access as justification, rather than safety concerns. To quantify knowledge
refusals, we adapt the factual recall prompts as in Example 5 into questions:
                        Relation                                  Entity type
                         Who directed the movie 12 Angry Men ?                                                       (8)
                                                             Entity name         Attribute
and we define a set of common knowledge refusal completions and detect if any of these occur
with string matching, e.g. ‘Unfortunately, I don’t have access to real-time information...’. Gemma
2 includes both a base model, and a fine-tuned chat (i.e. instruction tuned) model. In Section 4 we
found the entity recognition latents by studying the base model, but here focus on the chat model, as
they have been explicitly fine-tuned to perform knowledge refusal where appropriate (Team et al.,
2024)4 , and the factuality of chat models is highly desirable.
We hypothesize that entity recognition directions could be used by chat models to induce knowl-
edge refusal. To evaluate this, we use a test set sample of 100 questions about unknown entities, and
measure the number of times the model refuses by steering (as in Equation (4)) with the entity recog-
nition latents the last token of the entity and the following end-of-instruction-tokens.5 Figure 3 (left)
    4
      The Gemma 2 technical report (Team et al., 2024) mentions “including subsets of data that encourage
refusals to minimize hallucinations improves performance on factuality metrics”. This pattern is consistent
with recent language models, such as Llama 3.1 (Dubey et al., 2024), where the explicit finetuning process for
knowledge refusal has been documented.
    5
      We use a validation set to select an appropriate steering coefficient α. In Appendix G we show generations
of Gemma 2B IT with different steering coefficients. We select α ∈ [400, 550], which corresponds to around
two times the norm of the residual stream in the layers where the entity recognition latents are present (Ap-
pendix E).


                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                100
                 90                                     Original generation       Where was the player LeBron James born?
                 80                                     Steering unknown latent
                 70                                     Random steering           Generation
 Refusal Rate                                           Unknown latent setting    LeBron James was born on **Akron,
                 60                                     Orthogonalized model
                 50                                     Unknown latent            Ohio**.
                 40                                     Steering known latent
                 30                                     Random steering           Generation after intervention

                 20                                     Known latent setting      I'm not able to provide real-time

                 10                                                               information,      including     personal
                  0                                                               details like birthplaces.
                      Player   City   Movie   Song


Figure 3: Left: Number of times Gemma 2 2B refuses to answer in 100 queries about unknown
entities. We examine the unmodified original model, the model steered with the known entity latent
and unknown entity latent, and the model with the unknown entity latent projected out of its weights
(referred to as Orthogonalized model). The mean and standard deviation of steering with 10 random
latents are shown for comparison. Right: This example illustrates the effect of steering with the
unknown entity recognition latent (same as in Table 1). The steering induces the model to refuse to
answer about a well-known basketball player.



illustrates the original model refusal rate (blue bar), showing some refusal across entity types. We
see that the entity recognition SAE latents found in the base model transfer to the chat model, and
increasing the unknown entity latent induces almost 100% refusal across all entity types in Gemma 2
2B. Conversely, increasing the known entity latent activation slightly reduces refusal rates. We also
include an Orthogonalized model baseline, which consists of doing weight orthogonalization (Arditi
et al., 2024) on every matrix writing to the residual stream. Weight orthogonalization modifies each
row of a weight matrix to make it perpendicular to a specified direction vector d. This is achieved
by subtracting the component of each row that is parallel to d:

                                                      new
                                                     Wout ← Wout − Wout d⊺ d.                                                (9)

By doing this operation on every output matrix in the model we ensure no component is able to
write into that direction. The resulting orthogonalized model with the top unknown entity direction
exhibits a large reduction in refusal responses, suggesting this direction plays a crucial role in the
model’s knowledge refusal behavior. We also include the average refusal rate after steering with
10 differents random latents, using the same configuration (layer and steering coefficient) that the
known and unknown entity latents respectively. Additional analysis on the Gemma 2 9B model and
Llama 3.1 8B are detailed in Sections F and Q revealing similar patterns, albeit with less pronounced
effects compared to the 2B model.
Figure 3 (right) shows a refusal response for a well-known basketball player generated by steering
with the unknown entity latent. In Figure 1 (right) we observe that when asked about a non-existent
player, Wilson Brown, the model without intervention refuses to answer. However, steering with the
known entity latent induces a hallucination.


6                 M ECHANISTIC A NALYSIS

Entity Recognition Directions Regulate Attention to Entity. In the previous section, we saw
that entity recognition latents had a causal effect on knowledge refusal. Here, we look at how they
affect the factual recall mechanism (aka circuit) in prompts of the format of Example 5. This has
been well studied before on other language models (Nanda et al., 2023; Geva et al., 2023; Meng
et al., 2022a). We replicate the approach of Nanda et al. (2023) on Gemma 2 2B and 9B and find a
similar circuit. Namely, early attention heads merge the entity’s name into the last token of the entity,
and downstream attention heads extract relevant attributes from the entity and move them to the final
token position (Figure 4 (a, b)), this pattern holds across various entity types and model sizes (Ap-
pendix I and Appendix J). To do the analysis, we perform activation patching (Geiger et al., 2020;
Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022a) on the residual streams and attention heads’ outputs (see Ap-
pendix H for a detailed explanation on the method). We use the denoising setup (Heimersheim &


                                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                    Activation Patching on the Last
    Activation Patching on the Residual Streams         Position Attention Head
                                                                                                       Attention Scores of Last Entity Token
                                                                                                        Steering with Known Entity Latent


                                                                  (b)                                                   (c)
                         (a)

            Attention Scores of Last Entity Token              Attention Scores of Last Entity Token              Attention Scores of Last Token Entity
            Steering with Unknown Entity Latent                 Steering with Known Entity Latent                     Steering with Random Vector


                               (d)                                               (e)                                                (f)



Figure 4: (a,b) Activation patching on the residual streams and the output of attention heads in the
last position (song entities). We patch clean (from known entities prompts) representations into a
corrupted forward pass (from unknown entities prompts) and measure the logit difference recovered.
(c) Attention paid from the last position to the last token of the entity is greater when faced with a
known entity in attribute-extraction heads. (d,e,f) Effect on attention scores, as in (c), after steering
the last token of the entity with the unknown entity latent (d), known entity latent (e), and a random
vector with same norm (f).


Nanda, 2024), where we patch representations from a clean run (with a known entity) and apply it
over the run with a corrupted input (with an unknown entity).6
Expanding on the findings of Yuksekgonul et al. (2024), who established a link between prediction
accuracy and attention to the entity tokens, our study reveals a large disparity in attention between
known and unknown entities, for instance the attribute extraction heads L18H5 and L20H3 (Fig-
ure 4 (c)), which are overall relevant across entity types in Gemma 2 2B (see example of attributes
extracted by these heads in Appendix L). Notably, attention scores are higher when faced with a
known entity. This suggests that the detected entity recognition latents might influence the attention
mechanism through the ‘keys’ computation to induce this behavior. To evaluate this hypothesis we
steer the residual stream with the found latents on the last token of the entity, and measure the at-
tention scores of the entity tokens. We observe a causal relationship between the entity recognition
latents and the attention patterns of the attention heads downstream, being more pronounced in the
attribute extraction heads. Steering with the top unknown entity latent reduces the attention to en-
tity, even in prompts with a known entity (Figure 4 (d)), while steering with the known entity latent
increases the attention scores (Figure 4 (e)). We show in Figure 4 (f) the results of steering with a
random unit vector baseline for comparison, and in Appendix K when steering with a random SAE
latent. In Appendix M we illustrate the average attention score change to the entity tokens after
steering on the residual streams of the last token of the entities in Gemma 2 2B, 9B, and Llama 3.1
8B with the top 3 known and unknown entity latents. The results reveal an increase/decrease atten-
tion score across upper layer heads, with the 9B model showing more subtle effects when steered
using unknown latents.
These results provide compelling evidence that the entity recognition SAE latent directions play
a crucial role in regulating the model’s attention mechanisms, and thereby their ability to extract
attributes.

    6
      We show the proportion of logit difference recovered after each patch in Figure 4 (a). A recovered logit
difference of 1 indicates that the prediction after patching is the same as the original prediction in the clean run.


                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               Steering results on Known Entities                    Steering results on Unknown Entities


Figure 5: Logit difference between “Yes” and “No” predictions on the question “Are you sure you
know the {entity_type} {entity_name}? Answer yes or no.” after steering with unknown (left) and
known (right) entity recognition latents.


Early Entity Recognition Directions Regulate Expressing Knowledge Uncertainty. We have
shown that the entity recognition latents causally affect the model’s knowledge refusal, implicitly
using its knowledge of whether it recognises an entity, but not whether they are used when explicitly
asking a model whether it recognises an entity. To investigate this, we use the following prompt
structure:
Are you sure you know the {entity_type} {entity}? Answer yes or no. Answer:
                                                                                                   (10)
We then steer the residual streams of the last token of the entity by upweighting the entity recogni-
tion latents. In Figure 5 we show the results on the logit difference between Yes and No responses.
The left plot illustrates the effect of steering known entities prompts with the unknown entity latent.
This intervention results in a reduction of the logit difference. For comparison, we include a random
baseline where we apply a randomly sampled SAE latent with the same coefficient. In the right plot,
we steer unknown entities prompts with the known entity latent. Despite the model’s inherent bias
towards Yes predictions for unknown entities (indicated by positive logit differences in the ‘Orig-
inal’ column), which indicates the model struggles to accurately express their uncertainty (Yona
et al., 2024), this intervention leads to a positive shift in the logit difference, suggesting that the
entity recognition latents, although slightly, have an effect on the expression of uncertainty about
knowledge of entities. A similar pattern can be observed in Gemma 2 9B (Appendix N).

7       U NCERTAINTY D IRECTIONS
Having studied how base models represent features for entity recognition, we now explore internal
representations that may differentiate between correct and wrong answers. Our investigation fo-
cuses on chat models, which are capable of refusing to answer, and we search for directions in the
representation space signaling uncertainty or lack of knowledge potentially indicative of upcoming
errors. For this analysis we use our entities dataset, and exclude instances where the model refuses
to respond, and leave only prompts that elicit either correct predictions or errors from the model.
Our study focuses on the study of the residual streams before the answer. We hypothesize that end-
of-instruction tokens, which always succeed the instruction, may aggregate information about the
whole question (Marks & Tegmark, 2023).7 We select the token model and use examples such as:
<start_of_turn>user\nWhen was the player Wilson Brown born?<end_of_turn>\n<start_of_turn>model\n
                                                                                                            (11)
For each entity type and layer with available SAE we extract the representations of the model resid-
ual stream, for both correct and mistaken answers, and gather the SAE latent activations. We are
interested in seeing whether there are SAE latents that convey information about how unsure or un-
certain the model is to answer to a question, but still fails to refuse, giving rise to hallucinations. We
divide the dataset of prompts into train/validation/test sets (50%, 10%, 40%).
To capture subtle variations in model uncertainty, which may be represented even when attributes
are correctly recalled, we focus on quantifying differences in activation levels between correct and
    7
        This concept was termed by Tigges et al. (2023) as the ‘summarization motif’.


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            ‘Unknown’ Latent Activations
                 “Apparently one or two people were shooting or shooting at each other for reasons unknown when
                 eight people were struck by the gunfire
                 ...and the Red Cross all responded to the fire. The cause of the fire remains under investigation.
                 The Witcher Card Game will have another round of beta tests this spring (platforms TBA)
                 His condition was not disclosed, but police said he was described as stable.

Table 2: Activations of the Gemma 2B IT ‘unknown’ latent on the maximally activating examples
provided by Neuropedia (Lin & Bloom, 2024).


incorrect responses. For each latent, we compute the t-statistic in the training set using two activa-
tion samples: al,j (xcorrect
                     l       ) for correct responses and al,j (xerror   l   ) for incorrect ones. The t-statistic
measures how different the two sample means are from each other, taking into account the variability
within the samples:
                                            µ(al,j (xcorrect
                                                       l        )) − µ(al,j (xerrorl     ))
                           t-statisticl,j = q            correct    2              error
                                                                                            .               (12)
                                               σ(al,j (xl        ))     σ(al,j (xl ))2
                                                    n correct         +      n error



We use a pre-trained SAE for the 13th layer (out of 18) of Gemma 2B IT8 , and the available Gemma
Scope SAEs for Gemma 2 9B IT, at layers 10, 21, and 32 (out of 42). Our approach for detecting
top latents, similar to the entity recognition method described in Section 4 focuses on the top latents
with the highest minimum t-statistic score across entities, representing the most general latents. We
split the dataset into train and test sets, and use the training set to select the top latents. The left
panel of Figure 6 reveals a distinct separation between the latent activations at the model token
when comparing correct versus incorrect responses in the test set. Using this latent as a classifier,
it achieves 73.2 AUROC score, and by calibrating the decision threshold on a validation set, it
gets an F1 score of 72. See Appendix P with separated errors by entity type. Table 2 illustrates the
activations of the highest-scoring latent in Gemma 2B IT’s SAE on a large text corpus (Penedo et al.,
2024)9 , showing it triggers on text related to uncertainty or undisclosed information. Figure 6 (right)
illustrates the top tokens with higher logit increase by this latent, further confirming its association
with concepts of unknownness.10 Similar latent separations between correct and incorrect answers
                   Error Latent Activations
can also be observed in Gemma 2 9B IT (Appendix O).
        Activation Value


                           4



                           2



                           0
                               M


                                        M


                                                 Ci


                                                           Ci


                                                                       So


                                                                               So
                               ov


                                          ov


                                                    ty


                                                             ty


                                                                        ng


                                                                                 ng
                                   ie


                                            ie


                                                     -C


                                                                  -E



                                                                            -C


                                                                                       -E
                                    -C


                                               -E


                                                                   rr
                                                         or


                                                                                        rr
                                                                              or
                                                                     or
                                                 rr
                                        or


                                                           re


                                                                                          or
                                                                                re
                                                   or
                                          re


                                                             tc


                                                                                   c
                                            ct


                                                                                  t


Figure 6: Left: Activation values of the Gemma 2B IT ‘unknown’ latent on correct and incorrect
responses. Right: Top 10 tokens with the highest logit increase by the ‘unknown’ latent influence.


8       R ELATED W ORK
Recent advances in mechanistic interpretability in language models (Ferrando et al., 2024) have
shed light on the factual recall process in these systems. Key discoveries include the aggregation of
entity tokens (Nanda et al., 2023), the importance of early MLPs for entity processing (Meng et al.,
    8
     https://huggingface.co/jbloom/Gemma-2b-IT-Residual-Stream-SAEs. We note that Gemma
Scope doesn’t provide SAEs for Gemma 2 2B IT.
   9
     https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb.
  10
     We omit the players category since Gemma 2B IT refuses to almost all of those queries.


                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2022b), and the identification of specialized extraction relation heads (Geva et al., 2023; Chughtai
et al., 2024). Despite these insights, there remains a significant gap in our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying failures in attribute extraction leading to hallucinations. Gottesman & Geva
(2024) demonstrated that the performance of probes trained on the residual streams of entities corre-
lates with the model’s ability to answer questions about them accurately. Yuksekgonul et al. (2024)
established a link between increased attention to entity tokens and improved factual accuracy. (Yu
et al., 2024) proposed two mechanisms for non-factual hallucinations: inadequate entity enrichment
in early MLPs and failure to extract correct attributes in upper layers. Our research aligns with
studies on hallucination prediction (Kossen et al., 2024; Varshney et al., 2023), particularly those
engaging with model internals (CH-Wang et al., 2024; Azaria & Mitchell, 2023). Previous work
has trained probes to predict truthfulness of the produced outputs (Li et al., 2023) with Joshi et al.
(2024) showing this can be detected in activation space before the model generation, which can be
related to our results on ‘uncertainty directions’ discovered in Section 7. Additionally, our work
contributes to the growing body of literature on practical applications of sparse autoencoders, as
investigated by Marks et al. (2024); Krzyzanowski et al. (2024). While the practical applications
of sparse autoencoders in language model interpretation are still in their early stages, our research
demonstrates their potential.

9   C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we use sparse autoencoders to identify directions in the model’s representation space
that suggest the presence of encoded knowledge awareness about entities. These directions, found
in the base model, are causally relevant to the knowledge refusal behavior in the chat-based model.
We demonstrated that, by manipulating these directions, we can control the model’s tendency to
refuse answers or hallucinate information. We also provide insights into how the entity recognition
directions influence the model behavior, such as regulating the attention paid to entity tokens, and
their influence in expressing knowledge uncertainty. Finally, we uncover directions representing
model uncertainty to specific queries, capable of discriminating between correct and mistaken an-
swers. While our primary focus in this work centers on the representation of knowledge awareness
and uncertainty, the methodology we present for discovering these latent directions is generalizable
to any other type of binary (Section 3) and continuous (Section 7) features. This work contributes to
our understanding of language model behavior and opens avenues for improving model reliability
and mitigating hallucinations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was conducted as part of the ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS) Program. We
want to express our sincere gratitude to McKenna Fitzgerald for her guidance and support during the
program, to Matthew Wearden for his thoughtful feedback on the manuscript, and to Wes Gurnee for
initial discussions that helped shape this work. We want to extend our gratitude to Adam Karvonen,
Can Rager, Bart Bussmann, Patrick Leask and Stepan Shabalin for the valuable input during MATS.
Lastly, we thank the entire MATS and Lighthaven staff for creating the environment that made this
research possible. Portions of this work were supported by the Long Term Future Fund. Javier
Ferrando is supported by the fellowship within the “Generación D” initiative, Red.es, Ministerio
para la Transformación Digital y de la Función Pública, for talent atraction (C005/24-ED CV1).
Funded by the European Union NextGenerationEU funds, through PRTR. Lastly, we appreciate the
anonymous reviewers for their useful comments.

R EFERENCES
Andy Arditi, Oscar Balcells Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Rimsky, Wes Gurnee, and
  Neel Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. In The Thirty-
  eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=pH3XAQME6c.

Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it‘s lying. In Houda
 Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 967–976, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computa-


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.68. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2023.findings-emnlp.68/.
Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina
  Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and
  Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary
  learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/
  2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Sky CH-Wang, Benjamin Van Durme, Jason Eisner, and Chris Kedzie. Do androids know they‘re
  only dreaming of electric sheep? In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.),
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pp. 4401–4420, Bangkok,
  Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  findings-acl.260. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.260/.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Er-
  ica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,
  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern,
  Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling
  with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):1–113, 2023. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-1144.html.
Bilal Chughtai, Alan Cooney, and Neel Nanda. Summing up the facts: Additive mechanisms behind
  factual recall in llms, 2024. URL https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2402.07321.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
  Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
  Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
  Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
  Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
  Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
  Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
  Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
  son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
  Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
  Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
  Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
  wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
  Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
  Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
  Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
  nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
  Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
  Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
  Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
  gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
  Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
  Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
  baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
  Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
  Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
  Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
  Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
  Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
  Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
  vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
  Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
  Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
  Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
  Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
  Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
  Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
  Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
  Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
  Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
  Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
  don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
  Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
  Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
  Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
  Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
  Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
  caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
  Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
  Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
  Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
  Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
  man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
  James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
  Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
  Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
  Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
  Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
  Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
  Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
  Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
  Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
  neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
  Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mo-
  hammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navy-
  ata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Ning Zhang, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
  Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux,
  Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao,
  Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott,
  Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Sa-
  tadru Pan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lind-
  say, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang
  Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
  Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho,
  Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser,
  Tamara Best, Thilo Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Tim-
  othy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan,
  Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vítor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu
  Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-
  stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu,
  Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
  Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
  Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. The llama 3 herd of models. ArXiv,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
N. Benjamin Erichson, Zhewei Yao, and Michael W. Mahoney. Jumprelu: A retrofit defense strategy
  for adversarial attacks. ArXiv, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.03750.
Javier Ferrando, Gabriele Sarti, Arianna Bisazza, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. A primer on the inner
  workings of transformer-based language models. ArXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2405.00208.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The Pile:
  An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
Leo Gao, Tom Dupré la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. ArXiv, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04093.
Atticus Geiger, Kyle Richardson, and Christopher Potts. Neural natural language inference models
  partially embed theories of lexical entailment and negation. In Afra Alishahi, Yonatan Belinkov,
  Grzegorz Chrupała, Dieuwke Hupkes, Yuval Pinter, and Hassan Sajjad (eds.), Proceedings of
  the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp.
  163–173, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2020.blackboxnlp-1.16. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.blackboxnlp-1.16/.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika
 Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
 Processing, pp. 12216–12235, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.751. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
 emnlp-main.751/.
Daniela Gottesman and Mor Geva. Estimating knowledge in large language models without gener-
  ating a single token. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3994–4019,
  Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
  18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.232. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.232/.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
  Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
  Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Ko-
  renev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava
  Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux,
  Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret,
  Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius,
  Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary,
  Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco
  Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind That-
  tai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Kore-
  vaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra,
  Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu,
  Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jong-
  soo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala,
  Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid
  El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren
  Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin,
  Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi,
  Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew
  Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Ku-
  mar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoy-
  chev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ra-
  mon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Ro-
  hit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan
  Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell,
  Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng
  Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer
  Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman,
  Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mi-
  haylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor
  Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
  Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang
  Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Gold-
  schlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning
  Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh,
  Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria,
  Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
  Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, An-
  drew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, An-
  nie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel,
  Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leon-
  hardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu
  Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Mon-
  talvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia
  Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smoth-
  ers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni,
  Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia
  Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan,
  Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harri-
  son Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj,
  Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James
  Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-
  nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang,
  Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Jun-
  jie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy
  Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang,
  Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell,
  Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa,
  Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L.
  Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
  Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari,
  Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan
  Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent,
  Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar,
  Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Ro-
  driguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy,
  Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin
  Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon,
  Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ra-
  maswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
  Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal,
  Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satter-
  field, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj
  Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo
  Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
  Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Ku-
  mar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov,
  Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiao-
  jian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia,
  Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao,
  Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhao-
  duo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Zhengfu He, Wentao Shu, Xuyang Ge, Lingjie Chen, Junxuan Wang, Yunhua Zhou, Frances Liu,
  Qipeng Guo, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu. Llama scope:
  Extracting millions of features from llama-3.1-8b with sparse autoencoders, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2410.20526.

Stefan Heimersheim and Neel Nanda. How to use and interpret activation patching. Arxiv, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15255.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Thomas
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Au-
  relia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karén Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack Rae, and
  Laurent Sifre. An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training.
  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 30016–30030. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/c1e2faff6f588870935f114ebe04a3e5-Abstract-Conference.html.

Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large
  language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.05232.

Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse
  autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  F76bwRSLeK.

Samyak Jain, Robert Kirk, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P. Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, Tim Rock-
  täschel, Edward Grefenstette, and David Krueger. Mechanistically analyzing the effects of fine-
  tuning on procedurally defined tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=A0HKeKl4Nl.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12), mar 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3571730. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/3571730.
Nitish Joshi, Javier Rando, Abulhair Saparov, Najoung Kim, and He He. Personas as a way to model
  truthfulness in language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18168.
Connor Kissane, Robert Krzyzanowski, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda. Base llms refuse too.
  LessWrong, 2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/YWo2cKJgL7Lg8xWjj/
  base-llms-refuse-too.
Jannik Kossen, Jiatong Han, Muhammed Razzak, Lisa Schut, Shreshth Malik, and Yarin Gal. Se-
  mantic entropy probes: Robust and cheap hallucination detection in llms, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.15927.
Robert Krzyzanowski, Connor Kissane, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda.       We in-
  spected every head in GPT-2 small using saes so you don’t have to.   AI Align-
  ment Forum, 2024. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/xmegeW5mqiBsvoaim/
  we-inspected-every-head-in-gpt-2-small-using-saes-so-you-don.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  aLLuYpn83y.
Tom Lieberum, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Arthur Conmy, Lewis Smith, Nicolas Sonnerat, Vikrant
  Varma, János Kramár, Anca Dragan, Rohin Shah, and Neel Nanda. Gemma scope: Open sparse
  autoencoders everywhere all at once on gemma 2. ArXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2408.05147.
Johnny Lin and Joseph Bloom.             Announcing neuronpedia:    Platform for
  accelerating research into sparse autoencoders.         AI Alignment Forum,
  2024.           URL    https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/BaEQoxHhWPrkinmxd/
  announcing-neuronpedia-platform-for-accelerating-research.
Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language
  model representations of true/false datasets, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06824.
Samuel Marks, Can Rager, Eric J. Michaud, Yonatan Belinkov, David Bau, and Aaron Mueller.
  Sparse feature circuits: Discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models.
  ArXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19647.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual as-
  sociations in GPT. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 17359–17372. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2022a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2022/hash/6f1d43d5a82a37e89b0665b33bf3a182-Abstract-Conference.html.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing fac-
  tual associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2022b.
  arXiv:2202.05262.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed represen-
  tations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,
  Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper_files/paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Abstract.html.
Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard Socher, Xavier Am-
  atriain, and Jianfeng Gao. Large language models: A survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2402.06196.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Neel Nanda, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, János Kramár, and Rohin Shah.       Fact find-
  ing: Attempting to reverse-engineer factual recall on the neuron level. AI Align-
  ment Forum, 2023. URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/iGuwZTHWb6DFY3sKB/
  fact-finding-attempting-to-reverse-engineer-factual-recall.
Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy
  employed by v1? Vision Research, 37(23):3311–3325, 1997. ISSN 0042-6989. doi: https://
  doi.org/10.1016/S0042-6989(97)00169-7. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0042698997001697.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
  of large language models. Arxiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03658.
Judea Pearl. Causality.       Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2009.        doi:   10.1017/
  CBO9780511803161.
Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin
  Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the
  finest text data at scale, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17557.
Nikhil Prakash, Tamar Rott Shaham, Tal Haklay, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Fine-tuning
  enhances existing mechanisms: A case study on entity tracking. arXiv, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.14811.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 2019.   URL
  https://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language_models_
  are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Tom Lieberum, Nicolas Sonnerat, Arthur Conmy, Vikrant Varma, János
  Kramár, and Neel Nanda. Jumping ahead: Improving reconstruction fidelity with jumprelu sparse
  autoencoders, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14435.
Lee Sharkey, Dan Braun, and Beren Millidge.             Taking features out of
  superposition with sparse autoencoders.        AI Alignment Forum,       2022.
  URL                   https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/z6QQJbtpkEAX3Aojj/
  interim-research-report-taking-features-out-of-superposition.
Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhu-
  patiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Fer-
  ret, Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Char-
  line Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin,
  Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur,
  Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchi-
  son, Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge,
  Antonia Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar,
  Chris Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Wein-
  berger, Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozińska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang,
  Eric Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin,
  Gary Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harleen
  Batra, Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway, Jetha
  Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez, Joost van
  Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed, Kar-
  tikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir Sodhia,
  Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia Lago,
  Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins, Machel
  Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth, Matt Davidow,
  Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi, Michael Moyni-
  han, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani, Natalie Dao,
  Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar Wahltinez, Pankil
  Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko Georgiev, Phil Culli-
  ton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana, Reza Ardeshir Rokni,


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M. R.
  Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg, Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan,
  Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan, Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain,
  Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari, Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye,
  Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen, Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta,
  Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral,
  Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley, Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol
  Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya,
  Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek
  Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. ArXiv, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam
  Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner,
  Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers, Edward Rees,
  Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan. Scaling monoseman-
  ticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2024.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Curt Tigges, Oskar John Hollinsworth, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. Linear representations of
  sentiment in large language models. Arxiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15154.
Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDi-
  armid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization, 2023.
Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jianshu Chen, and Dong Yu. A stitch in time saves
  nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03987.
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer,
  and Stuart Shieber. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation
  analysis. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12388–12401. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  92650b2e92217715fe312e6fa7b90d82-Abstract.html.
Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. Wikidata: A free collaborative knowledgebase. ACM,
  2024. URL https://cacm.acm.org/research/wikidata/.
Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Inter-
  pretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In The Eleventh
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul.
Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, and Mor Geva. Can large language models faithfully express their intrinsic
  uncertainty in words?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16908.
Lei Yu, Meng Cao, Jackie Chi Kit Cheung, and Yue Dong. Mechanistic understanding and mitiga-
  tion of language model non-factual hallucinations. arXiv, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2403.18167.
Qinan Yu, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Characterizing mechanisms for factual recall in language
  models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15910.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Varun Chandrasekaran, Erik Jones, Suriya Gunasekar, Ranjita Naik, Hamid
 Palangi, Ece Kamar, and Besmira Nushi. Attention satisfies: A constraint-satisfaction lens on
 factual errors of language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
 sentations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gfFVATffPd.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander
  Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li,
  Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt
  Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation engineering: A top-down ap-
  proach to ai transparency. Arxiv, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E NTITY D IVISION INTO K NOWN AND U NKNOWN

                                 The place of birth of the player Michael
                                              Jordan is ___
                                                                                                        Known
                                 The year of birth of the player Michael
                                                                                                        entities
                                              Jordan is ___



                   Set of                    Attributes                                                Unknown
                  entities                   evaluation                                                 entities


                                                                                else                     Rest

               Entity                               Set of attributes
                                                                            Place of birth: New York
                                Michael Jordan                                 Year of birth: 1963
                                                                                        ...


Figure 7: Pipeline for classifying entities as known or unknown. Each entity ei ∈ E is evaluated by
querying the language model about a set of attributes A(ei ). Classification as known or unknown is
based on the accuracy of the model’s responses. In this work we set the threshold τ = 1.


    Entity Type     Number of entities                                                   Attributes
      Player                 7487                                      Birthplace, birthdate, teams played
      Movie                  10895                  Director, screenwriter, release date, genre, duration, cast
       City                  7904                               Country, population, elevation, coordinates
       Song                  8448                                    Artist, album, publication year, genre

                        Table 3: Entity types and attributes extracted from Wikidata.


                                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B      E NTITY R ECOGNITION L ATENTS ON D IVERSE E NTITIES

    Known Entity Latent Activations                            Unknown Entity Latent Activations
    Many people use Twitter to share their thoughts.           Many people use Twitter to share their thoughts.
    L’Oréal is a large cosmetics and beauty company.           L’Oréal is a large cosmetics and beauty company.
    The Mona Lisa is displayed in the Louvre museum.           The Mona Lisa is displayed in the Louvre museum.
    Many people use Snapchat for sharing photos and            Many people use Snapchat for sharing photos and
    short videos.                                              short videos.
    The Acropolis is an ancient citadel in Athens.             The Acropolis is an ancient citadel in Athens.
    The Galapagos Islands are known for their unique           The Galapagos Islands are known for their unique
    wildlife.                                                  wildlife.
    Many people use Dropbox for cloud storage.                 Many people use Dropbox for cloud storage.
    The pyramids of Giza were built by ancient Egyp-           The pyramids of Giza were built by ancient Egyp-
    tians.                                                     tians.
    Walmart is the world’s largest company by revenue.         Walmart is the world’s largest company by revenue.
    FedEx is a multinational delivery services com-            FedEx is a multinational delivery services com-
    pany.                                                      pany.
    Many people use Instagram to share photos.                 Many people use Instagram to share photos.
    The Neuschwanstein Castle inspired Disney’s                The Neuschwanstein Castle inspired Disney’s
    Sleeping Beauty Castle.                                    Sleeping Beauty Castle.
    The theory of gravity was developed by Isaac New-          The theory of gravity was developed by Isaac New-
    ton.                                                       ton.
    Sony is known for its electronics and entertainment        Sony is known for its electronics and entertainment
    products.                                                  products.
    Many people use Skype for voice and video calls.           Many people use Skype for voice and video calls.
    The Sistine Chapel is famous for its frescoes by           The Sistine Chapel is famous for its frescoes by
    Michelangelo.                                              Michelangelo.
    The Andes are the longest continental mountain             The Andes are the longest continental mountain
    range in the world.                                        range in the world.
    The theory of evolution was proposed by Charles            The theory of evolution was proposed by Charles
    Darwin.                                                    Darwin.
    Many people use Shopify for e-commerce plat-               Many people use Shopify for e-commerce plat-
    forms.                                                     forms.
    Honda is known for its motorcycles and automo-             Honda is known for its motorcycles and automo-
    biles.                                                     biles.

        Table 4: Activations of Gemma 2 2B entity recognition latents on LLM generated data.


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Known Entity Latent Activations                            Unknown Entity Latent Activations
  Druids commune with nature in the sacred grove of          Druids commune with nature in the sacred grove of
  Elthalas.                                                  Elthalas.
  Adventurers seek the lost treasure of King                 Adventurers seek the lost treasure of King
  Zephyrion.                                                 Zephyrion.
  The Thaumaturge’s Guild specializes in Aether              The Thaumaturge’s Guild specializes in Aether
  manipulation.                                              manipulation.
  The Vorpal Blade was forged by the legendary               The Vorpal Blade was forged by the legendary Jab-
  Jabberwock.                                                berwock.
  The Hivemind of Xarzith threatens galactic peace.          The Hivemind of Xarzith threatens galactic peace.
  Travelers must appease the Stormcaller to cross the        Travelers must appease the Stormcaller to cross the
  Tempest Sea.                                               Tempest Sea.
  Archaeologists unearthed artifacts from the Zan-           Archaeologists unearthed       artifacts   from the
  thar civilization.                                         Zanthar civilization.
  Sailors fear the treacherous waters of the My-             Sailors fear the treacherous waters of the Myrosian
  roskian Sea.                                               Sea.
  Scientists studied the unique properties of Quixium        Scientists studied the unique properties of Quixium
  alloy.                                                     alloy.
  The Glibberthorn plant is known for its healing            The Glibberthorn plant is known for its healing
  properties.                                                properties.
  The Voidwalker emerged from the Abyssal Rift.              The Voidwalker emerged from the Abyssal Rift.
  Alchemists seek to create the legendary Philoso-           Alchemists seek to create the legendary Philoso-
  pher’s Stone.                                              pher’s Stone.
  Pilgrims seek enlightenment at the Temple of Ethe-         Pilgrims seek enlightenment at the Temple of Ethe-
  real Wisdom.                                               real Wisdom.
  Pilots navigate through the treacherous Astral             Pilots navigate through the treacherous Astral
  Maelstrom.                                                 Maelstrom.
  Merchants trade rare gems in the bazaars of Khalin-        Merchants trade rare gems in the bazaars of Khalin-
  dor.                                                       dor.
  Scholars study ancient texts at the University of          Scholars study ancient texts at the University of Ar-
  Arcanum.                                                   canum.
  The Vexnor device revolutionized quantum com-              The Vexnor device revolutionized quantum com-
  puting.                                                    puting.
  The Whispering Woods are guarded by the Sylvani.           The Whispering Woods are guarded by the Sylvani.
  The Ethereal Conclave governs the realm of spirits.        The Ethereal Conclave governs the realm of spirits.
  The Quantum Forge harnesses the power of Null-             The Quantum Forge harnesses the power of Null-
  stone.                                                     stone.

      Table 5: Activations of Gemma 2 2B entity recognition latents on LLM generated data.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C                                         G EMMA 2 9B L ATENTS ACTIVATION F REQUENCIES ON K NOWN AND
                                          U NKNOWN P ROMPTS


Figure 8: Activation frequencies of Gemma 2 9B SAE latents on known and unknown Prompts, in
player entity type.


D                                              G EMMA 2 9B L AYERWISE E VOLUTION OF THE T OP 5 L ATENTS
                                                      Top 5 Known Separation Scores Latents                                Top 5 Unknown Separation Scores Latents
                                                                                                   Player                0.8                                             Player
                                                0.8
                                                                                                   Song                                                                  Song
                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                0.6                                                City                                                                  City
                                                                                                                 Score
                                      Score


                                                                                                   Movie                 0.4                                             Movie
                                                0.4
                                                                                                   MaxMin                                                                MaxMin
                                                0.2                                                                      0.2

                                                 0                                                                        0
                                                         5   10   15   20      25   30   35   40                               5   10   15   20      25   30   35   40

                                                                       Layer                                                                 Layer

    Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js


Figure 9: Gemma 2 9B layerwise evolution of the Top 5 latents, as measured by their known (left)
and unknown (right) latent separation scores (sknown and sunknown ). Error bars show maximum and
minimum scores. MaxMin (red line) refers to the minimum separation score across entities of the
best latent. This represents how entity-agnostic is the most general latent per layer. In both cases,
middle layers provide the best-performing latents.


                                                                                                            22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E    N ORM R ESIDUAL S TREAMS

                 Mean Residual Stream Norm Gemma 2 2B                                             Mean Residual Stream Norm Gemma 2 9B


                Mean Residual Stream Norm Gemma 2 2B IT                                       Mean Residual Stream Norm Gemma 2 9B IT


                                                          Mean Residual Stream Norm Gemma 2B IT


Figure 10: Norm of the residual streams of the last token of the entity across layers of the different
Gemma models.


F    R EFUSAL R ATES G EMMA 2 9B

                                    100
                                     90                                                     Original generation
                                     80                                                     Steering unknown latent
                                     70                                                     Random steering
                                                                                            Unknown latent setting
                     Refusal Rate


                                     60                                                     Orthogonalized model
                                     50                                                     Unknown latent
                                     40                                                     Steering known latent
                                     30                                                     Random steering
                                     20
                                                                                            Known latent setting
                                     10
                                      0
                                          Player   City        Movie       Song

Figure 11: Left: Number of times Gemma 2 9B refuses to answer in 100 queries about unknown
entities. We examine the unmodified original model, the model steered with the known entity latent
and unknown entity latent, and the model with the unknown entity latent projected out of its weights
(referred to as Orthogonalized model). The mean and standard deviation of steering with 10 random
latents are shown for comparison. Right: This example illustrates the effect of steering with the
unknown entity recognition latent. The steering induces the model to refuse to answer about a well-
known basketball player.


                                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    E XAMPLE OF G ENERATIONS S TEERING WITH D IFFERENT C OEFFICIENTS

                   Question: Where was born the player Leo Barnhorst?
           α                                   Generation
           0     Leo Barnhorst was born in **Berlin, Germany**.
          100    Leo Barnhorst was born in **Germany**.
          200    I do not have access to real-time information, including personal details
                 like birthplaces.
          300    I do not have access to real-time information, including personal details
                 like birthplaces.
          400    I couldn’t find any information about a player named Leo Barnhorst.
          500    I believe you’re asking about**Leo Barnhorst**, a professional soccer
                 player.
          600    I’m unable to provide specific details about the birthplace of a player
                 named Leo Barnhorst.
          700    ?\n\nPlease provide me with the correct spelling of the player’s name.
          800    r\n\nI believe you’re asking about Leo Barnhart, a professional soccer
                 player.
          900    "r\n\nI believe you’re asking about **Leo Barnhart**, a professional
                 soccer player.
         1000    r\n\nI believe you’re asking about **Leo Barnhart**, a professional
                 soccer player.
         1100    Associate the player Leo Barnhart with the sport of baseball.
         1200    criminator: I’m sorry, but I don’t have access to real-time information,
                 including personal details like birthplaces.

Table 6: Gemma 2 2B IT responses to ‘Where was born the player Leo Barnhorst?’ at different
steering coefficient values, α in Equation (4). Leo Barnhorst is unknown for Gemma 2 2B.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    ACTIVATION PATCHING

                                        Lakers                                 Warriors      Lakers


              LeBron James     joined    the               Wilson Brown       joined   the
                Known entity                                 Unknown entity


                    Figure 12: Activation Patching done over the residual stream.

Activation patching (Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022a; Geiger et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023) is an
intervention procedure performed during a forward pass. We consider a ‘clean’ input, which in our
case is the prompt with a known entity (Figure 12 left). We compute an intermediate hidden state,
e.g. the residual steam value at token James, as in Figure 12. Then, we patch this activation at the
same site of the forward pass with the corrupted input. In this case, the corrupted input is a prompt
with an unknown entity. We can express this intervention using the do-operator (Pearl, 2009) as
f (corr|do(xunknown ← xknown )). After the intervention is done, the forward pass continues and the
model output is compared with the prediction with the corrupted input. In the experiments in Sec-
tion 6 we measure the logit difference between the clean (Lakers) and the corrupted predictions
(Warriors):
                          logitLakers−Warriors (corr|do(xunknown ← xknown ))
                                                                                                    (13)
                                      logitLakers−Warriors (clean)


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I   ACTIVATION PATCHING ON G EMMA 2 2B


Figure 13: Gemma 2 2B activation patching results on movies (top), players (middle) and cities
(bottom).


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J   ACTIVATION PATCHING ON G EMMA 2 9B


Figure 14: Gemma 2 9B activation patching results on. from top to bottom, song, movies, players
and cities.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    ATTENTION TO L AST E NTITY T OKEN A FTER R ANDOM L ATENT
     S TEERING


Figure 15: Comparison of attention scores to the last token of the entity after steering with a random
SAE latent from Layer 15.


L    ATTRIBUTE E XTRACTION HEADS E XAMPLES

                 Head      Entity                        Extracted Attributes
                           Kawhi Leonard             Clippers, Niagara, Raptors,
                 L18H5     Detmold                Westfalen, Lancaster, Volkswagen
                           Boombastic           Jamaican, Reggae, Jamaica, Caribbean
                           Kawhi Leonard        NBA, basketball, Clippers, Basketball
                 L20H3     Detmold             Germans, German, Germany, Westfalen
                           Boombastic          reggae, Reggae, Jamaican, music, song

Table 7: Examples from the top tokens promoted by the attribute extraction heads L18H5 and L20H3
in Gemma 2 2B.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 M                                 C HANGE OF ATTENTION S CORES TO E NTITIES A FTER S TEERING

Gemma 2 2B (Figures 16 and 17), Gemma 2 9B (Figures 18 and 19) and Llama 3.1 8B (Figures 20
and 21) average attention scores to entity tokens after steering with the top known entity latents and
top unknown entity latents. Error bars indicate standard deviation. For the known entity latent steer-
ing we use prompts with unknown entities, for the unknown entity latent steering we use prompts
with known entities. The strength of the steering coefficient is α = 100 for Gemma models and
α = 20 for Llama 3.1 8B. We show heads starting from layer the latent is found, and the steering is
done.

                             0.3

                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3
                                   0


                                         5


                                                2


                                                       7


                                                              4


                                                                     1


                                                                            6


                                                                                   3


                                                                                          0


                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                               7


                                                                                                                      4


                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                                           3


                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                         5


                                                                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                                                                       7


                                                                                                                                                                              4
                               3H


                                        3H


                                               4H


                                                      4H


                                                             5H


                                                                    6H


                                                                           6H


                                                                                  7H


                                                                                         8H


                                                                                                8H


                                                                                                       9H


                                                                                                               9H


                                                                                                                     0H


                                                                                                                            1H


                                                                                                                                   1H


                                                                                                                                          2H


                                                                                                                                                 3H


                                                                                                                                                        3H


                                                                                                                                                               4H


                                                                                                                                                                      4H


                                                                                                                                                                             5H
                              L1


                                       L1


                                              L1


                                                     L1


                                                            L1


                                                                   L1


                                                                          L1


                                                                                 L1


                                                                                        L1


                                                                                               L1


                                                                                                      L1


                                                                                                             L1


                                                                                                                    L2


                                                                                                                           L2


                                                                                                                                  L2


                                                                                                                                         L2


                                                                                                                                                L2


                                                                                                                                                       L2


                                                                                                                                                              L2


                                                                                                                                                                     L2


                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                        Head


                             0.3

                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3
                                   0


                                         5


                                                2


                                                       7


                                                              4


                                                                     1


                                                                            6


                                                                                   3


                                                                                          0


                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                               7


                                                                                                                      4


                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                                           3


                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                         5


                                                                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                                                                       7


                                                                                                                                                                              4
                               3H


                                        3H


                                               4H


                                                      4H


                                                             5H


                                                                    6H


                                                                           6H


                                                                                  7H


                                                                                         8H


                                                                                                8H


                                                                                                       9H


                                                                                                               9H


                                                                                                                     0H


                                                                                                                            1H


                                                                                                                                   1H


                                                                                                                                          2H


                                                                                                                                                 3H


                                                                                                                                                        3H


                                                                                                                                                               4H


                                                                                                                                                                      4H


                                                                                                                                                                             5H
                              L1


                                       L1


                                              L1


                                                     L1


                                                            L1


                                                                   L1


                                                                          L1


                                                                                 L1


                                                                                        L1


                                                                                               L1


                                                                                                      L1


                                                                                                             L1


                                                                                                                    L2


                                                                                                                           L2


                                                                                                                                  L2


                                                                                                                                         L2


                                                                                                                                                L2


                                                                                                                                                       L2


                                                                                                                                                              L2


                                                                                                                                                                     L2


                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                        Head


                             0.3

                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3
                                   0


                                         5


                                                2


                                                       7


                                                              4


                                                                     1


                                                                            6


                                                                                   3


                                                                                          0


                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                               7


                                                                                                                      4


                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                                           3


                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                         5


                                                                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                                                                       7


                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                3H


                                         3H


                                                4H


                                                       4H


                                                              5H


                                                                     6H


                                                                            6H


                                                                                   7H


                                                                                          8H


                                                                                                 8H


                                                                                                        9H


                                                                                                               9H


                                                                                                                      0H


                                                                                                                             1H


                                                                                                                                    1H


                                                                                                                                           2H


                                                                                                                                                  3H


                                                                                                                                                         3H


                                                                                                                                                                4H


                                                                                                                                                                       4H


                                                                                                                                                                              5H
                              L1


                                       L1


                                              L1


                                                     L1


                                                            L1


                                                                   L1


                                                                          L1


                                                                                 L1


                                                                                        L1


                                                                                               L1


                                                                                                      L1


                                                                                                             L1


                                                                                                                    L2


                                                                                                                           L2


                                                                                                                                  L2


                                                                                                                                         L2


                                                                                                                                                L2


                                                                                                                                                       L2


                                                                                                                                                              L2


                                                                                                                                                                     L2


                                                                                                                                                                            L2


                                                                                                        Head


Figure 16: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Gemma 2 2B. Steering is done
with the top 3 known entity latents (from top to bottom).

We have assessed the statistical significance of attention score changes by comparing steering with
entity recognition latents versus with random SAE latents using the same layer and steering coeffi-
cient. We conduct t-tests where the null hypothesis states that both steerings would yield identical
mean attention scores differences across downstream attention heads. The alternative hypothesis is
that known entity latents would increase mean attention scores, while unknown entity latents would
decrease them. We tested against 10 different random SAE latents using 100 distinct prompts.
Results indicate that for Gemma 2 2B, Gemma 2 9B and Llama 3.1 8B, steering with the top known
entity latent shows statistically significant larger average attention score when compared to random
SAE latents on 10/10, 10/10 and 7/10 cases respectively. When steering with the top unknown entity


                                                                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             0.3

                             0.2
Attention Score Difference
                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3
                                   0


                                             5


                                                           2


                                                                     7


                                                                                   4


                                                                                             1


                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                            5


                                                                                                                                                      2


                                                                                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                                                                              4


                                                                                                                                                                                            1


                                                                                                                                                                                                         6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                               5H


                                            5H


                                                       6H


                                                                    6H


                                                                               7H


                                                                                            8H


                                                                                                        8H


                                                                                                                  9H


                                                                                                                             0H


                                                                                                                                         0H


                                                                                                                                                     1H


                                                                                                                                                                1H


                                                                                                                                                                             2H


                                                                                                                                                                                           3H


                                                                                                                                                                                                      3H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5H


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5H
                              L1


                                            L1


                                                      L1


                                                                 L1


                                                                              L1


                                                                                         L1


                                                                                                      L1


                                                                                                                  L1


                                                                                                                             L2


                                                                                                                                        L2


                                                                                                                                                     L2


                                                                                                                                                                L2


                                                                                                                                                                             L2


                                                                                                                                                                                       L2


                                                                                                                                                                                                     L2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L2
                                                                                                                                       Head


                             0.3

                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3
                               H0

                                       H5


                                                 2

                                                       7

                                                               4

                                                                      1

                                                                              6

                                                                                       3

                                                                                               0

                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                    7

                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                          6

                                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                5

                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                  7

                                                                                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                                         6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                 0H

                                                      0H

                                                               1H

                                                                     2H

                                                                              2H

                                                                                    3H

                                                                                            4H

                                                                                                     4H

                                                                                                           5H

                                                                                                                  5H

                                                                                                                        6H

                                                                                                                                  7H

                                                                                                                                        7H

                                                                                                                                                8H

                                                                                                                                                      9H

                                                                                                                                                               9H

                                                                                                                                                                        0H

                                                                                                                                                                              0H

                                                                                                                                                                                       1H

                                                                                                                                                                                                2H

                                                                                                                                                                                                      2H

                                                                                                                                                                                                               3H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5H
                              L9

                                       L9

                                             L1

                                                      L1

                                                            L1

                                                                    L1

                                                                           L1

                                                                                   L1

                                                                                           L1

                                                                                                   L1

                                                                                                          L1

                                                                                                                  L1

                                                                                                                        L1

                                                                                                                                L1

                                                                                                                                       L1

                                                                                                                                              L1

                                                                                                                                                      L1

                                                                                                                                                               L1

                                                                                                                                                                     L2

                                                                                                                                                                             L2

                                                                                                                                                                                      L2

                                                                                                                                                                                            L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                     L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                                                     Head


                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2
                                   0

                                        5

                                                  2

                                                           7

                                                                 4

                                                                          1

                                                                                   6

                                                                                           3

                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                                                                                                            7

                                                                                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                               0H

                                       0H

                                                 1H

                                                       1H

                                                                2H

                                                                         3H

                                                                                3H

                                                                                        4H

                                                                                                 5H

                                                                                                          5H

                                                                                                                  6H

                                                                                                                        6H

                                                                                                                                7H

                                                                                                                                        8H

                                                                                                                                                8H

                                                                                                                                                          9H

                                                                                                                                                                0H

                                                                                                                                                                        0H

                                                                                                                                                                                  1H

                                                                                                                                                                                           1H

                                                                                                                                                                                                 2H

                                                                                                                                                                                                           3H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5H
                             L1

                                       L1

                                             L1

                                                      L1

                                                               L1

                                                                      L1

                                                                              L1

                                                                                       L1

                                                                                                L1

                                                                                                        L1

                                                                                                               L1

                                                                                                                       L1

                                                                                                                                L1

                                                                                                                                       L1

                                                                                                                                                L1

                                                                                                                                                      L1

                                                                                                                                                               L2

                                                                                                                                                                        L2

                                                                                                                                                                              L2

                                                                                                                                                                                       L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                 L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L2
                                                                                                                                       Head


Figure 17: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Gemma 2 2B. Steering is done
with the top 3 unknown entity latents (from top to bottom).


latent it shows statistically significant lower average attention score when compared to random SAE
latents on 9/10, 1/10 and 10/10 cases respectively. As shown in Figure 19 (top), Gemma 2 9B top
unknown entity latent doesn’t show strong reductions. However the second unknown entity latent
shows significant differences in 9/10 tests.


                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                Attention Score Difference                                         Attention Score Difference                                Attention Score Difference                                                                                                                                         Attention Score Difference                                       Attention Score Difference                                   Attention Score Difference                                                                                                                                     Attention Score Difference                             Attention Score Difference                                        Attention Score Difference


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L2


                                                                                                                       0.075
                                                                                                                               0.050
                                                                                                                                       0.025
                                                                                                                                               0.000
                                                                                                                                                       0.025
                                                                                                                                                               0.050
                                                                                                                                                                       0.075
                                                                                                              L1                                                                   L1                                                      L1                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                                     2H                                                   L2                                                                                                                                                                  L3                                                       L3                                                     L2
                                                                                                                                                                                     2H                                                      3H                                                                                                                                                                  4H                                                                    0                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                               0H                                                       3H                                                       2H
                                                                                                                1H                                                                 L1 0                                                    L1 0                                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                                                                              0                                                        0                                                          0
                                                                                                              L1 0
                                                                                                                1                                                                    2                                                       3H
                                                                                                             L1 H5                                                                L1 H5                                                   L1 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L2                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L2
                                                                                                                                                                                    2H                                                      3H                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                                     2H                                                        1H
                                                                                                               1H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L1 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4H                                                                    5                                                         5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                             L1 10
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   2H                                                    L1 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3H                                                                                                                                                                       5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L3
                                                                                                             L1 15                                                                L1 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L2                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                     0H
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   2H                                                    L1 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3H                                                                                                                                                             L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2H                                                        1H                                                                                                                                                                  5                                                                                                          L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L1 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4H                                                                  10                                                        10                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                          10
                                                                                                             L1 20                                                                                                                        L1 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3H
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   2H                                                      3H                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                             L1 25                                                                L1 25                                                   L1 25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2H                                                        1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   2H                                                      3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15                                                        15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2H
                                                                                                              L1 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                2H                                                                 L1 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0H
                                                                                                                                                                                     3H                                                    L1 30                                                                                                                                                                  15                                                                                                                    L2                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                              L1 3                                                                 L1 3                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2
                                                                                                                2                                                                    3                                                     L1 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3H                                                        2H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                             L1 H8                                                                L1 H8                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                               2H                                                                   3H                                                    L1 8                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3H
                                                                                                             L1 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5H                                                                                                                     L2
                                                                                                               2H                                                                 L1 13                                                     4H                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                        L2                                                             2H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                           10                                                 L2
                                                                                                             L1 18                                                                  3H                                                    L1 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9                                                         9                                                                                                                                                            0H                                                                                                                3H
                                                                                                               2H                                                                 L1 18
                                                                                                                                                                                    3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                             L1 23                                                                                                                        L1 18                                                                                                                                                                  5H                                                                                                                    L2
                                                                                                               2H                                                                 L1 23                                                     4H                                                                                                                                                                       9                                                       L2                                                             2H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2
                                                                                                                                                                                    3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3H                                                          14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3H
                                                                                                              L1 28                                                                                                                       L1 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                3H                                                                 L1 28                                                    4H
                                                                                                              L1 1                                                                   4H                                                    L1 28                                                                                                                                                           L2                                                                                                                           L2                                                                                                                                                                  L3                                                       L3
                                                                                                                3                                                                  L1 1                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                 5H                                                            L2                                                             3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3H                                                   L2
                                                                                                             L1 H6                                                                   4                                                     L1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14                                                               4H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15                                                     4H
                                                                                                               3H                                                                 L1 H6
                                                                                                                                                                                    4H                                                       5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                             L1 11                                                                                                                        L1 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3H
                                                                                                               3H                                                                 L1 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L2                                                                L2
                                                                                                             L1 16                                                                  4H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                   6H                                                                4H                                                            8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2
                                                                                                               3H                                                                                                                         L1 11                                                                                                                                                                      3                                                                 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L3                                                                                                                  4H
                                                                                                             L1 21                                                                L1 16
                                                                                                                                                                                    4H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L2                                                                                                                                                                     1H                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                               3H                                                                                                                         L1 16                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                             3H                                                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                             L1 26                                                                L1 21                                                     5H                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                                    4H                                                          13                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                    L2
                                                                                                               3H                                                                   4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4H                                                      4H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L1 26                                                   L1 21                                                                                                                                                                      8                                                              13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4                                                       13
                                                                                                              L1 31                                                                 4H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4H
                                                                                                                4H                                                                                                                        L1 26                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                                 2
                                                                                                              L1 4                                                                 L1 31                                                    5H                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L3                                                                                                              L2
                                                                                                                4                                                                    5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6H                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1H                                                                                                                5H
                                                                                                             L1 H9                                                                 L1 4                                                    L1 31                                                                                                                                                                  13                                                                                                                    L2                                                                                                                                                                      14                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                               4H                                                                    5                                                       6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4H
                                                                                                             L1 14                                                                L1 H9                                                    L1 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                                 7
                                                                                                               4H                                                                   5H                                                       6H                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                                     5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L3                                                     L2
                                                                                                             L1 19                                                                L1 14                                                   L1 9                                                                                                                                                                   7H                                                                    7                                               L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4H                                                       5H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                               4H                                                                   5H                                                      6H                                                                                                                                                                       2                                                                                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                           9
                                                                                                             L1 24                                                                L1 19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L2                                                               12                                                                                                                                                              2H
                                                                                                               4H                                                                   5H                                                    L1 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3                                                                                                          L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5H
                                                                                                              L1 29                                                               L1 24                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L2                                                                      12                                                  L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L1 19                                                                                                                                                                  7H                                                                                                                          5H
                                                                                                                5H                                                                  5H                                                      6H                                                                                                                                                                       7                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                              L1 2                                                                 L1 29                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L2
                                                                                                                5                                                                    6H                                                   L1 24                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L2
                                                                                                             L1 H7
                                                                                                               5H                                                                  L1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                                          1                                                L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                       L3                                                         6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                     6                                                     L1 29                                                                                                                                                                7H                                                                                                                               6                                                                                                                                                            2H                                                       4H
                                                                                                             L1 12                                                                L1 H7                                                      7H                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8                                                        14
                                                                                                               5H                                                                   6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L1 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6H                                                  L2
                                                                                                             L1 17
                                                                                                               5H                                                                 L1 12                                                      7H                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                                         6                                                    5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                             L1 22                                                                  6H                                                    L1 7                                                                                                                                                                   8H                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                               5H                                                                 L1 17                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                       L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                                                                                                    6H                                                    L1 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2H                                                                                                           L2
                                                                                                              L1 27                                                                                                                         7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11                                                  L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6H
                                                                                                                6H                                                                L1 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6H                                                                                                                                                                 13                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                              L1 0                                                                  6H                                                    L1 17                                                                                                                                                             L2                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L3
                                                                                                                6                                                                                                                           7H                                                                                                                                                                   8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5H
                                                                                                             L1 H5
                                                                                                                                                                                   L1 27
                                                                                                                                                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6                                                        L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7H                                                   L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3                                                  L2
                                                                                                               6H                                                                                                                         L1 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                     6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7H
                                                                                                                                                                                   L1 0                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                             L1 10
                                                                                                               6H                                                                    7                                                     L1 27                                                                                                                                                           L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3
                                                                                                                                                                                  L1 H5                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                 8H                                                            L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3H
                                                                                                             L1 15                                                                  7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11                                                               7H                                                  L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                                  2                                                                                                           L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7H
                                                                                                               6H                                                                 L1 10                                                    L1 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5                                                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                             L1 20                                                                  7H
                                                                                                               6H                                                                 L1 15                                                   L1 5                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                               L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L3
                                                                                                             L1 25                                                                  7H                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                   9H                                                               7H                                                   L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5H                                                  L2
                                                                                                               6H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L1 20                                                   L1 10                                                                                                                                                                      0                                                              10                                                      6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                           8                                                     7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                              L1 30                                                                 7H                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3H
                                                                                                                7H                                                                L1 25                                                   L1 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                              L1 3                                                                  7H                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                                    7H                                                    L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L2
                                                                                                                7                                                                                                                         L1 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                              15                                                       7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                             L1 H8                                                                 L1 30                                                    8H
                                                                                                               7H                                                                    8H
                                                                                                             L1 13                                                                 L1 3                                                   L1 25                                                                                                                                                            L2                                                                 L2                                                        L2                                                                                                                                                                  L3                                                                                                              L2
                                                                                                               7H                                                                    8                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                  9H                                                                 8H                                                        7H                                                                                                                                                               3H                                                     L3                                                         8H
                                                                                                             L1 18                                                                L1 H8                                                    L1 30                                                                                                                                                                  10                                                                   4                                                         9                                                                                                                                                              12                                                     5H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13                                                         4
                                                                                                               7H                                                                   8H                                                       9H
                                                                                                             L1 23                                                                L1 13                                                    L1 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                       L2
                                                                                                               7H                                                                   8H                                                       9H                                                                                                                                                            L2                                                                      8H                                                       7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9H                                                                     9                                                      14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8H
                                                                                                              L1 28
                                                                                                                8H                                                                L1 18
                                                                                                                                                                                    8H                                                    L1 8                                                                                                                                                                    15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3
                                                                                                              L1 1                                                                L1 23                                                   L1 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L2                                                         L2                                                                                                                                                                    4H
                                                                                                                8                                                                   8H                                                      9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8H                                                         8H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3                                                                                                                                                              1                                                                                                          L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8H
                                                                                                             L1 H6                                                                 L1 28                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L3                                                                      14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                          14
                                                                                                               8H                                                                                                                         L1 18                                                                                                                                                                  0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6H
                                                                                                             L1 11                                                                   9H                                                     9H                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                                                                                  L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                               8H                                                                  L1 1                                                   L1 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                             8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2
                                                                                                             L1 16                                                                   9                                                      9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9H                                                            8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9H
                                                                                                               8H                                                                 L1 H6                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                                         3                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L3                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                    9H                                                     L2 28                                                                                                                                                                 0H                                                                                                                    L2                                                                                                                                                                     4H
                                                                                                             L1 21
                                                                                                               8H                                                                 L1 11                                                      0H                                                                                                                                                                      9                                                                                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                    9H                                                     L2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2                                                              13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L2
                                                                                                             L1 26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9H
                                                                                                               8H                                                                 L1 16                                                      0H                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                          8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                              L1 31                                                                 9H                                                    L2 6                                                                                                                                                                  0H                                                                                                                      L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0H                                                                                                                                                                    14                                                                                                                         9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6H
                                                                                                                9H                                                                L1 21
                                                                                                                                                                                    9H                                                    L2 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9H                                                             2                                                                                                                                                          L3                                                           7                                                 L2
                                                                                                              L1 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4H                                                                                                               9H
                                                                                                                9                                                                 L1 26                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                             L1 H9                                                                  9H                                                    L2 16                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                          L2
                                                                                                               9H                                                                                                                           0H                                                                                                                                                                   1H                                                                                                                          9H
                                                                                                             L1 14                                                                 L2 31
                                                                                                                                                                                     0H                                                   L2 21                                                                                                                                                                      3                                                        L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0H                                                            7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                               9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0H
                                                                                                                                                                                   L2 4                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                             L1 19
                                                                                                               9H                                                                    0                                                    L2 26                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                              9H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                       L3
                                                                                                                                                                                  L2 H9                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                   1H                                                           L3                                                              12                                                                                                                                                              5H                                                       6H
                                                                                                             L1 24
                                                                                                               9H                                                                   0H                                                     L2 31                                                                                                                                                                     8                                                             0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                        12                                                 L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L2 14                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7                                                L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                              L2 29                                                                 0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0H
                                                                                                                0H                                                                L2 19                                                    L2 4                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                L3                                                                  1
                                                                                                              L2 2                                                                  0H                                                       1H                                                                                                                                                                 1H                                                                0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L3
                                                                                                                0                                                                                                                         L2 9                                                                                                                                                                    13                                                                12                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0H
                                                                                                             L2 H7                                                                L2 24                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L3                                                                                                                                                                    5H                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                               0H                                                                   0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0H
                                                                                                             L2 12                                                                                                                        L2 14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                               0H                                                                  L2 29                                                    1H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                     L3
                                                                                                                                                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2H                                                                1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2 19                                                                                                                                                                      2                                                                 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7H                                                       1H
                                                                                                             L2 17                                                                 L2 2                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                                                          1
                                                                                                               0H                                                                    1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                             L2 22                                                                L2 H7                                                   L2 24                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                               0H                                                                   1H                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5H                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2H                                                                    6                                                L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1H
                                                                                                              L2 27
                                                                                                                1H                                                                L2 12
                                                                                                                                                                                    1H                                                     L2 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2H                                                                                                                                                                      7                                                                                                                       1H                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                              L2 0                                                                L2 17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L3                                                                  0
                                                                                                                1                                                                   1H                                                     L2 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L3
                                                                                                             L2 H5                                                                                                                           2H                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L3                                                        1H
                                                                                                               1H                                                                 L2 22                                                   L2 7                                                                                                                                                                  2H                                                                  11                                                  L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7H                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                    1H                                                      2H                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                                                         1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                             L2 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5                                                                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5H
                                                                                                               1H                                                                  L2 27                                                  L2 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                                                          L3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Head
                                                                                                                                                                                     2H                                                     2H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2H


31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Head


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Head


                                                                                                          Head
                                                                                                             L2 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2H


                                                                                                                                                                               Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Head
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Head


                                                                                                               1H                                                                  L2 0                                                   L2 17                                                                                                                                                                  3H                                                                                                                         1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                             L2 20                                                                   2                                                      2H                                                                                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                               1H                                                                 L2 H5                                                   L2 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                             L2 25                                                                  2H                                                      2H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2H                                                  L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2H
                                                                                                               1H                                                                 L2 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                                         5                                                    1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                       L3                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                    2H                                                     L2 27                                                                                                                                                                 3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6H                                                       7H
                                                                                                              L2 30
                                                                                                                2H                                                                L2 15                                                      3H                                                                                                                                                                      6                                                       L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                    2H                                                     L2 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2H                                                    L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L3
                                                                                                              L2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2H
                                                                                                                2                                                                 L2 20                                                      3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L3                                                                       10                                                       2H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                             L2 H8                                                                  2H                                                    L2 5                                                                                                                                                                  3H                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                               2H                                                                 L2 25                                                     3H                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                             L2 13                                                                  2H                                                    L2 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                         L3                                                                                                                                                                  L3                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                               2H                                                                                                                           3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2H                                                         2H                                                                                                                                                               6H                                                                                                               2H
                                                                                                                                                                                   L2 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15                                                           9                                                                                                                                                              9                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                             L2 18                                                                   3H                                                   L2 15                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L3
                                                                                                               2H                                                                                                                           3H                                                                                                                                                                   4H


     with the top 3 known entity latents (from top to bottom).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      with the top 3 known entity latents (from top to bottom).



                                                                                                             L2 23                                                                 L2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                        L3                                                       L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8H
                                                                                                               2H                                                                    3                                                    L2 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3H                                                       2H                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                  L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3H
                                                                                                              L2 28                                                               L2 H8                                                     3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4                                                      14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                3H                                                                  3H                                                    L2 25                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3
                                                                                                              L2 1                                                                L2 13                                                     3H                                                                                                                                                                   4H                                                           L3                                                        L3                                                                                                                                                                    6H
                                                                                                                3                                                                   3H                                                     L2 30                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                             3H                                                        3H                                                                                                                                                                 14                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3H
                                                                                                             L2 H6                                                                L2 18                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9                                                         3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     with the top 3 unknown entity latents (from top to bottom).
                                                                                                               3H                                                                   3H                                                     L2 3
                                                                                                             L2 11                                                                L2 23                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                L3                                                         L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L3
                                                                                                               3H                                                                   3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4H                                                                3H                                                         3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8H                                                  L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2 8                                                                                                                                                                    10                                                                14                                                           8                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5                                                     3H
                                                                                                             L2 16                                                                 L2 28                                                    4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                               3H                                                                    4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7H
                                                                                                             L2 21                                                                 L2 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                          L3                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                               3H                                                                    4                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4H                                                            L3                                                            3H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L2 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4H                                                         13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4H
                                                                                                             L2 26
                                                                                                               3H                                                                 L2 H6                                                     4H                                                                                                                                                                    15                                                                   3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                    4H
                                                                                                              L2 31                                                               L2 11                                                   L2 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L3
                                                                                                                4H                                                                  4H                                                      4H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                L3                                                             4H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                       L3                                                     L3
                                                                                                              L2 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5H                                                                4H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8                                                         2                                                                                                                                                            7H                                                       8H                                                       4H
                                                                                                                4                                                                 L2 16
                                                                                                                                                                                    4H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L2 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5H                                                                                                                                                                      4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8                                                        10                                                         8
                                                                                                             L2 H9                                                                L2 21                                                    L2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L3
                                                                                                               4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                              4H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                             L2 14                                                                  4H                                                       5H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                    4H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13                                                           7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4H
                                                                                                               4H                                                                 L2 26                                                   L2 6                                                                                                                                                                   5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                                                             L2 19                                                                  4H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                       9                                                                                                                 L3                                                                                                                                                                   L3
                                                                                                               4H                                                                  L2 31                                                  L2 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                            4H                                                                                                                                                                7H
                                                                                                             L2 24                                                                   5H                                                     5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5H                                                         12                                                                                                                                                                13                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L3                                                                          2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                         5H
                                                                                                               4H                                                                  L2 4                                                   L2 16                                                                                                                                                                 5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8H                                                           2
                                                                                                              L2 29                                                                  5                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                    14                                                                                                                    L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                5H                                                                L2 H9                                                   L2 21                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5H
                                                                                                              L2 2                                                                  5H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5H                                                            1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5H
                                                                                                                5                                                                 L2 14                                                   L2 26                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                         7                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L3                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                             L2 H7                                                                  5H                                                      5H                                                                                                                                                                   6H                                                                                                                     L3                                                                                                                                                                    8H
                                                                                                               5H                                                                 L2 19                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3                                                                                                                       5H                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                             L2 12                                                                  5H                                                     L2 31                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5H                                                             6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5H
                                                                                                               5H                                                                 L2 24                                                      6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                             L2 17                                                                  5H                                                     L2 4                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                         L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                               5H                                                                                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                                  6H                                                                                                                         5H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9H
                                                                                                             L2 22                                                                 L2 29                                                  L2 9                                                                                                                                                                       8                                                        L3                                                              11                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                           4                                                  L3
                                                                                                               5H                                                                    6H                                                     6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8H                                                                                                                6H
                                                                                                              L2 27                                                                L2 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                                                L3                                                                                                                                                                      7                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                6H                                                                   6                                                    L2 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6H                                                                                                                           6H
                                                                                                              L2 0                                                                L2 H7
                                                                                                                                                                                    6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13                                                          L3                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                6                                                                                                                         L2 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6H
                                                                                                             L2 H5                                                                L2 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6                                                L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                               6H                                                                   6H                                                    L2 24                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                               6H                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                             L2 10                                                                L2 17                                                     6H                                                                                                                                                                   7H                                                          L3                                                                  5                                                                                                                                                            8H                                                     L3                                                    L3
                                                                                                               6H                                                                   6H                                                     L2 29                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                            6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12                                                     9H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9                                                     6H
                                                                                                             L2 15                                                                L2 22                                                      7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11                                                 L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                               6H                                                                   6H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6H
                                                                                                             L2 20                                                                                                                         L2 2                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                               6H                                                                  L2 27                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                                  7H                                                           L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                                                                                                     7H                                                   L2 7                                                                                                                                                                       7                                                             7H                                                  L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7H
                                                                                                             L2 25                                                                 L2 0                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                    6H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                               6H                                                                    7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9H
                                                                                                              L2 30                                                                                                                       L2 12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                7H                                                                L2 H5                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                 L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L3                                                     L3
                                                                                                                                                                                    7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7H                                                                 7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9H                                                       7H
                                                                                                              L2 3                                                                                                                        L2 17                                                                                                                                                                   12                                                                   5                                                L3
                                                                                                                7                                                                 L2 10
                                                                                                                                                                                    7H                                                      7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14                                                         5
                                                                                                             L2 H8                                                                                                                        L2 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                               7H                                                                 L2 15                                                     7H                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                               L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                             L2 13                                                                  7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8H                                                               7H                                                    L3                                                                                                                                                                  L3                                                                                                                 7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L2 27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9H
                                                                                                               7H                                                                 L2 20                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                      1                                                              10                                                       7H                                                                                                                                                                 6                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                             L2 18                                                                  7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                               7H                                                                 L2 25                                                    L2 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                             L2 23                                                                  7H                                                       8H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                    7H                                                   L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7H
                                                                                                               7H                                                                  L2 30                                                  L2 5                                                                                                                                                                   8H                                                                 15                                                      7H                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L4                                                          15
                                                                                                              L2 28                                                                  8H                                                     8H                                                                                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                        14                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                8H                                                                 L2 3                                                   L2 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9H
                                                                                                              L2 1                                                                   8                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                                      8H                                                   L3                                                                                                                                                                      11                                                                                                          L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8H
                                                                                                                8                                                                 L2 H8                                                   L2 15                                                                                                                                                                 8H                                                                     4                                                     8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                             L2 H6                                                                  8H                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                    11                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                               8H                                                                 L2 13                                                   L2 20
                                                                                                             L2 11                                                                  8H                                                      8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L3                                                        L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L3
                                                                                                               8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8H                                                        8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8H
                                                                                                             L2 16                                                                L2 18
                                                                                                                                                                                    8H                                                    L2 25                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9H                                                                    9                                                         8                                                                                                                                                          L4                                                       L4                                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0H
                                                                                                               8H
                                                                                                                                                                                  L2 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0                                                      0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                             L2 21                                                                  8H                                                     L2 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L3                                                        L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L3
                                                                                                               8H                                                                                                                            9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8H                                                        8H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8H
                                                                                                             L2 26                                                                 L2 28                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L3                                                                      14                                                        13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                               8H                                                                    9H                                                    L2 3                                                                                                                                                                  9H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9H                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                              L2 31                                                                L2 1                                                   L2 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L3                                                        L3
                                                                                                                9H                                                                   9                                                      9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9H                                                        9H                                                                                                                                                             L4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9H
                                                                                                              L2 4                                                                L2 H6                                                   L2 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3                                                         2                                                                                                                                                              5                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                9                                                                   9H                                                      9H                                                                                                                                                             L3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L4
                                                                                                             L2 H9                                                                L2 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10                                                          L3                                                        L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0H                                                   L3
                                                                                                               9H                                                                   9H                                                    L2 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9H                                                        9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13                                                     9H
                                                                                                             L2 14                                                                L2 16                                                     9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8                                                         7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                               9H                                                                   9H                                                    L2 23                                                                                                                                                            L3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L4
                                                                                                             L2 19                                                                L2 21                                                     9H                                                                                                                                                                  9H                                                                                                                     L3                                                                                                                                                                     0H
                                                                                                               9H                                                                   9H                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15                                                         L3                                                             9H                                                                                                                                                                  10                                                                                                         L3
                                                                                                             L2 24                                                                                                                         L3 28                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9H                                                          12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9H
                                                                                                               9H                                                                 L2 26                                                      0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                                                    9H                                                     L3 1
                                                                                                              L3 29                                                                L3 31                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                             L4                                                                                                                          L4                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L4
                                                                                                                0H                                                                   0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0H                                                           L4                                                             0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L4
                                                                                                              L3 2                                                                                                                        L3 6                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                             0H                                                            1                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                      0H
                                                                                                                0                                                                  L3 4                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L4                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                             L3 H7                                                                   0                                                    L3 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                               0H                                                                 L3 H9                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                              L4                                                                L4                                                             0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L4
                                                                                                             L3 12                                                                  0H                                                    L3 16                                                                                                                                                                  0H                                                                0H                                                            6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0H
                                                                                                               0H                                                                 L3 14                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                       9                                                                 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                             L3 17                                                                  0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L4
                                                                                                               0H                                                                 L3 19                                                   L3 21                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0H
                                                                                                                                                                                    0H                                                      0H                                                                                                                                                             L4                                                                L4                                                               11                                                                                                                                                            L4                                                                                                             L4
                                                                                                             L3 22                                                                                                                        L3 26                                                                                                                                                                 0H                                                                0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1H                                                     L4                                                        0H
                                                                                                               0H                                                                 L3 24                                                     0H                                                                                                                                                                    14                                                                12                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4                                                      1H                                                        12
                                                                                                              L3 27                                                                 0H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L4                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                1H                                                                 L3 29                                                   L3 31                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1H
                                                                                                              L3 0                                                                   1H                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                             L4                                                                L4                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L4
                                                                                                                1                                                                  L3 2                                                    L3 4                                                                                                                                                                  1H                                                                1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                             L3 H5
                                                                                                               1H                                                                    1                                                       1H                                                                                                                                                                      3                                                                                                                  L4
                                                                                                                                                                                  L3 H7                                                   L3 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1H                                                                                                                                                             L4
                                                                                                             L3 10                                                                  1H                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L4                                                                 5                                                                                                                                                            1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9                                                                                                           L4
                                                                                                               1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L4                                                                     1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1H
                                                                                                             L3 15                                                                L3 12
                                                                                                                                                                                    1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L3 14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1H                                                                                                                                                                   1H                                                                    6                                               L4                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1H                                                           6
                                                                                                               1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8                                                                                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                             L3 20                                                                L3 17                                                   L3 19                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L4                                                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L4
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   1H                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1H
                                                                                                             L3 25                                                                L3 22                                                   L3 24                                                                                                                                                            L4                                                                       11                                                 L4                                                                                                                                                                   L4                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                               1H                                                                   1H                                                      1H                                                                                                                                                                  1H                                                                                                                          1H                                                                                                                                                                1H
                                                                                                                  30                                                                   27                                                      29                                                                                                                                                                 13                                                                                                                          15                                                                                                                                                                14


     Figure 20: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Llama 3.1 8B. Steering is done
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 19: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Gemma 2 9B. Steering is done
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 18: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Gemma 2 9B. Steering is done
                                                                                                                               Attention Score Difference                               Attention Score Difference                               Attention Score Difference


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2


                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                                            0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                              L1                                                       L1                                                       L1
                                                                                                                 0                                                        0                                                        5H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                              L1 H0                                                    L1 H0                                                    L1
                                                                                                                 0                                                        0                                                        5H
                                                                                                             L1 H5                                                    L1 H5
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                      L1 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5H
                                                                                                             L1 H10                                                   L1 H10                                                         1
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                      L1 0
                                                                                                             L1 H15                                                   L1 H15                                                      5H
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                            1
                                                                                                             L1 H20                                                   L1 H20                                                   L1 5
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                         5H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                             L1 H25                                                   L1 H25                                                   L1
                                                                                                               0H                                                       0H                                                        5H
                                                                                                              L1 30                                                    L1 30                                                         2
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                    L1 5
                                                                                                              L1 H3                                                    L1 H3                                                      5H
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                          3
                                                                                                             L1 H8                                                    L1 H8                                                     L1 0
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                          6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                             L1 H13                                                   L1 H13
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                       L1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6H
                                                                                                             L1 H18                                                   L1 H18
                                                                                                               1H                                                       1H                                                     L1 8
                                                                                                             L1 23                                                    L1 23                                                       6H
                                                                                                               1H                                                       1H                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L1 3
                                                                                                              L1 28                                                    L1 28                                                      6H
                                                                                                                 2                                                        2                                                          1
                                                                                                              L1 H1                                                    L1 H1                                                   L1 8
                                                                                                                 2                                                        2                                                       6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     23
                                                                                                             L1 H6                                                    L1 H6
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                      L1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6H
                                                                                                             L1 H11
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                      L1 H11
                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                            2
                                                                                                             L1 H16                                                   L1 H16                                                    L1 8
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                          7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                             L1 H21                                                   L1 H21                                                    L1
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                          7H
                                                                                                             L1 H26                                                   L1 H26                                                   L1 6
                                                                                                               2H                                                       2H                                                        7H
                                                                                                              L1 31                                                    L1 31                                                         1
                                                                                                                 3                                                        3                                                    L1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7H
                                                                                                              L1 H4                                                    L1 H4                                                         1
                                                                                                                 3                                                        3                                                    L1 6
                                                                                                             L1 H9                                                    L1 H9
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                         7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                             L1 H14                                                   L1 H14                                                   L1 1
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                         7H
                                                                                                             L1 H19                                                   L1 H19                                                         2
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                      L1 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7H
                                                                                                             L1 H24                                                   L1 H24                                                         3
                                                                                                               3H                                                       3H                                                      L1 1
                                                                                                              L1 29                                                    L1 29                                                       8H
                                                                                                                 4                                                        4                                                            4
                                                                                                              L1 H2                                                    L1 H2                                                    L1
                                                                                                                 4                                                        4                                                        8H
                                                                                                             L1 H7                                                    L1 H7
                                                                                                               4                                                        4                                                      L1 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8H
                                                                                                             L1 H12
                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                      L1 H12
                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L1 4
                                                                                                             L1 H17                                                   L1 H17                                                      8H
                                                                                                               4H                                                       4H                                                           1
                                                                                                             L1 22                                                    L1 22                                                    L1 9
                                                                                                               4H                                                       4H                                                        8H
                                                                                                              L1 27                                                    L1 27                                                         2
                                                                                                                 5                                                        5                                                    L1 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8H
                                                                                                              L1 H0                                                    L1 H0                                                         2
                                                                                                                 5                                                        5                                                     L1 9
                                                                                                             L1 H5                                                    L1 H5                                                        9H
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                              2
                                                                                                             L1 H10                                                   L1 H10                                                    L1
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                          9H
                                                                                                             L1 H15                                                   L1 H15                                                   L1 7
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                         9H
                                                                                                             L1 H20                                                   L1 H20                                                         1
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                      L1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9H
                                                                                                             L1 H25                                                   L1 H25                                                         1
                                                                                                               5H                                                       5H                                                     L1 7
                                                                                                              L1 30                                                    L1 30                                                      9H
                                                                                                                 6                                                        6                                                          22
                                                                                                              L1 H3                                                    L1 H3                                                   L1
                                                                                                                 6                                                        6                                                       9H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                             L1 H8                                                    L1 H8
                                                                                                               6                                                        6                                                       L2 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0H
                                                                                                             L1 H13                                                   L1 H13                                                           0
                                                                                                               6                                                        6                                                       L2
                                                                                                             L1 H18                                                   L1 H18                                                       0H
                                                                                                               6                                                        6
                                                                                                             L1 H23                                                   L1 H23                                                   L2 5
                                                                                                               6H                                                       6H                                                        0H
                                                                                                              L1 28                                                    L1 28                                                         1
                                                                                                                 7                                                        7                                                    L2 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0H
                                                                                                              L1 H1                                                    L1 H1                                                         1
                                                                                                                 7                                                        7                                                    L2 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0H
                                                                                                             L1 H6                                                    L1 H6                                                          2
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                      L2 0
                                                                                                             L1 H11                                                   L1 H11                                                      0H
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                            2
                                                                                                             L1 H16                                                   L1 H16                                                   L2 5
                                                                                                               7H                                                       7H                                                        0H
                                                                                                             L1 21                                                    L1 21                                                          3
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                       L2 0
                                                                                                             L1 H26                                                   L1 H26                                                       1H
                                                                                                               7H                                                       7H                                                             3
                                                                                                              L1 31                                                    L1 31                                                    L2
                                                                                                                 8                                                        8                                                        1H
                                                                                                              L1 H4                                                    L1 H4                                                   L2 8
                                                                                                                 8                                                        8                                                       1H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                             L1 H9                                                    L1 H9
                                                                                                               8                                                        8                                                      L2 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1H
                                                                                                             L1 H14
                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                      L1 H14
                                                                                                                                                                        8                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 8
                                                                                                             L1 H19                                                   L1 H19                                                      1H
                                                                                                               8                                                        8                                                            2
                                                                                                             L1 H24                                                   L1 H24                                                   L2 3
                                                                                                               8H                                                       8H                                                        1H
                                                                                                              L1 29                                                    L1 29                                                         2
                                                                                                                 9                                                        9                                                     L2 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2H
                                                                                                              L1 H2
                                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                                                                                       L1 H2
                                                                                                                                                                          9                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L2
                                                                                                             L1 H7                                                    L1 H7                                                        2H
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                      L2 6
                                                                                                             L1 H12                                                   L1 H12                                                      2H
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                            1
                                                                                                             L1 H17                                                   L1 H17                                                   L2 1
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                         2H
                                                                                                             L1 H22                                                   L1 H22                                                         1
                                                                                                               9H                                                       9H                                                     L2 6
                                                                                                              L2 27                                                    L2 27                                                      2H
                                                                                                                 0                                                        0                                                          21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2
                                                                                                              L2 H0                                                    L2 H0                                                      2H
                                                                                                                 0                                                        0                                                          2
                                                                                                             L2 H5                                                    L2 H5                                                    L2 6
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                         2H
                                                                                                             L2 H10                                                   L2 H10                                                         3
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                       L2 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3H
                                                                                                             L2 H15                                                   L2 H15                                                           4
                                                                                                               0H                                                       0H                                                      L2
                                                                                                             L2 20                                                    L2 20                                                        3H
                                                                                                               0                                                        0
                                                                                                             L2 H25                                                   L2 H25                                                   L2 9
                                                                                                               0H                                                       0H                                                        3H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                              L2 30                                                    L2 30


32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Head


                                                                                                          Head
                                                                                                                                                                   Head
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                       3H
                                                                                                              L2 H3                                                    L2 H3                                                         1
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                    L2 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3H
                                                                                                             L2 H8                                                    L2 H8
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                      L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24
                                                                                                             L2 H13                                                   L2 H13                                                      3H
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                            2
                                                                                                             L2 H18                                                   L2 H18                                                    L2 9
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                          4H
                                                                                                             L2 H23
                                                                                                               1H
                                                                                                                                                                      L2 H23
                                                                                                                                                                        1H                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L2
                                                                                                              L2 28                                                    L2 28                                                       4H
                                                                                                                 2                                                        2                                                    L2 7
                                                                                                              L2 H1                                                    L2 H1                                                      4H
                                                                                                                 2                                                        2                                                          1
                                                                                                             L2 H6                                                    L2 H6                                                    L2 2
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                         4H
                                                                                                             L2 H11                                                   L2 H11                                                         1
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                      L2 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4H
                                                                                                             L2 H16
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                      L2 H16
                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 2
                                                                                                             L2 H21                                                   L2 H21                                                      4H
                                                                                                               2                                                        2                                                            2


     with the top 3 unknown entity latents (from top to bottom).
                                                                                                             L2 H26                                                   L2 H26                                                    L2 7
                                                                                                               2H                                                       2H                                                         5H
                                                                                                              L2 31                                                    L2 31                                                           0
                                                                                                                 3                                                        3                                                     L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5H
                                                                                                              L2 H4                                                    L2 H4
                                                                                                                 3                                                        3                                                    L2 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5H
                                                                                                             L2 H9                                                    L2 H9                                                          1
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                      L2 0
                                                                                                             L2 H14                                                   L2 H14                                                      5H
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                            1
                                                                                                             L2 H19                                                   L2 H19                                                   L2 5
                                                                                                               3                                                        3                                                         5H
                                                                                                             L2 H24                                                   L2 H24                                                         2
                                                                                                               3H                                                       3H                                                     L2 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5H
                                                                                                              L2 29
                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                       L2 29
                                                                                                                                                                          4                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 5
                                                                                                              L2 H2                                                    L2 H2                                                      5H
                                                                                                                 4                                                        4                                                          3
                                                                                                             L2 H7                                                    L2 H7                                                     L2 0
                                                                                                               4                                                        4                                                          6H
                                                                                                             L2 H12                                                   L2 H12                                                           3
                                                                                                               4                                                        4                                                       L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6H
                                                                                                             L2 H17                                                   L2 H17
                                                                                                               4                                                        4                                                      L2 8
                                                                                                             L2 H22                                                   L2 H22                                                      6H
                                                                                                               4H                                                       4H                                                           1
                                                                                                              L2 27                                                    L2 27                                                   L2 3
                                                                                                                 5                                                        5                                                       6H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                              L2 H0                                                    L2 H0                                                   L2 8
                                                                                                                 5                                                        5                                                       6H
                                                                                                             L2 H5                                                    L2 H5                                                          23
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                      L2
                                                                                                             L2 H10                                                   L2 H10                                                      6H
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                            2
                                                                                                             L2 H15                                                   L2 H15                                                    L2 8
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                          7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                             L2 H20                                                   L2 H20                                                    L2
                                                                                                               5                                                        5                                                          7H
                                                                                                             L2 H25                                                   L2 H25                                                   L2 6
                                                                                                               5H                                                       5H                                                        7H
                                                                                                              L2 30
                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                       L2 30
                                                                                                                                                                          6                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 1
                                                                                                              L2 H3                                                    L2 H3                                                      7H
                                                                                                                 6                                                        6                                                          1
                                                                                                             L2 H8                                                    L2 H8                                                    L2 6
                                                                                                               6                                                        6                                                         7H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                             L2 H13                                                   L2 H13                                                   L2 1
                                                                                                               6                                                        6                                                         7H
                                                                                                             L2 H18
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                      L2 H18
                                                                                                                                                                        6                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 6
                                                                                                             L2 H23                                                   L2 H23                                                      7H
                                                                                                               6H                                                       6H                                                           3
                                                                                                              L2 28                                                    L2 28                                                    L2 1
                                                                                                                 7                                                        7                                                        8H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                              L2 H1                                                    L2 H1                                                    L2
                                                                                                                 7                                                        7                                                        8H
                                                                                                             L2 H6                                                    L2 H6
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                      L2 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8H
                                                                                                             L2 H11                                                   L2 H11                                                         1
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                      L2 4
                                                                                                             L2 H16                                                   L2 H16                                                      8H
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                            1
                                                                                                             L2 H21                                                   L2 H21                                                   L2 9
                                                                                                               7                                                        7                                                         8H
                                                                                                             L2 H26                                                   L2 H26                                                         2
                                                                                                               7H                                                       7H                                                     L2 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8H
                                                                                                              L2 31
                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                       L2 31
                                                                                                                                                                          8                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L2 9
                                                                                                              L2 H4                                                    L2 H4                                                       9H
                                                                                                                 8                                                        8                                                            2
                                                                                                             L2 H9                                                    L2 H9                                                     L2
                                                                                                               8                                                        8                                                          9H
                                                                                                             L2 H14                                                   L2 H14                                                   L2 7
                                                                                                               8                                                        8                                                         9H
                                                                                                             L2 H19
                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                      L2 H19
                                                                                                                                                                        8                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L2 2
                                                                                                             L2 H24                                                   L2 H24                                                      9H
                                                                                                               8H                                                       8H                                                           1
                                                                                                              L2 29                                                    L2 29                                                   L2 7
                                                                                                                 9                                                        9                                                       9H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22
                                                                                                              L2 H2                                                    L2 H2                                                   L2
                                                                                                                 9                                                        9                                                       9H
                                                                                                             L2 H7                                                    L2 H7                                                          2
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                       L3 7
                                                                                                             L2 H12                                                   L2 H12                                                       0H
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                              0
                                                                                                             L2 H17                                                   L2 H17                                                    L3
                                                                                                               9                                                        9                                                          0H
                                                                                                             L2 H22                                                   L2 H22                                                   L3 5
                                                                                                               9H                                                       9H                                                        0H
                                                                                                              L3 27                                                    L3 27                                                         1
                                                                                                                 0                                                        0                                                    L3 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0H
                                                                                                              L3 H0
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                       L3 H0
                                                                                                                                                                          0                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L3 5
                                                                                                             L3 H5                                                    L3 H5                                                       0H
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                            2
                                                                                                             L3 H10                                                   L3 H10                                                   L3 0
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                         0H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                             L3 H15                                                   L3 H15                                                   L3 5
                                                                                                               0                                                        0                                                         0H
                                                                                                             L3 H20
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                      L3 H20
                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L3 0
                                                                                                             L3 H25                                                   L3 H25                                                       1H
                                                                                                               0H                                                       0H                                                             3
                                                                                                              L3 30                                                    L3 30                                                    L3
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                        1H
                                                                                                              L3 H3                                                    L3 H3                                                   L3 8
                                                                                                                 1                                                        1                                                       1H
                                                                                                             L3 H8                                                    L3 H8                                                          1
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                      L3 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1H
                                                                                                             L3 H13                                                   L3 H13                                                         1
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                      L3 8
                                                                                                             L3 H18                                                   L3 H18                                                      1H
                                                                                                               1                                                        1                                                            2
                                                                                                             L3 H23                                                   L3 H23                                                   L3 3
                                                                                                               1H                                                       1H                                                        1H
                                                                                                                   28                                                       28                                                       28
     Figure 21: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Llama 3.1 8B. Steering is done
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N    G EMMA 2 9B S ELF K NOWLEDGE R EFLECTION


          Steering Unknown Prompts with Known SAE latent                                                            Steering Known Prompts with Unknown SAE latent

        Logit Diﬀerence (Yes - No)


                                                                                                                    Logit Diﬀerence (Yes - No)
                                      6                                                               Player                                                                                             Player
                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                      Movie                                                                                              Movie
                                                                                                      City                                                                                               City
                                      4                                                               Song                                                                                               Song
                                                                                                                                                 6

                                      2
                                                                                                                                                 4

                                      0

                                                                                                                                                 2
                                     −2
                                          Original     Random SAE latent           Known SAE latent                                                  Original   Random SAE latent   Unknown SAE latent


Figure 22: Gemma 2 9B Logit difference between “Yes” and “No” predictions on the question
“Are you sure you know the {entity_type} {entity_name}? Answer yes or no.” after steering with
unknown (left) and known (right) entity recognition latents..


O    G EMMA 2 9B IT T OP ‘U NKNOWN ’ L ATENTS

                                                                   'Unknown' Latent Activations 5038 L32            'Unknown' Latent Activations 88 L32


                 Figure 23: Top 2 Gemma 2 9B IT ‘unknown’ latents based on the t-statistic score.


P   G EMMA 2B IT T OP ‘U NKNOWN ’ L ATENT WITH S EPARATED E RRORS
    BASED ON E NTITY T YPE Error Latent Activations
                                                     Activation Value


                                                                        4



                                                                        2



                                                                        0
                                                                            M

                                                                                   M

                                                                                          M

                                                                                      Ci

                                                                                      Ci Co r ( no

                                                                                      Ci

                                                                                      So Er (Un

                                                                                      So

                                                                                      So - E ct n e tit
                                                                              ov

                                                                                     ov

                                                                                             ov

                                                                                         ty

                                                                                         ty

                                                                                         ty rro

                                                                                          ng ror kn

                                                                                          ng or

                                                                                          ng ro
                                                                                ie

                                                                                        ie

                                                                                            ie ro

                                                                                             -

                                                                                             - E ec

                                                                                             -

                                                                                               -



                                                                                               - E r (U
                                                                                   -C

                                                                                                 - E ec

                                                                                                 - E r (U


                                                                                                  C Kn wn

                                                                                                   r

                                                                                                   rr
                                                                                                   rr Kn wn
                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                     rr
                                                                                                     or


                                                                                                      or nkn
                                                                                                      r



                                                                                                       re w
                                                                                                       o nk
                                                                                                        r


                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                          t


                                                                                                          (K ow
                                                                                                            t


                                                                                                            no n
                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                              ow


                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                              o


                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                  en tity
                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                   en tity


                                                                                                                    tit )
                                                                                                                    en


                                                                                                                      tit )
                                                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                       tit )
                                                                                                                       en


                                                                                                                       y)


                                                                                                                         y)
                                                                                                                          y)



                                                                                                                          y


Figure 24: Top 2 Gemma 2B IT ‘unknown’ latent based on the t-statistic score, with errors divided
into known and unknown entities.


                                                                                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Q                                                         L LAMA 3.1 8B R EPLICATION

We extend our experimental analysis to Llama 3.1 8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), using the SAEs
suite from LlamaScope (He et al., 2024), which offers per-layer pretrained SAEs. Following the
methodology described in Section 3, we detect both known and unknown entity latents within the
model. The distribution of the Top 5 latents across layers (Figure 25) exhibit consistent patterns
with previous findings, with the most effective and generalizable latent representations concentrated
in the intermediate layers.


                                                                  Top 5 Known Separation Scores Latents                                                             Top 5 Unknown Separation Scores Latents
                                                                                                                   Player                                         0.8                                                  Player
                                                            0.8
                                                                                                                   Song                                           0.6                                                  Song
                                                            0.6                                                    City                                                                                                City
                                                 Score


                                                                                                                                                         Score
                                                                                                                   Movie                                          0.4                                                  Movie
                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                   MaxMin                                                                                              MaxMin
                                                            0.2                                                                                                   0.2

                                                              0                                                                                                     0
                                                                      5      10      15      20     25   30                                                               5      10      15      20     25   30

                                                                                     Layer                                                                                               Layer

               Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js


Figure 25: Llama 3.1 8B layerwise evolution of the Top 5 latents, as measured by their known
(left) and unknown (right) latent separation scores. Error bars show maximum and minimum scores.
MaxMin (red line) refers to the minimum separation score across entities of the best latent. This
represents how entity-agnostic is the most general latent per layer. In both cases, middle layers
provide the best-performing latents.



Steering experiments using the top unknown entity latent reveal increase refusal rates in the
instruction-tuned model (Figure 26). Conversely, when we orthogonalize the model weights with
respect to this direction, refusal rates decrease. Since the original model’s refusal rate on unknown
entity prompts is high (Figure 26 left), we include the refusal rates on prompts with known enti-
ties (Figure 26 right). Notably, steering with the top known entity latent did not produce a corre-
sponding decrease in refusals.


               100                                                                                                                                 100
                90                                                                                       Original generation                        90                                                       Original generation
                80                                                                                       Steering unknown latent                    80                                                       Steering unknown latent
                70                                                                                       Random steering                            70                                                       Random steering
                                                                                                         Unknown latent setting                                                                              Unknown latent setting
Refusal Rate


                                                                                                                                    Refusal Rate


                60                                                                                       Orthogonalized model                       60                                                       Orthogonalized model
                50                                                                                       Unknown latent                             50                                                       Unknown latent
                40                                                                                       Steering known latent                      40                                                       Steering known latent
                30                                                                                       Random steering                            30                                                       Random steering
                20
                                                                                                         Known latent setting                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Known latent setting
                10                                                                                                                                  10
                 0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                           Player     City        Movie      Song                                                                Player   City        Movie      Song


Figure 26: Number of times Llama 3.1 8B refuses to answer in 100 queries about unknown entities
(left) and known entities (right). We examine the unmodified original model, the model steered with
the known entity latent and unknown entity latent, and the model with the unknown entity latent
projected out of its weights (referred to as Orthogonalized model). The mean and standard deviation
of steering with 10 random latents are shown for comparison.



Further analysis reveal similar findings to those in Gemma regarding attention patterns: steering
with the top known entity latent increases the attention scores to the entity (Figure 27 top), while
unknown entity latent steering result in diminished attention scores (Figure 27 bottom).
The replication of our key findings—originally observed in Gemma—across Llama 3.1 8B strength-
ens our confidence in both our methodological approach and the broader applicability of our results.
This generalization is particularly noteworthy given the substantial architectural differences between
the two models and their respective SAEs.


                                                                                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                             0.08
                             0.06


Attention Score Difference
                             0.04
                             0.02
                             0.00
                             0.02
                             0.04
                             0.06
                             0.08
                               L1 0
                              L1 5
                              L1 10
                              L1 15
                              L1 20
                              L1 25
                               L1 0
                               L1 3
                              L1 8
                              L1 13
                              L1 18
                              L1 23
                               L1 8
                               L1 1
                              L1 6
                              L1 11
                              L1 16
                              L1 21
                              L1 26
                               L1 1
                               L1 4
                              L1 9
                              L1 14
                              L1 19
                              L1 24
                               L1 9
                               L1 2
                              L1 7
                              L1 12
                              L1 17
                              L1 22
                               L1 7
                               L1 0
                              L1 5
                              L1 10
                              L1 15
                              L1 20
                              L1 25
                               L2 0
                               L2 3
                              L2 8
                              L2 13
                              L2 18
                              L2 23
                               L2 8
                               L2 1
                              L2 6
                              L2 11
                              L2 16
                              L2 21
                              L2 26
                               L2 1
                               L2 4
                              L2 9
                              L2 14
                              L2 19
                              L2 24
                               L2 9
                               L2 2
                              L2 7
                              L2 12
                              L2 17
                              L2 22
                               L2 7
                               L2 0
                              L2 5
                              L2 10
                              L2 15
                              L2 20
                              L2 25
                               L2 0
                               L2 3
                              L2 8
                              L2 13
                              L2 18
                              L2 23
                               L2 8
                               L2 1
                              L2 6
                              L2 11
                              L2 16
                              L2 21
                              L2 26
                               L2 1
                               L2 4
                              L2 9
                              L2 14
                              L2 19
                              L2 24
                               L2 9
                               L2 2
                              L2 7
                              L2 12
                              L2 17
                              L2 22
                               L2 7
                               L2 0
                              L2 5
                              L2 10
                              L2 15
                              L2 20
                              L2 25
                               L3 0
                               L3 3
                              L3 8
                              L3 13
                              L3 18
                              L3 23
                               L3 8
                               L3 1
                              L3 6
                              L3 11
                              L3 16
                              L3 21
                              L3 26
                                   31
                                  4H
                                  4H


                                   3
                                  5H
                                  5H


                                   2
                                  6H
                                  6H


                                   3
                                  7H
                                  7H


                                   2
                                  8H
                                  8H


                                   2
                                  9H
                                  9H


                                   3
                                  0H
                                  0H


                                   2
                                  1H
                                  1H


                                   3
                                  2H
                                  2H


                                   2
                                  3H
                                  3H


                                   2
                                  4H
                                  4H


                                   3
                                  5H
                                  5H


                                   2
                                  6H
                                  6H


                                   3
                                  7H
                                  7H


                                   2
                                  8H
                                  8H


                                   2
                                  9H
                                  9H


                                   3
                                  0H
                                  0H


                                   2
                                  1H
                                  1H
                                4H
                                4H
                                4H
                                4H
                                4H



                                5H
                                5H
                                5H
                                5H



                                6H
                                6H
                                6H
                                6H
                                6H



                                7H
                                7H
                                7H
                                7H



                                8H
                                8H
                                8H
                                8H



                                9H
                                9H
                                9H
                                9H
                                9H



                                0H
                                0H
                                0H
                                0H



                                1H
                                1H
                                1H
                                1H
                                1H



                                2H
                                2H
                                2H
                                2H



                                3H
                                3H
                                3H
                                3H



                                4H
                                4H
                                4H
                                4H
                                4H



                                5H
                                5H
                                5H
                                5H



                                6H
                                6H
                                6H
                                6H
                                6H



                                7H
                                7H
                                7H
                                7H



                                8H
                                8H
                                8H
                                8H



                                9H
                                9H
                                9H
                                9H
                                9H



                                0H
                                0H
                                0H
                                0H



                                1H
                                1H
                                1H
                                1H
                                1H
                               L1


                                                                                   Head


                             0.2
Attention Score Difference


                             0.1

                             0.0

                             0.1

                             0.2
                                   0

                             L1 5
                             L1 0
                             L1 5
                                 20

                             L1 5
                              L1 0
                                   3

                             L1 8
                             L1 3
                             L1 8
                             L1 3
                              L1 8
                                   1

                             L1 6
                             L1 1
                             L1 6
                             L1 1
                             L1 6
                              L1 1
                                   4

                             L1 9
                             L1 4
                             L1 9
                                 24

                              L2 9
                                   2

                             L2 7
                             L2 2
                             L2 7
                             L2 2
                              L2 7
                                   0

                             L2 5
                             L2 0
                             L2 5
                             L2 0
                             L2 5
                              L2 0
                                   3

                             L2 8
                             L2 3
                             L2 8
                                 23

                              L2 8
                                   1

                             L2 6
                             L2 1
                             L2 6
                             L2 1
                             L2 6
                              L2 1
                                   4

                             L2 9
                             L2 4
                             L2 9
                                 24

                              L2 9
                                   2

                             L2 7
                             L2 2
                                 17

                             L2 2
                              L2 7
                                   0

                             L2 5
                             L2 0
                             L2 5
                             L2 0
                             L2 5
                              L2 0
                                   3

                             L2 8
                             L2 3
                             L2 8
                                 23

                              L2 8
                                   1

                             L2 6
                             L2 1
                             L2 6
                             L2 1
                             L2 6
                              L2 1
                                   4

                             L2 9
                             L2 4
                             L2 9
                             L2 4
                              L3 9
                                   2

                             L3 7
                             L3 2
                             L3 7
                                 22

                              L3 7
                                   0

                             L3 5
                             L3 0
                             L3 5
                             L3 0
                             L3 5
                                 30
                                6H
                                6H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                 3
                                7H
                                7H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                8H
                                8H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                 3
                                9H
                                9H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                0H
                                0H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                1H
                                1H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                 3
                                2H
                                2H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                3H
                                3H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                 3
                                4H
                                4H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                5H
                                5H

                                 1


                                 2
                                 2
                                6H
                                6H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                 3
                                7H
                                7H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                8H
                                8H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                 3
                                9H
                                9H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                                0H
                                0H

                                 1
                                 1


                                 2
                                1H
                                1H

                                 1
                                 1
                                 2
                                 2
                               6H
                               6H
                               6H
                               6H
                               6H


                               7H
                               7H
                               7H
                               7H


                               8H
                               8H
                               8H
                               8H
                               8H


                               9H
                               9H
                               9H
                               9H


                               0H
                               0H
                               0H
                               0H


                               1H
                               1H
                               1H
                               1H
                               1H


                               2H
                               2H
                               2H
                               2H


                               3H
                               3H
                               3H
                               3H
                               3H


                               4H
                               4H
                               4H
                               4H


                               5H
                               5H
                               5H
                               5H


                               6H
                               6H
                               6H
                               6H
                               6H


                               7H
                               7H
                               7H
                               7H


                               8H
                               8H
                               8H
                               8H
                               8H


                               9H
                               9H
                               9H
                               9H


                               0H
                               0H
                               0H
                               0H


                               1H
                               1H
                               1H
                               1H
                               1H
                              L1
                              L1


                              L1


                              L1


                              L1


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L2


                              L3


                              L3
                             L1


                             L1


                             L2


                             L2


                             L2


                             L2


                             L3
                                                                                   Head


Figure 27: Aggregated attention scores to entity tokens per head in Llama 3.1 8B top known entity
(top) and unknown entity (bottom) latents.


   R                                ACTIVATION F REQUENCY ON S ONGS DATA A FTER KNOWLEDGE C UTOFF

                                                      Model        Known Entity Latent    Unknown Entity Latent
                                                   Gemma 2 2B               6%                     53%
                                                   Gemma 2 9B              22%                     55%
                                                   Llama 3.1 8B           13.4%                    76%

Table 8: Activation frequency of each of the top known and unknown entity latents on songs released
after knowledge cutoff (August 2024).


   S                                T OKEN L IKELIHOOD H YPOTHESIS
An alternative explanation for our observed entity recognition latents is the token likelihood hypoth-
esis: the latents might simply encode token likelihood rather than actual knowledge about entities.
Under this hypothesis, when processing a token sequence (t1 , . . . , ti−1 , ti ), the activation of our
discovered latents at position i could be explained by the model’s ability to predict token ti from
previous context. For instance, given a well-known movie title, the model would more easily predict
subsequent tokens, potentially triggering what we interpret as ‘known entity’ latents. Conversely,
for unknown entities, lower token likelihood might activate our ‘unknown entity’ latents. This repre-
sents a plausible confounding factor, as tokens comprising well-known entity names are inherently
more predictable in the training distribution than those of unknown entities.
To test this hypothesis, we analyze token likelihood on a broad text corpus from the FineWeb
dataset (Penedo et al., 2024). For each token position i, we compute both the entity recognition
latent activations and the probability of the ground-truth token being predicted from position i − 1,
p(ti |t<i ). If the token likelihood hypothesis were true, we would expect strong correlations between
these measures.
Our analysis reveals several key findings that challenge this hypothesis:

                                     • Entity recognition latents activate selectively, firing on only a small fraction of tokens (e.g.
                                       0.6% for known entity latents and 0.5% for unknown entity latents in Gemma 2 2B, see
                                       Table 9).
                                     • The correlations between latent activations and token prediction probabilities are negligible
                                       across all tested models (Figure 28).
                                     • We explored various other potential relationships, including dependencies on the perplex-
                                       ity of surrounding tokens and next-token prediction entropy, finding no substantial correla-
                                       tions.

While we observe that tokens where unknown entity latents activate tend to have lower prediction
probabilities compared to the baseline, this effect is modest given the latents’ sparse activation pat-
terns. These findings suggest that token predictability alone cannot explain the behavior of our


                                                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


entity recognition latents, supporting our interpretation that they encode a more sophisticated form
of knowledge awareness.

                                                                        Gemma 2 2B
                             All Tokens                     Tokens where Known Entity Latent is Active Tokens where Unknown Entity Latent is Active
                                                         2500
                                                                      Known (freq: 0.008, corr: 0.067, p=0.000)                           Unknown (freq: 0.008, corr: -0.000, p=0.996)
        200000                                                                                                               2000
                                                         2000
        150000                                           1500                                                                1500
Count


        100000                                           1000                                                                1000
         50000                                            500                                                                 500
             0                                              0                                                                   0
                 0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8     1.0          0.0       0.2         0.4        0.6       0.8        1.0           0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8        1.0
                             Probability                                              Probability                                                  Probability
                                                                        Gemma 2 9B
                             All Tokens                     Tokens where Known Entity Latent is Active Tokens where Unknown Entity Latent is Active
        200000                                           2500         Known (freq: 0.009, corr: 0.062, p=0.000)                            Unknown (freq: 0.009, corr: 0.009, p=0.000)
                                                                                                                             2000
                                                         2000
        150000                                                                                                               1500
                                                         1500
Count


        100000                                                                                                               1000
                                                         1000
         50000                                            500                                                                 500
             0                                              0                                                                   0
                 0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8     1.0          0.0       0.2         0.4        0.6       0.8        1.0           0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8        1.0
                             Probability                                              Probability                                                  Probability
                                                                       Llama 3.1 8B
                             All Tokens                     Tokens where Known Entity Latent is Active Tokens where Unknown Entity Latent is Active
        200000                                           500                    Known (freq: 0.002, corr: 0.003, p=0.014)                  Unknown (freq: 0.026, corr: 0.047, p=0.000)
                                                                                                                             5000
                                                         400
        150000                                                                                                               4000
                                                         300
Count


        100000                                                                                                               3000
                                                         200                                                                 2000
         50000                                           100                                                                 1000
             0                                              0                                                                   0
                 0.0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8     1.0          0.0       0.2         0.4        0.6       0.8        1.0           0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6       0.8        1.0
                             Probability                                              Probability                                                  Probability

Figure 28: Distribution of ground-truth next-token probabilities for Gemma 2 2B (top), Gemma 2
9B (middle), and Llama 3.1 8B (bottom). For each model, we show three distributions: (left) across
all tokens in the dataset, (middle) for tokens where the known entity latent activates, and (right) for
tokens where the unknown entity latent activates.


                             Model               Latent           Activation Frequency                               Correlation with p(ti |t<i )
                                              Known                                 0.006                                   0.067 (p=0.000e+00)
                        Gemma 2 2B
                                             Unknown                                0.005                                   -0.000 (p=9.960e-01)
                                              Known                                 0.009                                    0.062 (p=0.0e+00)
                        Gemma 2 9B
                                             Unknown                                0.009                                   0.009 (p=1.045e-12)
                                              Known                                 0.002                                   0.003 (p=1.380e-02)
                        Llama 3.1 8B
                                             Unknown                                0.026                                   0.047 (p=0.000e+00)

Table 9: Activation frequency and correlation with conditional next-token probability for top known
and unknown entity latents in each model.


                                                                                      36
