Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


LLM- BASED T YPED H YPERRESOLUTION FOR C OM -
MONSENSE R EASONING WITH K NOWLEDGE BASES

 Armin Toroghi1 , Ali Pesaranghader2 , Tanmana Sadhu2 , Scott Sanner1,3
 1
  University of Toronto, 2 LG Electronics, Toronto AI Lab, 3 Vector Institute of AI
 armin.toroghi@mail.utoronto.ca,
 {ali.pesaranghader, tanmana.sadhu}@lge.com , ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca



                                            A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLM) are being increasingly applied to tasks requiring
         commonsense reasoning. Despite their outstanding potential, the reasoning pro-
         cess of LLMs is prone to errors and hallucinations that hinder their applicabil-
         ity, especially in high-stakes scenarios. Several works have attempted to enhance
         commonsense reasoning performance of LLMs by (i) using prompting styles that
         elicit more accurate reasoning, (ii) utilizing the LLM as a semantic parser for a
         symbolic reasoner, or (iii) enforcing the LLM to simulate a logical inference rule.
         However, all these solutions have critical limitations: they are unable to leverage
         the internal commonsense knowledge of the LLM in tandem with an axiomatic
         knowledge base, they lack a mechanism to reliably repair erroneous inference
         steps, and their application is restricted to small knowledge bases that fit the con-
         text limit of the LLM. In this work, we present LLM-based Typed Hyperresolution
         (LLM-TH), a logical commonsense reasoning framework that leverages “theory
         resolution”, a concept from classical logical inference which enables integrat-
         ing LLMs into the “resolution” inference rule, thus mitigating reasoning errors
         and hallucinations and enabling verification of the reasoning procedure. LLM-
         TH is also equipped with a mechanism for repairing erroneous inference steps
         supported by theoretical guarantees. Using “Hyperresolution” and “Typed infer-
         ence” schemes, we show that LLM-TH can efficiently reason over large knowl-
         edge bases consisting of tens of thousands of rules with arbitrary predicate arities.
         Our experiments on three diverse language-based reasoning tasks—preference
         reasoning, multi-domain deductive reasoning, and geographical question answer-
         ing—showcase that LLM-TH, using merely a BART 406M parameter NLI entail-
         ment model, significantly reduces reasoning errors compared to baselines using
         Llama3-70B, Gemini1.5-Flash, GPT-3.5-Turbo, and Mixtral-46.7B.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The breakthrough in Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly impacted AI research, paving
the way for deploying AI-powered systems in various tasks and applications. This huge impact is
primarily due to the outstanding performance of LLMs in tasks that require substantial reasoning
skills (Chang et al., 2024; Plaat et al., 2024). LLMs have also acquired commonsense understanding,
a critical element for interacting with the real world (Zhao et al., 2024; Valmeekam et al., 2024).
However, reasoning performance of LLMs is not infallible. LLMs commonly show reasoning errors
and make hallucinations—generating incorrect outputs that seem valid—which hinders their reliable
deployment, particularly in high-risk tasks (Tonmoy et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023b).
To overcome these challenges in LLM-based reasoning, several approaches have been proposed
in the literature that can be broadly categorized into three groups: (i) Using prompting styles that
can elicit more accurate reasoning from the LLM (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2022) or augmenting the prompt by retrieved information (Lewis et al., 2020b), (ii) using
the LLM to translate natural language problem and knowledge bases (KB) for a symbolic logical
solver (Olausson et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023), and (iii) using the LLM to emulate a logical inference
rule to solve the reasoning problem (Kazemi et al., 2023; Lee & Hwang, 2024).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                        I'm looking for a Mediterranean fish recipe that packs some heat.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Query
                                Clause at Head of
                                 Priority Queue                                                                     "                           "                                       "                                               "            "                                 "           "         "

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Query in Causal Form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "               "
                                                                                                                        "                           "                                               "                                           "                    "                             "                 "           "



                                                                                                                                                                                            :       "                               "                                "                         "                     "                                      "
 Original Reasoning


                                                                                                        Recipe 1: Fiery Trout Souvlaki with Lime                                                                                                                                                                                                 Recipe 2: Mustard-Flavored Sicilian Cuttlefish
                                                            "           "               "                       "                       "                           "                                                       "                        "                                                           "                                          "                       "                   "                   "           "



                                                                                            "                                           "                               "                                                   "                                                                                                        "                                      "                           "                           "
                                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                "               "                           "               "                                                                                                                                                               "                               "                   "           "


                                  ...                       ...                                                         "                                                           "                                                                                                                                                                           "                                                   "
                                                                                                        "                           "                       "                                               "                                                                                                                                       "                   "                       "                               "


                                  ...

                                                                                                            "               "                   "                                                       "                                                                                                                                "                                              "                   "                               "

                                                                                                                                            Repair Axiom                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Repair Axiom
                                                                                                                "                           "                       "                                               "                                                                                                                                                   "                           "                   "       "
 Reasoning with Repair Axioms


                                Clause at Head of                                                               "                           "                   "                                               "
                                 Priority Queue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Recipe 2 at Step 2:
                                                            Recipe 1 at Step 2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                                          "                       "                   "                   "           "
                                   ...                              "           "               "                           "                               "                                   "                       "                                            "



                                   ...                                                                                                                                                              "                                                "                                                           Recipe 2 has no binary predicate to resolve with "                                                                             "



                                  ...


Figure 1: Workflow of LLM-TH shown with a preference reasoning example. Top: Using
                                                                "                   "                   "                       "                       "                               "                               "                       "                             "                        "     ...             "               "
                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                        |
LLM-based ...
              typed hyperresolution to compute proof scores for each recipe option to entail user
                                                        "                   "                       "                   "                       "                               "                                                           "                    "                         "                             "                   ...    "                       "                                   ... |
query. Negated query is the first active clause, and each resolvent is assigned a priority tu-
ple: (type entailment score, predicate entailment score, proof length score) and pushed to the prior-
ity queue (only the foremost clause is shown for priority queue of recipe 1 which
                                          "                             "         ...
                                                                                    "     becomes the next
                                                                                                        "                                       "                                   "                                       "                   "                        "                     "                 "                                      "
                                                                                Typed Resolution
active clause). LLM makes two mistakes: assigning a low score to “Souvlaki”            entailing “Mediter-
                                                                                   and   as well as      and
ranean” and a high score to “cuttlefish” entailing “fish”. Bottom: Both " ...
                                                                              kinds
                                                                                have theof
                                                                                         same mistakes       can be
                                                                                               types which are
                                                                                                                    "                       " "                                     "                                           "                                    "             "                                 "
                                                                                       and            ,
fixed after the insertion of repair axioms, resulting in the correct recommendation       of Recipe 1.
                                                                                respectively.
                                                    Untyped Resolution (Incorrect)
                                                    Typed Resolution (Correct)                                                                          ...

These works have advanced the logical reasoning performance of LLMs; yet, they are hindered by
a number of important limitations: (a) Their application is limited to small KBs that can fit into the
context limit of the LLM, and are not scalable to practical KBs such as the widely-used Knowledge
Graphs (KG) containing thousands of facts and axioms. (b) They are restricted to reason on a
complete KB containing all rules required to solve the problem. However, assuming access to such
KB is typically unrealistic in practical use cases, thus calling for a methodology to leverage the
internal commonsense knowledge of the LLM in the reasoning process. (c) All steps involved in
the reasoning process are not transparent and thus, the correctness of the final answer cannot be
determined by inspecting the reasoning process. (d) Upon observation of a reasoning error, they do
not provide any reliable framework to fix the error and ensure it will not occur in the future.
In this work, we aim to address these limitations by making the following contributions:

                                         • We introduce LLM-based Typed Hyperersolution (LLM-TH), a framework for efficient
                                           complex logical commonsense reasoning with KBs containing predicates of arbitrary arti-
                                           ties, that facilitates the incorporation of the internal commonsense knowledge of LLMs in
                                           the reasoning process. LLM-TH is founded on “theory resolution” (Stickel, 1985; Baum-
                                           gartner, 1992), a concept from classical logical reasoning that allows for the incorporation
                                           of specialized theorem provers into the resolution inference rule. (Section 3.1)
                                         • We equip LLM-TH with a mechanism for incorporating the type information of the vari-
                                           ables and constants in the problem domain to prune the proof search space and terminate
                                           the exploration of reasoning paths that are unlikely to succeed at very early stages. Also,
                                           using hyperresolution, an extension of resolution that enables combining clauses to per-
                                           form several resolution steps simultaneously, we make LLM-TH an efficient and scalable


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      "               "       "           "         "             "   "               "                   "               "   ...           "   "
                          |                                                                               |

        ...       "               "       "           "         "         "                       "           "                   "                     "       ...   "         "           ... |


    "                         "       "       "                 "             "           "           "               "               "         "                           "        ...
                                                                                                                                                                                    Typed Resolution

                                                                                                                                                                                      and    as well as     and
                                                                                                                                                                                    have the same types which are
                              "                   "           " "             "               "                   "           "                     "                 ...                  and           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                    respectively.
              Untyped Resolution (Incorrect)
              Typed Resolution (Correct)                            ...


Figure 2: An example of typing mechanism of LLM-TH. The binary predicate “contains” is com-
mon among clauses from different domains. Left: Application of resolution rule without considering
types leads to resolving a literal about “recipes” with complementary literals from domains such as
“animals”. Each incorrect resolution results in a new branch that will be explored but leads to fail-
ure, making the process inefficient. Right: in typed resolution, only literals with consistent variable
and constant types will be unified, therefore pruning the search space and enhancing efficiency.


                reasoning framework for logical commonsense reasoning with LLMs. We show that LLM-
                TH is easily scalable to KBs consisting of tens of thousands of rules. (Section 5.2.1)
              • We show that by providing access to the exact axioms and facts used at every reasoning
                step, LLM-TH results in a verifiable and faithful reasoning performance. Furthermore,
                we propose a reliable repair methodology for missed inferences and incorrect reasoning
                steps due to LLM hallucinations and missed inferences, and provide theoretical proof that
                it reliably fixes reasoning errors. (Section 4)
              • We show that by using the theory hyperresolution framework, LLM-TH is able to leverage
                the internal commonsense knowledge of the LLM to compensate for KB incompleteness
                and perform accurate and reliable reasoning. (Section 5.2.2)
              • We experiment with LLM-TH on three different tasks involving commonsense reasoning:
                preference reasoning, multi-domain deductive reasoning, and geographical QA, showcas-
                ing the superiority of LLM-TH in terms of answer and reasoning accuracy over Chain
                of Thought (Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022) and retrieval augmented generation
                (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020b) baselines using orders of magnitude larger LLMs. (Section 5)


2       R ELATED W ORKS
Enhancing LLM Reasoning As LLMs scale, they exhibit emergent behaviors such as the ca-
pability of solving problems that involve reasoning (Chang et al., 2024; Huang & Chang, 2022).
However, their reasoning performance often suffers from errors and hallucination of facts in their
inferences (Tonmoy et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023b). Several works have shown that with certain
prompting techniques such as Chain of Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), Tree
of thought (Yao et al., 2024), Selection-Inference (Creswell et al., 2022), Self-consistency (Wang
et al., 2022), Least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022), etc., more accurate reasoning can be
elicited from LLMs. Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020b) has also been
noted as an effective approach in reducing reasoning errors and hallucinations by including relevant
content retrieved from a KB in the prompt to condition LLM’s reasoning on dependable information.
These methods have made significant progress in advancing the reasoning behavior of LLMs, but
even applying them does not guarantee an accurate reasoning behavior from the LLM. Furthermore,
since the LLM is entirely in charge of doing the reasoning, there is no control over the reasoning
process and its correctness cannot be verified (Shanahan, 2024; Pan et al., 2023). Moreover, the per-
formance of these methods has been shown to degrade when being applied to long-horizon (Dziri
et al., 2024) and out-of-domain (Saparov et al., 2024) reasoning tasks as well as problems involving
negation (Anil et al., 2022) and contraposition (Zhang et al., 2024).

Formal Reasoning with LLMs To offer more control over the reasoning process, two groups of
work have been proposed for formal reasoning with LLMs: (i) Semantic parsing methods remove


                                                                                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the LLM from reasoning and only use it to translate the problem into a symbolic format and delegate
the reasoning task to a symbolic solver (Pan et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023). (ii) Works enforcing
the LLM to emulate an established logical inference rule such as backchaining (Kazemi et al., 2023;
Lee & Hwang, 2024). While these works make progress in mitigating hallucinations, they rely on
the existing KB rules and have no mechanism to use the rich commonsense knowledge of the LLM
in their reasoning. Although recent works (Toroghi et al., 2024a) used resolution inference rule for
LLM-based reasoning, they are restricted to unary predicates and small KBs.

Commonsense Reasoning with LLMs We refer the reader to Appendix F.

3    M ETHODOLOGY
We first review the (hyper)resolution rule for inference in first-order logic using a function and
equality-free first-order logical (FOL) syntax in clausal normal form (Chang & Lee, 2014). We
then proceed to introduce the concept of Theory resolution that leverages external sources of knowl-
edge (such as LLMs) to augment the resolution process. Next, we introduce the concept of typed
resolution that will be critical for improving the efficiency of inference in our work by prioritiz-
ing inference with compatible types and reducing proof length. With all of these ingredients in
place, we conclude with our LLM Theory Hyperresolution algorithm (LLM-TH) along with crucial
propositions that ensure the correctness of repair axioms used to override incorrect LLM inferences.

Resolution Rule and Hyperresolution Resolution is a sound and complete inference rule which
is widely used in logical reasoning. From two premise clauses containing complementary literals,
resolution rule derives a resolvent clause by canceling (resolving) the complementary literals, e.g.,
                                A(x) ∨ B(x, y) ¬B(w, z) ∨ C(z) ,
                                         A(x) ∨ C(y)                                                 (1)
under the unification θ = {x/w, y/z}. Repeated application of the resolution rule will either result
in a contradiction, e.g., deriving both A(x) and ¬A(x) indicating an inconsistent clause set, or
reaching a point where no further resolutions are possible.
The efficiency of the repeated application of the resolution rule can be substantially improved by
hyeperresolution (Robinson, 1965), an extension of resolution that enables combining multiple res-
olution steps in one inference step. Concretely, it resolves positive literals with all possible matching
negative clauses simultaneously, e.g.,
    A(x) ∨ B1 (x, y)... ∨ Bn (x, y) C(z) ∨ ¬B1 (w, z) ∨ ... ∨ ¬Bn (w, z)
                                                                         , θ = {x/w, y/z}.
                                 A(x) ∨ C(y)                                                         (2)

LLM-based Theory Resolution Application of the resolution rule is originally restricted to
clauses with complementary literals that share identical predicates. Theory resolution (Stickel, 1985;
Baumgartner, 1992) relaxes this condition and broadens the applicability of the resolution rule by
integrating special-purpose theories into resolution. Based on theory resolution, given two clauses
c1 = A(x) ∨ B(x, y) and c2 = ¬C(w, z) ∨ D(z), if a theorem prover T identifies B(x, y) and
¬C(w, z) under unification θ = {x/w, y/z} to be unsatisfiable (i.e., ∀x∀yB(x, y) ∧ ¬C(x, y) ⊢T
⊥), the clauses can be resolved despite lacking complimentary literals with identical predicates:
                      A(x) ∨ B(x, y) ¬C(w, z) ∨ D(z)
                                                     , θ = {x/w, y/z}.
                               A(x) ∨ D(y)                                                           (3)
In this work, we use an LLM as the theory that identifies the unsatisfiable natural language predi-
cates to perform reasoning via theory resolution. Translating natural language to symbolic form, as
semantic parsing methods do, is substantially restricted. For example, semantic parsing will map
“packs some heat” and being “spicy” to completely different symbolic predicates. Therefore, a
symbolic reasoner is unable to discern their entailment relationship unless given explicit axioms.
Using LLM-based theory resolution, we can integrate the LLM’s commonsense knowledge into the
reasoning process to find entailments between predicates and constants without requiring explicit
axioms. We do this in an extended version of FOL in which predicates, functions, and constants


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


are no longer symbols, but natural language text. In this logical system, which we call natural
language logic, the unsatisfiability condition in theory resolution reduces to natural language entail-
ment. In other words, if an LLM identifies a natural language predicate B to entail predicate D,
i.e., B(x) ⊢LLM D(x), and therefore, B(x) ∧ ¬D(x) ⊢LLM ⊥, then literals B(x) and D(x) can be
resolved. For instance, given clauses c1 =“packs some heat”(x) and c2 = ¬“spicy” (x) ∨ Q(x), in
which Q(x) is another literal with a natural language predicate, since the LLM identifies the natural
language entailment “packs some heat” ⊢LLM “spicy”, a theory resolution step can be performed as
                            “packs some heat”(x) ¬“spicy”(x) ∨ Q(x)
                                                                    .
                                              Q(x)                                                       (4)

LLM-based Typed Theory Resolution Although resolution is one of the most widely used infer-
ence rules in logical reasoning with the key properties of being sound and complete, its application
on real-world large-scale knowledge bases is computationally expensive. One of the key challenges
is that the space of possible resolutions—the combinations of literals and clauses that can potentially
be unified and resolved—can become enormous, and grows exponentially during the resolution pro-
cess, leading to inefficiencies in finding contradictions or valid derivations. This challenge is often
addressed by choosing particular orderings that first explore resolution steps that are more likely to
lead to valid proofs (Baumgartner, 1992; Sanner & McIlraith, 2006).
In addition to proposing an ordering strategy which is explained in 3.1, we introduce the notion of
typing into theory resolution which considerably prunes the space of possible resolutions. Many
of the created resolvents during the resolution process, each opening a new search branch, are cre-
ated by unifying variables and constants with inconsistent ontological types. For instance, a literal
“small”(x) in a clause about vehicles x can be resolved with a literal ¬“small”(y) which is about
animals y. However, the search branch created by this resolvent is very unlikely to result in a valid
proof as it uses a semantically unlikely unification (vehicle-animals) that is likely to lead to a failed
inference in subsequent steps. By associating variables and constants with their ontological types
and considering type consistency in unification, we can significantly prune the space of allowable
resolutions, by preventing the exploration of type inconsistent branches from the beginning.
Variable types can be introduced into an FOL sentence as unary predicates, e.g., “animal”(x).
Considering a universally quantified sentence in FOL as
                             ∀x∀y H(x) ∧ T (y) ∧ A(x, y) =⇒ R(x, y),                                     (5)
where H(.) and T (.) are unary predicates indicating types of their corresponding variables, we
equivalently write the above sentence in the typed FOL as
                               ∀x∀y A(x, y) =⇒ R(x, y)|x : H, y : T,                                     (6)
where, x : H and y : T indicate that x and y are of type H and T respectively. This clause can be
equivalently written in the clausal form as
                                ∀x∀y ¬A(x, y) ∨ R(x, y)|x : H, y : T,                                    (7)
Next, consider another clause in typed FOL as
                               ∀w∀z ¬R(w, z) ∨ S(w, z)|w : M, z : N.                                     (8)
Using the unifier θ = {w/x, z/y}, we can perform typed resolution between the clauses 7 and 8 as
               ¬A(x, y) ∨ R(x, y)|x : H, y : T ¬R(w, z) ∨ S(w, z)|w : M, z : N ,
                                ¬A(x, y) ∨ S(x, y)|x : C, y : D                                          (9)
where C and D, the types of resolvent variables are C ≡ H ⊓M and D ≡ T ⊓N using the following
lemma which is proved in Appendix A. Here, ⊓ indicates unary type intersection (conjunction).
Lemma 1. Resolving two disjunctive clauses c1 and c2 that include complimentary literals
l(x1 , ..., xn )|x1 : T1 , ..., xn : Tn and ¬l(y1 , ..., yn )|y1 : H1 , ..., yn : Hn under the unifier
θ = {x1 /y1 , ..., x2 /y2 } creates a resolvent cres with type variables x1 : T1 ⊓ H1 , ..., xn : Tn ⊓ Tn .
Typed resolution can be directly extended to typed theory resolution in our natural language-based
logical system by resolving literals B(x1 , ..., xn )|x1 : T1 , ..., xn : Tn and D(y1 , ..., yn )|y1 :
H1 , ..., Hn if the LLM identifies the natural language predicate B to entail D, i.e.,
B(x1 , ..., xn ) ⊢LLM D(y1 , ..., yn ) if their unified variables have consistent types. In the next section,
we elaborate on how type consistency is checked in our LLM-TH framework.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 LLM-TH Algorithm
 1: Input: K, q, max proofs, max iters, I, F
 2: proofs ← ∅
 3: P Q ← ∅ // P Q is an initially empty priority queue.
 4: P Q.push(¬q, (1, 1, 0)) // Negation of q has priority (1, 1, 0), P Q is ordered by Equation 15
 5: i ← 0
 6: while (P Q ̸= ∅) ∧ (|proofs| ≤ max proofs) ∧ (i ≤ max iters) do
 7:   c ← P Q.pop()
 8:   if c = ⊥ then
 9:      proofs ← proofs ∪ {(Ac , (ρt (c), ρe (c), ρl (c))} //Ac is the set of ancestors of c, found by
         backtracking up to ¬q
10:   else
11:      βc ← candidate clauses in K with similar arity and different polarity to c
12:      for ctarget ∈ βc do
13:         Perform hyperresolution to compute resolvent cres of c and ctarget using Equation 2
14:         P Q.push(cres , (ρt (cres ), ρe (cres ), ρl (cres )) // cf. Equations 11, 13 and 14
      i←i+1
15: Output: proofs



3.1   LLM-TH A LGORITHM

We present LLM-TH, an algorithm for efficient logical commonsense reasoning that extends the-
ory resolution to LLM-based reasoning with predicates of arbitrary arity, hyperresolution and type
inference. Its workflow is presented in Figures 1 and 2, Algorithm 1, and explained in Appendix E.

Problem Definition Let Q denote a set of queries and K represent a knowledge base (KB) com-
prising a set of axioms and facts, a set of intended repair axioms I, and a set of forbidden repair
axioms F, all expressed in natural language logic and clausal form with arbitrary predicate arities.
For each query q ∈ Q, LLM-TH identifies a set of proofs, denoted as proofs. Each proof f ∈ proofs
consists of a subset of clauses in K, and is assigned a priority score ρ.

Algorithm To prove K entails the query q via resolution, we need to show that repeatedly using the
resolution rule on K ∧ ¬q leads to a contradiction, and is thus unsatisfiable. Following the backward
chaining paradigm that offers efficiency benefits (Poole & Mackworth, 2010), we pick ¬q as the first
                                                                                                       W|c|
active clause to be resolved with a clause from K. At each step, given an active clause c = i=1 li
                                                                                          W|ctarget |
where each li is a literal of arbitrary arity, any clause ctarget ∈ K as ctarget = i=1                ltargeti is
considered a candidate clause to be theory resolved with c, yielding the resolvent cres , if at least one
(li , ltargeti ) pair can be formed where li and ltargeti have equal arities and different polarities. One
can lift this polarity restriction for theory resolutions to allow implicit negation in the language of
the predicate (e.g.,“not spicy”) in contrast to explicit logical negation (e.g., ¬“spicy”). As K is often
large and expands further with new resolvents being derived as resolution advances, efficiency is a
key desideratum, which LLM-TH achieves by prioritizing candidate clauses based on two criteria:
(i) type consistency and (ii) predicate entailment between the active and candidate clauses.
Restricting the Space of Resolutions with Typing: The first mechanism used by LLM-TH to improve
efficiency is the use of typed theory resolution to restrict the space of allowable resolutions. In typed
theory resolution, the types of variables in the resolvent clause are determined by the conjunction of
the types of variables in their parent clause, hence LLM-TH prioritizes clauses with variable types
that align with the active clause to encourage valid types. For example, if two candidate clauses are
considered to be resolved with an active clause of variable type “Animal”, LLM-TH prioritizes a
candidate clause with a unifying variable type “Mammal” over one with type “Vehicle”.
LLM-TH leverages the commonsense knowledge of the LLM to obtain the probability of entailment
between the variable types. Formally, for the pair of literals with equal arities (l, ltarget ), denoting
the set of argument types of l and ltarget as T = {ti } and T ′ = {t′i } respectively, the plausibility of
unifying each of their variables can be obtained by calculating the entailment probabilities between
each ti and t′i . Since entailment is an asymmetric relation and its direction is unknown, we need to


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


calculate both ti ⊢LLM t′i and t′i ⊢LLM ti to obtain the type consistency score. The average of type
entailment scores for arguments determines ρtype (cres ), the overall type priority score for cres .
                                         1
                      ρtype (cres ) =        Σi (max{p(ti ⊢LLM t′i ), p(t′i ⊢LLM ti )}) .             (10)
                                       |Ti |
Since the main objective is to find the most plausible proofs, i.e., the sequences of most plausible
theory resolution steps, we define the first entry of our priority score for each cres as the overall type
consistency score of all resolution steps beginning from ¬q that led to its derivation. Let Pcres be the
set of parent clauses of cres ; the proof type consistency score of cres is inductively defined as
                                                                  !
                                                    Y
                                     ρt (cres ) =         ρt (c′ ) · ρtype
                                                                       cres .                         (11)
                                                  c′ ∈Pcres
Resolution Ordering based on Predicate Entailment: Assigning the type consistency scores prunes
the resolution search space ensuring that only clauses with compatible argument types will be con-
sidered for resolution. To further enhance efficiency, LLM-TH prioritizes the remaining clauses
based on their potential for being part of a plausible proof considering their predicate entailment.
As explained, in our LLM-based theory resolution framework, LLM entailment is used to identify
unsatisfiability of clauses. Therefore, the greater probability the LLM assigns to ltarget entailing l,
the more plausible it becomes to resolve l and ltarget . Therefore we define the plausibility of a theory
resolution step between c and ctarget by resolving literals l and ltarget generating cres , denoted by ρentail
                                                                                                        cres
                                     
                                     1                    if (ltarget ⊢ l) ∈ I,
                          ρentail
                            cres =    0                    if ¬(ltarget ⊢ l) ∈ F,                       (12)
                                      p(ltarget ⊢LLM l) otherwise .
                                     

These plausibility scores can help us prioritize the resolvent clauses based on their predicate entail-
ment. For example, in the scenario depicted in Figure 1, resolving “Sicilian” with “Mediterranean”
results in a higher entailment score compared to resolving “Mustard-flavored” with “Mediter-
ranean”. Hence, it is prudent to prioritize the former resolvent, as it is more likely to contribute
to the final proof. As the definition of the overall proof type consistency score, we can compute the
overall predicate entailment score inductively to obtain the second entry of our priority score as
                                                                 !
                                                  Y
                                   e                      e ′
                                  ρ (cres ) =           ρ (c ) · ρentail
                                                                       cres .                           (13)
                                                 c′ ∈Pcres
Ultimately, among equally plausible proofs, we prioritize shorter ones that circumvent unnecessary
steps. We define the proof length score, a third priority score that accounts for this preference. The
proof length score of cres is derived inductively from the maximum length of its parent clauses as
                                     ρl (cres ) = 1 + ′max ρl (c′ ).                               (14)
                                                        c ∈Pcres

Each resolvent cres is assigned the priority tuple (ρt (cres ), ρe (cres ), ρl (cres )) and then pushed to the
priority queue P Q, in which the order of clauses is specified as
            c1 ⪯ c2 ⇐⇒ [ρt (c1 ) > ρt (c2 )] ∨ [(ρt (c1 ) = ρt (c2 )) ∧ (ρe (c1 ) > ρe (c2 ))]            (15)
                    ∨ [(ρt (c1 ) = ρt (c2 )) ∧ (ρe (c1 ) = ρe (c2 )) ∧ (ρl (c1 ) < ρl (c2 )].
By applying this prioritization scheme, the type consistency priority score first applies a hard filter to
avoid exploration of resolvents with invalid types, and the predicate entailment and length priorities
together enable an efficient inference via LLM-based theory resolution. These efficiency enhance-
ments enable LLM-TH to be applied to large-scale KBs. Furthermore, it is able to reason over
incomplete KBs by benefiting from the commonsense knowledge of the LLM to fill in the missing
axioms by identifying entailing predicates in the theory resolution process.
At the start of each iteration of LLM-TH, the clause with the highest rank in P Q becomes the
active clause. When a resolution step yields a contradiction, the proof and its respective priority
score are added to the set of found proofs by backtracking the ancestor clauses. The algorithm
terminates when either a certain number of proofs are found or the maximum number of iterations
is exceeded. Notably, LLM-TH is not limited to proving a single query; instead, it finds a set of
proofs and assigns a strength score to each. This feature enables it to evaluate the likelihood of each
query being entailed, which is critical for tasks requiring ranking, such as answering multiple-choice
questions. Furthermore, LLM-TH can reason on incomplete KBs by using the LLM’s commonsense
knowledge to fill in the missing axioms by identifying entailed predicates via theory resolution.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4       F IXING E RRONEOUS R ESOLUTIONS IN LLM-TH
LLM-TH enables verification of the reasoning process by providing access to atomic resolution
steps. Therefore, if an incorrect theory resolution step is identified, the source of failure can be
provably repaired. In the example of Figure 1, the LLM’s mistake in assigning a low probability for
“Souvlaki” to entail “Mediterranean” leads to a missed resolution. Also, incorrectly considering
“cuttlefish” to entail being a “fish” leads to an incorrect resolution. To fix both errors, we (1) insert
the missing axiom ∀y“Souvlaki”(y) =⇒ “Mediterranean”(y) to I and (2) insert the forbidden
axiom“cuttlefish” ⊬LLM “fish” to F. The formal propositions below are proved in Appendix B.
Proposition 1. Consider proof Pcϕ using axiom ϕ that derives clause c. For missing LLM reasoning
                                                                    ′
axiom ϕ, a Repair Axiom ϕ′ can be inserted into I such that Pcϕ will be produced before Pcϕ .
Proposition 2. Consider proof Pcϕ using axiom ϕ that derives clause c. For any incorrect LLM
reasoning axiom ϕ, a Repair Axiom ϕ′ can be inserted into F such that Pcϕ will receive priority 0.

5       E XPERIMENTS
We empirically evaluate LLM-TH1 on three different tasks representing commonsense reasoning
with KBs on different datasets and compare it against variations of four different baselines to com-
pare them from different aspects by answering the following questions:

          • RQ1-Scalability: How does the reasoning performance of LLM-TH compare to baselines
            when reasoning with large, but complete knowledge bases?
          • RQ2-Reasoning with incomplete KBs: How effectively do LLM-TH and the baselines
            use the LLM’s commonsense knowledge to compensate for the incompleteness of the KB?
          • RQ3-Efficiency: How is the efficiency of LLM-TH influenced by typed hyperresolution?

5.1       TASKS AND DATASETS D ESCRIPTION

          • Preference reasoning: An exemplar commonsense reasoning task is providing recommen-
            dations using natural language statements of user preferences and restrictions. For this task,
            we use Recipe-MPR (Zhang et al., 2023a), a dataset consisting of 500 queries, e.g., “I want
            French food, but I’m on a budget” and five-way recipe options. This dataset covers a broad
            range of commonsense reasoning skills such as temporal and analogical reasoning.
          • Multi-domain Deductive reasoning: Since established datasets for logical commonsense
            reasoning with LLMs, e.g., ProntoQA (Saparov & He, 2022) and COPA-SSE (Brassard
            et al., 2022), have small KBs with less than 20 facts and axioms per query, we find them
            insufficient for evaluating the reasoning capability on large KBs. Thus, following the
            approach in Saparov & He (2022), we create a deductive reasoning dataset using man-
            ually written commonsense axioms and ground facts sampled from Wikidata knowledge
            graph (Vrandečić & Krötzsch, 2014). This dataset contains more than 32k rules about five
            different domains: Biological entities, foods, vehicles, drugs and diseases, and sports, and
            1000 queries that answering them requires 2 to 7 reasoning steps. We release this dataset
            to encourage research on LLM-based commonsense reasoning on large-scale KBs.
          • Geographical QA: Using the same approach for generating the multi-domain deductive
            reasoning dataset, we create a KB about geographical entities, e.g., cities, deserts, muse-
            ums, etc. containing more than 12k rules and 500 queries which we also release.

5.2       BASELINES AND E VALUATION

We use established methodologies for eliciting more faithful reasoning from the LLMs as our com-
parison baselines: (a) zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022), (b) few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022), and
(c) RAG (Lewis et al., 2020b) using a dense retriever (Song et al., 2020) to find relevant rules from
the KB and prompting the LLM with zero-shot CoT and (d) few-shot CoT. (e) To enable compari-
son to semantic parsing (Pan et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023), we provide them with an ideal KB
    1
        https://github.com/atoroghi/LLM-TH


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 1: Reasoning performance of methods across the three datasets on complete KBs.

                                  Preference Reasoning                          Deductive Reasoning                                                   Geographical QA
 Method
                          Accuracy       RS Macro      RS Micro       Accuracy         RS Macro     RS Micro        Accuracy                                RS Macro           RS Micro
 GPT-3.5 Turbo
   Zero-Shot CoT          0.86±0.04        0.60           0.80        0.69±0.02          0.45          0.48         0.71±0.03                                   0.60             0.77
   Few-Shot CoT           0.87±0.02        0.65           0.81        0.65±0.03          0.45          0.48         0.82±0.02                                   0.50             0.53
   RAG + Zero-Shot CoT       NA            NA             NA          0.68±0.02          0.85          0.92         0.74±0.01                                   0.80             0.88
   RAG + Few-Shot CoT        NA            NA             NA          0.69±0.02          0.65          0.84         0.83±0.02                                   0.75             0.84
 Gemini-1.5-Flash
   Zero-Shot CoT          0.84±0.04        0.60           0.75        0.60±0.01          0.40          0.81         0.78±0.03                                   0.20             0.51
   Few-Shot CoT           0.86±0.02        0.55           0.79        0.66±0.05          0.20          0.71         0.79±0.02                                   0.25             0.54
   RAG + Zero-Shot CoT       NA            NA             NA          0.78±0.02          0.85          0.93         0.79±0.03                                   0.50             0.72
   RAG + Few-Shot CoT        NA            NA             NA          0.86±0.04          0.45          0.72         0.78±0.03                                   0.25             0.47
 Llama3 70B
    Zero-Shot CoT         0.87±0.01        0.55           0.80        0.80±0.03          0.15          0.77         0.78±0.01                                   0.25             0.57
    Few-Shot CoT          0.91±0.01        0.70           0.84        0.78± 0.02         0.55          0.58         0.87±0.02                                   0.45             0.45
    RAG + Zero-Shot CoT      NA            NA             NA          0.78±0.01          0.50          0.81         0.87±0.030                                  0.40             0.65
    RAG + Few-Shot CoT       NA            NA             NA          0.80±0.02          0.75          0.80         0.91±0.02                                   0.65             0.71
 Mixtral 46.7B
   Zero-Shot CoT          0.79±0.03        0.60           0.84        0.59±0.02          0.30          0.66         0.71±0.02                                   0.50             0.70
   Few-Shot CoT           0.74±0.02        0.65           0.83        0.67±0.01          0.45          0.53         0.80±0.01                                   0.45             0.49
   RAG + Zero-Shot CoT       NA            NA             NA          0.65±0.02          0.65          0.81         0.66±0.07                                   0.25             0.51
   RAG + Few-Shot CoT        NA            NA             NA          0.46±0.03          0.30          0.43         0.70±0.06                                   0.50             0.65
 VERA (T5 5B)               0.86           NA             NA             0.76            NA             NA                     0.68                              NA              NA
 Semantic Parsing            NA            NA             NA             NA              NA             NA                     0.05                              NA              NA
 LLM-TH (BART 406M)         0.84           0.90           0.94           1.00            1.00          1.00                    1.00                             1.00             1.00



including all axioms necessary to answer a perfect semantic parse of the query (cf. Appendix C). (e)
We also compare against (f) VERA (Liu et al., 2023), a method for estimating commonsense plau-
sibility of statements. VERA estimates a score in the range (0, 1), and we consider a score greater
(smaller) than 0.5 as a True (False) prediction. Except VERA which uses T5 (Raffel et al., 2020),
we use different common LLMs for other baselines: (1) Gemini 1.5-flash, (2) Llama3 (70B), (3)
Mixtral (56.7B), and (4) GPT3.5 Turbo, while using BART large (Lewis et al., 2020a)2 (406 M) and
RoBERTa large (Liu et al., 2019)3 (365 M) tuned on MNLI (Williams et al., 2018) dataset to obtain
entailment probabilities for LLM-TH. We use pyDatalog4 to perform hyperresolution for grounding
on the KB facts and use Gemini 1.5-flash to convert natural language axioms to clausal form.
We evaluate the reasoning performance based on both, (1) the correctness of the final answer, mea-
sured by accuracy, and (2) the correctness of the reasoning process by evaluating proofs using the
reasoning score (RS) (Kazemi et al., 2023) metric which is manually calculated for 20 randomly
chosen responses in which the final answer was correct. RS is typically assessed as a binary deci-
sion based on whether the predicted proof is entirely aligned with the ground truth proof (Kazemi
et al., 2023; Lee & Hwang, 2024), which leads to both a single erroneous step and wholly flawed
reasoning being penalized equally. To achieve a more granular evaluation of the proofs, we calculate
both the conventional macro RS and following the idea of Min et al. (2023), we propose a metric
which we call micro RS. Let P be a provided proof and P ∗ a valid ground truthP proof. Using the
indicator function I, we define the micro RS for each query as RSMicro = |P1 | p∈P I(p ∈ P ∗ ).
Table 2: Reasoning performance on incomplete KBs. Numbers in paren-                                                                                        Untyped
                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                      Reasoning Steps (Average)


thesis indicate the difference with the method’s performance on a complete                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                           Typed
KB (Table 1) with ↓ (↑) showing a decrease (increase).                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                  6
                                   Deductive Reasoning                             Geographical QA                                                4
 Method
                           Zero-Shot CoT           Few-Shot CoT         Zero-Shot CoT            Few-Shot CoT
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                  0 Deductive Reasoning    Geographical QA
 GPT-3.5-Turbo            0.65±0.01 (0.03↓)       0.54±0.04 (0.15↓)    0.60±0.02 (0.14↓)        0.64±0.03 (0.19↓)                                                    Dataset
 Gemini-1.5-Flash         0.73±0.02 (0.05↓)       0.73±0.01 (0.13↓)    0.68±0.02 (0.11↓)        0.66±0.02 (0.11↓)
 Llama3 70B               0.77±0.02 (0.01↓)       0.77±0.01 (0.03↓)    0.66±0.02 (0.21↓)        0.66±0.02 (0.25↓)          Figure 3: Influence of
 Mixtral 46.7B            0.50±0.04 (0.14↓)       0.48±0.02 (0.03↑)    0.53±0.03 (0.12↓)        0.58±0.03 (0.13↓)          typing on the efficiency
 LLM-TH (BART 406M)               0.97                    -                     0.95                    -
                                                                                                                           of the inference algo-
 LLM-TH (RoBERTa 356M)            0.96                    -                     0.92                    -
                                                                                                                           rithm.
   2
     https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-mnli
   3
     https://huggingface.co/FacebookAI/roberta-large-mnli
   4
     https://pypi.org/project/pyDatalog/


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.2.1 RQ1: Reasoning Performance on Complete KB Before we proceed to the general case
of reasoning with incomplete KBs, we first aim to study whether the typed hyperresolution method-
ology of LLM-TH can scale to answer queries in an ideal and complete, yet large KB in comparison
to the baselines. These results serve as an upper bound for incomplete KB reasoning performance
and also allow us to distinguish failure modes related to reasoning from failure modes related to
KB incompleteness assessed in subsequent experiments. As the results in Table 1 indicate, on the
preference reasoning task with a small and implicit KB of the five available recipe options, although
zero-shot and few-shot CoT with a large LLM such as Llama 3 (70B) yield superior accuracy, LLM-
TH still shows a reasonable performance, exceeding zero-shot and few-shot CoT with Mixtral and
is competitive with zero-shot CoT using GPT3.5 and Gemini despite using a substantially smaller
LLM. For the reasoning scores, LLM-TH exhibits a more correct and faithful reasoning process than
all other methods. On this task, since the dataset does not contain an explicit KB, RAG-based base-
lines reduce to zero-shot and few-shot CoT. On larger KBs of deductive reasoning and geographical
QA tasks, the limitations of existing LLM-based methods are revealed as none of them compare to
the accuracy of LLM-TH. Furthermore, they all obtain imperfect reasoning scores, reflecting their
hallucinations and reasoning errors. On these datasets, LLM-TH performs standard resolution which
is a sound and complete inference rule, as reflected in the results. However, the existing semantic
parsing methods that use off-the-shelf theorem provers (intended for mathematical theorem proving)
are not scalable to these large instance-heavy KBs, even with an ideal parser. While complete KBs
are impractical in real-world use cases, results of this experiment highlight that existing baselines,
as opposed to LLM-TH, exhibit reasoning failures on large scale KBs even when they are complete.


5.2.2 RQ2: Reasoning Performance on Incomplete KBs To enable reasoning over practical
KBs, leveraging the commonsense reasoning ability of the LLM to compensate for KB incomplete-
ness is essential. To assess this capability, in our experiments on deductive reasoning and geographi-
cal QA datasets that have explicit KBs, we simulate KB incompleteness by omitting one of the rules
used in the proof of each query, to test whether the LLM can use its commonsense knowledge to
deduce, e.g., “paying taxes” implies “earning revenue”. Since few-shot and zero-shot CoT meth-
ods rely solely on the internal LLM knowledge, they are irrelevant to this RQ that examines the role
of KB incompleteness. Hence, we compare LLM-TH against variations of RAG with zero-shot and
few-shot CoT prompting. Results in Table 2 show that using the theory hyperresolution framework,
LLM-TH is able to achieve significantly higher accuracies compared to the RAG-based baselines
that clearly struggle with incompleteness compared to RAG results for complete KBs in Table 1.
In order to provide further insight into the failure cases of RAG-based methods and the limitations
of LLM-TH, we conduct a series of additional experiments with RAG-based methods using an ideal
retriever, as well as robustness of different methods to longer reasoning chains and different levels
of KB incompleteness in Appendix D. We provide comparative anecdotal examples in Appendix H.


5.2.3 RQ3: Influence of Typing on Efficiency To verify the efficiency enhancement offered by
introducing type information to the hyperresolution framework of LLM-TH, we perform an ablation
experiment on the complete KB, by comparing the average number of reasoning steps that LLM-TH
takes to find the answers with its untyped variant that does not consider types in prioritization. In
summary, the results of this experiment shown in Figure 3 , indicate that using the typed hyperreso-
lution framework, a considerable improvement is obtained in the efficiency of the reasoning process
by reducing the number of reasoning steps required to find the answers to almost half compare to
the untyped variant. This efficiency benefit is crucial in interacting with vast real-world KBs.

6   C ONCLUSION
We proposed LLM-TH for logical commonsense reasoning with large and incomplete KBs. Using
theory resolution, LLM-TH integrates LLM commonsense knowledge into the resolution inference
rule to enable reasoning over incomplete KBs with arbitrary predicates. LLM-TH shows strong
performance: it matches or outperforms baselines that use orders of magnitude larger LLMs; its use
of an LLM-based typed hyperresolution approach yields high efficiency gains; and its transparency
and repairability establish it as a solution for factual and correct reasoning on large-scale KBs. In
summary, LLM-TH holds promise to significantly reduce hallucinations in LLM-based reasoning.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Acknowledgments This work was supported by LG Electronics, Toronto AI Lab Grant Ref No.
2024-0565. We also thank Roxana Li for her valuable assistance in evaluations.

Ethics Statement: By introducing LLM-TH, we tried to enhance the transparency and increasing
control over the reasoning process of LLM-based logical commonsense reasoning. However, draw-
ing logically valid conclusions does not necessarily mean that all axioms, rules, and the internal
commonsense knowledge of the LLM which are leveraged in the reasoning process follow ethical
requirements. A responsible and credible usage of LLM-TH, like any other reasoning framework,
requires careful considerations and assessments of the knowledge base, the underlying LLM, and
the user-defined axioms to ensure desired unbiased and ethical performance.

Reproducibility Statement: We release all our code and data in the supplementary materials and
the LLM-TH repository5 . We also explain the experimental setup and dataset descriptions in Section
5, and include all prompts utilized for the LLM usage in Appendix G, as well as in the supplementary
materials.

R EFERENCES
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh, Am-
  brose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
  in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38546–38556,
  2022.
Marco Baroni, Armand Joulin, Allan Jabri, German Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Klemen Si-
 monic, and Tomas Mikolov. Commai: Evaluating the first steps towards a useful general ai. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1701.08954, 2017.
Peter Baumgartner. An ordered theory resolution calculus. In Logic Programming and Automated
  Reasoning: International Conference LPAR’92 St. Petersburg, Russia, July 15–20, 1992 Proceed-
  ings 3, pp. 119–130. Springer, 1992.
Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, et al. Piqa: Reasoning about physical com-
  monsense in natural language. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 34, pp. 7432–7439, 2020.
Ana Brassard, Benjamin Heinzerling, Pride Kavumba, and Kentaro Inui. Copa-sse: Semi-structured
  explanations for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources
  and Evaluation Conference, pp. 3994–4000, 2022.
Chin-Liang Chang and Richard Char-Tung Lee. Symbolic logic and mechanical theorem proving.
  Academic press, 2014.
Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan
  Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM
  Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(3):1–45, 2024.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large lan-
  guage models for interpretable logical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09712, 2022.
Ernest Davis and Gary Marcus. Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in artificial
  intelligence. Communications of the ACM, 58(9):92–103, 2015.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean
  Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of
  transformers on compositionality. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Willis Guo, Armin Toroghi, and Scott Sanner. Cr-lt-kgqa: A knowledge graph question an-
 swering dataset requiring commonsense reasoning and long-tail knowledge. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.01395, 2024.
   5
       https://github.com/atoroghi/LLM-TH


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Weinan He, Canming Huang, Yongmei Liu, and Xiaodan Zhu. Winologic: A zero-shot logic-based
 diagnostic dataset for winograd schema challenge. In Proceedings of the 2021 conference on
 empirical methods in natural language processing, pp. 3779–3789, 2021.
Jie Huang and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Towards reasoning in large language models: A survey.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10403, 2022.
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong
  Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. A survey on hallucination in large language
  models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05232,
  2023.
Mete Ismayilzada, Debjit Paul, Syrielle Montariol, Mor Geva, and Antoine Bosselut. Crow: Bench-
 marking commonsense reasoning in real-world tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15239, 2023.
Mehran Kazemi, Najoung Kim, Deepti Bhatia, Xin Xu, and Deepak Ramachandran. Lambada:
 Backward chaining for automated reasoning in natural language. In Proceedings of the 61st
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
 6547–6568, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Stefanie Krause and Frieder Stolzenburg. Commonsense reasoning and explainable artificial in-
  telligence using large language models. In European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  302–319. Springer, 2023.
Jinu Lee and Wonseok Hwang. Symba: Symbolic backward chaining for multi-step natural language
   reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12806, 2024.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the
 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7871–7880, 2020a.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020b.
Hugo Liu and Push Singh. Conceptnet—a practical commonsense reasoning tool-kit. BT technology
  journal, 22(4):211–226, 2004.
Jiacheng Liu, Wenya Wang, Dianzhuo Wang, Noah A Smith, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Ha-
   jishirzi. Vera: A general-purpose plausibility estimation model for commonsense statements.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03695, 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual pre-
  cision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 12076–12100, 2023.
Robert C Moore. The role of logic in knowledge representation and commonsense reasoning. SRI
  International. Artificial Intelligence Center, 1982.
Theo Olausson, Alex Gu, Ben Lipkin, Cedegao Zhang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Joshua Tenenbaum,
  and Roger Levy. Linc: A neurosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combining language
  models with first-order logic provers. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5153–5176, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Wang. Logic-lm: Empowering large lan-
  guage models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 3806–3824, 2023.

Mete Ismayilzada Debjit Paul, Syrielle Montariol, Mor GevaO, and Antoine Bosselut. Crow: Bench-
 marking commonsense reasoning in real-world tasks.

Aske Plaat, Annie Wong, Suzan Verberne, Joost Broekens, Niki van Stein, and Thomas Back. Rea-
  soning with large language models, a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11511, 2024.

David L Poole and Alan K Mackworth. Artificial Intelligence: foundations of computational agents.
  Cambridge University Press, 2010.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Nidhi Rastogi and Mohammed J Zaki. Personal health knowledge graphs for patients. In Workshop–
  Personal Health Knowledge Graphs (PHKG2020), 2020.

Shaina Raza, Mizanur Rahman, Safiullah Kamawal, Armin Toroghi, Ananya Raval, Farshad Navah,
  and Amirmohammad Kazemeini. A comprehensive review of recommender systems: Transition-
  ing from theory to practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13699, 2024.

John Alan Robinson. A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle. Journal of the
  ACM (JACM), 12(1):23–41, 1965.

Scott Sanner and Sheila A McIlraith. An ordered theory resolution calculus for hybrid reasoning in
  first-order extensions of description logic. In KR, pp. 100–111, 2006.

Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan LeBras, and Yejin Choi. Socialiqa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09728, 2019.

Abulhair Saparov and He He. Language models are greedy reasoners: A systematic formal analysis
  of chain-of-thought. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.

Abulhair Saparov, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Vishakh Padmakumar, Nitish Joshi, Mehran Kazemi,
  Najoung Kim, and He He. Testing the general deductive reasoning capacity of large language
  models using ood examples. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Murray Shanahan. Talking about large language models. Communications of the ACM, 67(2):68–79,
 2024.

Ke Shen and Mayank Kejriwal. An experimental study measuring the generalization of fine-tuned
  language representation models across commonsense reasoning benchmarks. Expert Systems, 40
  (5):e13243, 2023.

Shikhar Singh, Nuan Wen, Yu Hou, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Te-Lin Wu, Xuezhe Ma, and Nanyun
  Peng. Com2sense: A commonsense reasoning benchmark with complementary sentences. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.00969, 2021.

Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-Yan Liu. Mpnet: Masked and permuted pre-
  training for language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
  16857–16867, 2020.

Mark E Stickel. Automated deduction by theory resolution. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 1(4):
 333–355, 1985.

SM Tonmoy, SM Zaman, Vinija Jain, Anku Rani, Vipula Rawte, Aman Chadha, and Amitava Das.
 A comprehensive survey of hallucination mitigation techniques in large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2401.01313, 2024.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Armin Toroghi and Scott Sanner. Bayesian inference with complex knowledge graph evidence.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 20550–20558,
  2024.
Armin Toroghi, Griffin Floto, Zhenwei Tang, and Scott Sanner. Bayesian knowledge-driven cri-
  tiquing with indirect evidence. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference
  on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 1838–1842, 2023.
Armin Toroghi, Willis Guo, Ali Pesaranghader, and Scott Sanner. Verifiable, debuggable, and re-
  pairable commonsense logical reasoning via llm-based theory resolution. In Proceedings of the
  2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 6634–6652, 2024a.
Armin Toroghi, Willis Guo, Mohammad Mahdi Abdollah Pour, and Scott Sanner. Right for right
  reasons: Large language models for verifiable commonsense knowledge graph question answer-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01390, 2024b.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kamb-
  hampati. Planbench: An extensible benchmark for evaluating large language models on planning
  and reasoning about change. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communi-
  cations of the ACM, 57(10):78–85, 2014.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
  tence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
  ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 1112–1122, 2018.
Jundong Xu, Hao Fei, Liangming Pan, Qian Liu, Mong-Li Lee, and Wynne Hsu. Faithful logical
  reasoning via symbolic chain-of-thought. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 13326–13365, 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Haochen Zhang, Anton Korikov, Parsa Farinneya, Mohammad Mahdi Abdollah Pour, Manasa
  Bharadwaj, Ali Pesaranghader, Xi Yu Huang, Yi Xin Lok, Zhaoqi Wang, Nathan Jones, et al.
  Recipe-mpr: A test collection for evaluating multi-aspect preference-based natural language re-
  trieval. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
  opment in Information Retrieval, pp. 2744–2753, 2023a.
Yanfang Zhang, Yiliu Sun, Yibing Zhan, Dapeng Tao, Dacheng Tao, and Chen Gong. Large lan-
  guage models as an indirect reasoner: Contrapositive and contradiction for automated reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03667, 2024.
Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu, Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao,
  Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, et al. Siren’s song in the ai ocean: a survey on hallucination in large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01219, 2023b.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
  mans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Lemma 1. Resolving two disjunctive clauses c1 and c2 that include complimentary literals
l(x1 , ..., xn )|x1 : T1 , ..., xn : Tn and ¬l(y1 , ..., yn )|y1 : H1 , ..., yn : Hn under the unifier
θ = {x1 /y1 , ..., x2 /y2 } creates a resolvent cres with type variables x1 : T1 ⊓ H1 , ..., xn : Tn ⊓ Tn .

Proof. Assume c1 to be A(x1 , ..., xn )∨l(x1 , ..., xn )|x1 : T1 , ..., xn : Tn and c2 to be ¬l(y1 , ..., yn )∨
B(y1 , ..., yn )|y1 : H1 , ..., yn : Hn . Following 5 and 6, we can rewrite these clauses in implication
form FOL by adding type predicates as
                                        n
                                        ^
                     ∀x1 , ..., ∀xn         Ti (xi ) ∧ ¬A(x1 , ..., xn ) =⇒ l(x1 , ..., xn ),              (16)
                                        i=1
                                          ^n
                        ∀y1 , ..., ∀yn          Hi (yi ) ∧ l(y1 , ..., yn ) =⇒ B(y1 , ..., yn ),           (17)
                                          i=1


Converting these clauses to the disjunctive form yields
                                           n
                                           _
                        ∀x1 , ..., ∀xn          ¬Ti (xi ) ∨ A(x1 , ..., xn ) ∨ l(x1 , ..., xn ),           (18)
                                         i=1
                                         n
                                         _
                       ∀y1 , ..., ∀yn          ¬Hi (yi ) ∨ ¬l(y1 , ..., yn ) ∨ B(y1 , ..., yn ).           (19)
                                         i=1

Now, we can resolve l(x1 , ..., xn ) with ¬l(y1 , ..., yn ) under the unifier θ = {x1 /y1 , ..., x2 /y2 } as
 Wn                                                   Wn
  i=1 ¬Ti (xi ) ∨ A(x1 , ..., xn ) ∨ l(x1 , ..., xn )   i=1 ¬Hi (xi ) ∨ ¬l(y1 , ..., yn ) ∨ B(y1 , ..., yn ) ,
                  Wn               Wn
                   i=1 ¬Ti (xi ) i=1 ¬Hi (xi ) ∨ A(x1 , ..., xn ) ∨ B(x1 , ..., xn )                           ,
                                                                                                           (20)
which can be rewritten as
                                 n
                                 ^
                ∀x1 , ..., ∀xn         Ti (xi ) ∧ Hi (xi ) =⇒ A(x1 , ..., xn ) ∨ B(x1 , ..., xn ).         (21)
                                 i=1

Therefore, the unary type predicates for each xi becomes the conjunction of the types from their
parent clauses, which in our typed FOL notation, can be equivalently written as

             ∀x1 , ..., ∀xn A(x1 , ..., xn ) ∨ B(x1 , ..., xn )|x1 : T1 ⊓ H1 , ..., xn : Tn ⊓ Hn .         (22)



B    P ROOF OF R EPAIRABILITY OF LLM-TH

Recall from Section 3.1 that we have two distinct sets of a set of repair axioms:

       • Intended repair axioms I: these axioms are used to provide missing information to the
         KB and are assigned priority score 1 (cf. Equation 12) during inference since they are user-
         provided and known to be true. A proof with a repair axiom will always receive higher
         priority over a proof using an equivalent LLM inference (during theory resolution), since
         the equivalent LLM inference from entailment necessarily has priority score < 1.
       • Forbidden repair axioms F: these axioms are intended to override erroneous LLM in-
         ferences (during theory resolution) and are assigned priority 0 (cf. Equation 12) during
         inference. Any proof that uses such a forbidden axiom will automatically receive priority
         score 0 due to Equation 13.

We now formalize and prove these statements of correctness. We begin by defining a proof Pcϕ =
Pc ∪ {ϕ} as the combined set of clauses Pc and ϕ that derive clause c.


                                                            15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proposition 1. Consider proof Pcϕ using axiom ϕ that derives clause c. For missing LLM reasoning
                                                               ′
axiom ϕ, a Repair Axiom ϕ′ can be inserted into I such that Pcϕ will be produced before Pcϕ .

Proof. We can obtain the proof score ρe (Pcϕ ) of clause c by inductively unrolling Equation 13
for ρe (c) over all ancestor clauses Pcϕ that derive it. This yields a simple product form: ρe (Pcϕ ) =
                                                                               ′
ρentail · c′ ∈Pc ρentail . Now, comparing two different derivations Pcϕ and Pcϕ of c, we can easily show
         Q
 ϕ                c′
                                             ′
                                                 ρentail          ρentail   ρentail
                                                         Q
            ′                       ρe (P ϕ )       ′ ·    ′        ′          ′
that ρe (Pcϕ ) > ρe (Pcϕ ) since ρe (Pcϕ )) = ρϕentail ·Qc′ ∈Pc ρcentail = ρϕentail > 1 given that the explicit Repair
                                         c        ϕ       c ∈Pc    c′        ϕ

Axiom has ρentail
              ϕ′   = 1 (following Equation 13) while the LLM entailment score ρentail
                                                                                 ϕ    < 1. Hence,
              ′
                                               ′
the proof Pc containing the Repair Axiom ϕ will always be given precedence over Pcϕ according
             ϕ

to the total ordering of Equation 15 used to prioritize proofs in the LLM-TH Algorithm 1.
Proposition 2. Consider proof Pcϕ using axiom ϕ that derives clause c. For any incorrect LLM
reasoning axiom ϕ, a Repair Axiom ϕ′ can be inserted into F such that Pcϕ will receive priority 0.

Proof. In the presence of ϕ′ , the priority score assigned to the resolvent clause c, i.e., ρentail
                                                                                             ϕ      will be
set to 0 following Equations 12, which then implies that the priority score of proof Pcϕ must be 0
according to 13), which is the product of priority scores of all constituent clauses of the proof.

In general, priority 0 proofs contain a forbidden or zero probability entailment and should be avoided
at inference time.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C       C OMPARISON TO E XISTING LLM- BASED F ORMAL R EASONING
        BASELINES
Existing formal reasoning methods with LLMs, i.e., semantic parsing methods and methods emulat-
ing inference rules, suffer from two limitations that make them inapplicable to our studied datasets:
(i) they cannot leverage the internal commonsense knowledge of the LLM and only rely on an ex-
plicit and complete rule base, which Recipe-MPR lacks. (ii) They are limited to small KBs that fit
in the LLM context size, but our studied KBs are much larger.
Semantic parsing methods use the LLM to translate the KB and query to symbolic forms. Although
these methods use the LLM solely for translating the NL problem into symbolic format, they in-
clude all facts and axioms to the LLM in the context because they need the LLM to use consistent
predicates and objects in its symbolic translation (otherwise, the symbolic reasoner will not be able
to execute the symbolic problem). in a recent work, Xu et al. (2024) showed that even by including
all facts and axioms in the context, these methods can have very high execution failure rates due to
translation inconsistencies.
Since our large KBs exceed the LLM context limit, we cannot use the LLM in the same manner
that semantic parsing baselines, Logic-LM (Pan et al., 2023) and LINC (Olausson et al., 2023), use
it for the translation process. Therefore, to ensure a fair comparison, we manually converted all
of our KB and queries to the symbolic format supported by Prover9 6 , the FOL theorem prover
that both of these works used. We set the time limit of Prover9 to the maximum time it takes for
LLM-TH to answer the same queries—as it does not support specifying the maximum number of
inference steps. The major difference between LINC and Logic-LM is that the former performs
multiple translations and uses majority voting on their results, but since we are using a perfect KB,
they become equivalent. Similar to Logic-LM, we also experiment with two backup mechanisms
for cases in which the symbolic solver fails: (i) randomly guessing the answer and (ii) using CoT.
When experimenting on our deductive reasoning dataset (KB with about 32k rules), the Prover9
solver crashed and could not reason on problems with such large KB sizes. For the geographical
QA dataset (KB with about 12k rules), the following results were obtained:


                                           Method                                 Accuracy

                Logic-LM / LINC with Perfect Translation (no backup mechanism)      0.05
               Logic-LM / LINC with Perfect Translation and random guess backup     0.61
               Logic-LM / LINC with Perfect Translation and CoT backup (GPT3.5)     0.73

 Table 3: Accuracies obtained by semantic parsing baselines on the geographical reasoning data.


The underlying cause of Logic-LM’s and LINC’s imperfect symbolic reasoning component on these
complete KBs is due to a lack of design and optimization for large KBs with thousands of facts.
To support this claim, it is important to note that the problems used by Logic-LM [2] and LINC
[3] have much smaller KBs—often smaller than 30 facts—for which existing theorem provers like
Prover9 are sufficient as their experiments show. However, LLM-TH is equipped with efficiency
enhancement and prioritization mechanisms such as typing and hyperresolution that significantly
improve reasoning efficiency in these settings.


    6
        https://www.cs.unm.edu/ mccune/prover9/


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D       A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide a set of additional experiments for a more detailed evaluation of the LLM-
TH and the studied baselines. Since the incomplete KB setting is more common in practical use
cases, studying the behavior of different models in this setting is more important than the complete
KB case (which was studied in Section 5.2.1), all additional experiments that are introduced in this
section focus on the incomplete KB case.


D.1       P ERFORMANCE OF RAG- BASED BASELINES WITH I DEAL R ETRIEVAL

In section 5.2.2, we studied the performance of different RAG-based baselines on the incomplete KB
cases on the deductive reasoning and geographical QA cases and showed that LLM-TH considerably
outperforms these baselines. However, it is not clear whether the inferior performance of RAG-based
baselines is due to the failure of the retriever to retrieve the relevant facts and axioms, or that the
LLMs are challenged with indicating the missing commonsense axioms from an incomplete KB and
compensating for them. In this experiment, to have a more fine-grained analysis of the performance
of the RAG-based baselines, we repeat the experiments with these baselines, but this time we ensure
that all the relevant facts and axioms in the ground truth proof are included in the set of retrieved
rules to simulate an ideal retrieval setting.
Results of this experiment are presented in Table 4. As expected, in all cases, the performance of
different methods with ideal retrieval is enhanced considerably, which indicates that the retriever
failure is a critical limitation in the performance of the RAG-based baselines. However, even though
under the ideal retrieval condition, the gap between the performance of the LLM-TH and that of
the RAG-based baselines is narrowed, e.g., Llama3 70B and Gemini 1.5-Flash achieve accuracies of
0.94 and 0.93 with ideal retrieval and few-shot prompting, the accuracies obtained by LLM-TH using
considerably smaller LLMs is still superior. This experiment indicates the restrictions of directly
applying LLMs to the task of logical reasoning on incomplete KBs, as they have limited ability to
correctly identify the missing commonsense axioms to compensate for the KB incompleteness and
provide logical proof, a task that LLM-TH can perform more aptly.

Table 4: Comparison of the performance of RAG-based baselines with an ideal retriever with
the original retriever used. The substantial improvement in results when using an ideal retriever
suggests a notable part of the incorrect answers are due to failure in the retrieval stage. However,
even by using an ideal retriever, the RAG-based baselines cannot outperform LLM-TH, despite using
substantially larger LLMs. These results indicate that existing LLM-based methods are challenged
with the task of reasoning over incomplete KBs, whereas LLM-TH can better identify the missing
axioms and compensate for them.

                                                       Deductive Reasoning                                                       Geographical QA
 Method
                                          Zero-Shot CoT                       Few-Shot CoT                       Zero-Shot CoT                       Few-Shot CoT

                               Ideal Retrieval    Real Retrieval   Ideal Retrieval   Real Retrieval   Ideal Retrieval    Real Retrieval   Ideal Retrieval   Real Retrieval

 GPT-3.5-Turbo                      0.73              0.65              0.67             0.54              0.64              0.60              0.69             0.64
 Gemini-1.5-Flash                   0.85              0.73              0.93             0.73              0.86              0.68              0.86             0.66
 Llama3 70B                         0.87              0.77              0.94             0.77              0.75              0.66              0.89             0.66
 Mixtral 46.7B                      0.67              0.50              0.71             0.48              0.70              0.53              0.68             0.58

 LLM-TH (using BART 406M)             -               0.97                -                  -               -               0.95                -                  -
 LLM-TH (using RoBERTa 356M)          -               0.96                -                  -               -               0.92                -                  -


D.2       ROBUSTNESS OF DIFFERENT M ETHODS TO L ONGER R EASONING C HAINS

As explained in Section 5.1, our deductive reasoning and geographical QA datasets include queries
that answering them requires different number of reasoning steps. Concretely, the deductive reason-
ing dataset contains queries whose reasoning lengths range from 2 to 7, and the geographical QA
dataset contains queries of length 2, 8, and 11. In this experiment, we want to study the robustness
of LLM-TH and the RAG-based baselines against increase in the length of reasoning steps required
to answer queries.


                                                                                  18
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 To this end, we provide a fine-grained analysis of the results provided in Table 2 by evaluating the
 accuracy obtained by each method for each group of queries that require equal number of reasoning
 steps. Results of this experiment for the deductive reasoning and geographical QA datasets are
 provided in Figure 4 and 5 respectively. For clarity of representation, we provide results of zero-shot
 prompting and few-shot prompting with the RAG baselines in separate plots. These results show
 that LLM-TH maintains its superior performance over the baselines across queries with different
 numbers of reasoning steps in most cases. Overall, LLM-TH and most baselines show a proper
 robustness to an increase in the number of reasoning steps. For instance, in the deductive reasoning
 dataset, most methods (including LLM-TH) obtain lower accuracy for queries with a reasoning
 length of 3, compared to the queries with a reasoning length of 4. This suggests that in reasoning
 over the incomplete KB, the difficulty incurred by an increase in the proof length is dominated by the
 difficulty of commonsense reasoning required to relate the query predicates to the correct predicates
 from the KB. For instance, finding the connection between the query predicate “Sold by businesses
 in” to the KB axiom predicate “Consumed by people in” (a query about foods with a proof length
 of 3) is more challenging for these methods than finding the connection between “Can be used
 interchangeably” and “Is prescribed for same condition” (a query about medications with a proof
 length of 4).

       1.40               Deductive Reasoning                                      1.40               Deductive Reasoning
                                               LLM-TH (Bart)                                                               LLM-TH (Bart)
                                               LLM-TH (RoBERTa)                                                            LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
       1.20                                    RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
                                               RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini                1.20                                    RAG+Few-Shot GPT3.5
                                                                                                                           RAG+Few-Shot Gemini
                                               RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3                                                        RAG+Few-Shot Llama3
       1.00                                    RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
                                                                                   1.00                                    RAG+Few-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


       0.80                                                                 Accuracy
                                                                                   0.80
       0.60                                                                        0.60
       0.40                                                                        0.40
       0.20                                                                        0.20
       0.00                                                                        0.00
              2      3         4       5          6             7                         2      3         4       5         6             7
                  Number of Reasoning Steps                                                   Number of Reasoning Steps
                              (a)                                                                         (b)

 Figure 4: Study of robustness of different methods to an increase in the length of reasoning chains
 required to answering queries from the deductive reasoning dataset. Plot (a) compares LLM-TH to
 RAG-based baselines with zero-shot prompting and plot (b) compares it to RAG-based baselines
 with few-shot prompting.


       1.40                Geographical QA                                         1.40                Geographical QA
                                               LLM-TH (Bart)                                                               LLM-TH (Bart)
                                               LLM-TH (RoBERTa)                                                            LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
       1.20                                    RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
                                               RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini                1.20                                    RAG+Few-Shot GPT3.5
                                                                                                                           RAG+Few-Shot Gemini
                                               RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3                                                        RAG+Few-Shot Llama3
       1.00                                    RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
                                                                                   1.00                                    RAG+Few-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


                                                                            Accuracy


       0.80                                                                        0.80
       0.60                                                                        0.60
       0.40                                                                        0.40
       0.20                                                                        0.20
       0.00                                                                        0.00
              2       4            6       8           10                                 2       4            6       8           10
                  Number of Reasoning Steps                                                   Number of Reasoning Steps
                              (a)                                                                         (b)

 Figure 5: Study of robustness of different methods to an increase in the length of reasoning chains
 required to answering queries from the geographical QA dataset. Plot (a) compares LLM-TH to
 RAG-based baselines with zero-shot prompting and plot (b) compares it to RAG-based baselines
 with few-shot prompting.


                                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D.3   ROBUSTNESS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS TO D IFFERENT L EVELS OF KB
      I NCOMPLETENESS

In our previous experiments on the incomplete KB case, we ablated one commonsense axiom to en-
sure no direct connection exists between the query and the KB axioms. However, practical KBs may
suffer from various levels of incompleteness, therefore reasoning on them may require performing
multiple steps of commonsense reasoning to find the connection between the query and KB rules.
In this experiment, we study the robustness of LLM-TH and the RAG-based baselines against differ-
ent levels of KB incompleteness. To this end, we ablate different number of commonsense axioms
from the KB and perform experiments using each method. Considering the number of KB axioms
used in the ground truth proof for each query, the number of rules we can ablate is different. There-
fore, we group queries based on the maximum number of rules that can be ablated, while still a valid
proof can be found for it by using KB facts and axioms.
Results of this experiment for the deductive reasoning and geographical QA datasets are provided
in Figures 6 and 7 respectively. As expected, with an increase in the number of ablated rules,
the commonsense reasoning required to find the connection between the query predicate and the
remaining commonsense axioms from the KB axioms becomes more challenging, resulting in a
drop in the performance of most methods. In particular, we observe that the performance of LLM-
TH using standard NLI models (both BART and RoBERTa) drops drastically with an increase in the
number of required reasoning steps, whereas RAG-based baselines exhibit a stronger robustness to
the KB incompleteness.
This trend stems from the limitation of entailment models in performing multi-step reasoning which
is required to answer queries with an increased level of KB incompleteness. For instance, when only
1 commonsense axiom is ablated from the KB, finding the proof requires theory resolving the query
predicate “Submitted tax forms in” with the predicate “Earned revenue in” from the KB which the
entailment models are capable of. However, when 3 rules are ablated, the required theory resolution
is between “Submitted tax forms in” with “Played in” which requires multiple steps of reasoning
(e.g., “since the person played in a professional sport club which is located in a country, they have
earned income and therefore should have paid taxes in that country which requires submitting tax
forms”.
This multi-step reasoning is beyond the capability of relatively small NLI models that are employed
by LLM-TH. To overcome this limitation, we also experiment LLM-TH by using a larger LLM,
Llama 3.1 (8B). Since Llama 3.1 does not directly provide entailment probabilities, we study two
different methods to obtain entailment probabilities between two predicates: (i) we provide Chain of
thought prompting with few-shot examples, asking the LLM to provide an entailment score between
0 to 1, and (ii) we obtain the joint log probabilities of the sequence “predicate1 entails predicate
2.”. As shown in Figure 4, using the log probability method still does not provide a satisfactory
performance, since this approach also does not offer the required multi-step reasoning. However,
using the chain of thought prompting approach, allows the LLM to perform the multi-step reasoning
and eventually propose a final entailment score which results to a robust performance of LLM-TH in
even higher levels of KB incompleteness, outperforming RAG-based baselines that use even larger
LLMs.


                                                 20
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 1)                                     Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 1)
       1.75                                LLM-TH (Bart)
                                           LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
                                                                                                                      LLM-TH (Bart)
                                                                                                                      LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
                                           LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)               1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)
       1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
                                                                                                                      LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                                                                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5

       1.25
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                                                                  1.25                                RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                                                                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


                                                                           Accuracy
       1.00                                                                       1.00
       0.75                                                                       0.75
       0.50                                                                       0.50
       0.25                                                                       0.25
       0.00                                                                       0.00
              0                                                1                         0                                                1
                  Number of Ablated Rules                                                    Number of Ablated Rules
                             (a)                                                                        (b)
              Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 2)                                     Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 2)
                                           LLM-TH (Bart)                                                              LLM-TH (Bart)
                                           LLM-TH (RoBERTa)                                                           LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
       1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)
                                           LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                                                                  1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)
                                                                                                                      LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5                                                       RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
       1.25                                RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                                                                  1.25                                RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                                                                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


                                                                           Accuracy
       1.00                                                                       1.00
       0.75                                                                       0.75
       0.50                                                                       0.50
       0.25                                                                       0.25
       0.00                                                                       0.00
              0                    1                           2                         0                    1                           2
                  Number of Ablated Rules                                                    Number of Ablated Rules
                             (a)                                                                        (b)
              Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 3)                                     Deductive Reasoning (Max Ablations: 3)
                                           LLM-TH (Bart)                                                              LLM-TH (Bart)
                                           LLM-TH (RoBERTa)                                                           LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
       1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)
                                           LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                                                                  1.50                                LLM-TH (Llama3-log prob)
                                                                                                                      LLM-TH (Llama3-number)
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5                                                       RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
       1.25                                RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                                                                  1.25                                RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini
                                                                                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3
                                           RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral                                                      RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


                                                                           Accuracy


       1.00                                                                       1.00
       0.75                                                                       0.75
       0.50                                                                       0.50
       0.25                                                                       0.25
       0.00                                                                       0.00
              0          1             2                       3                         0          1             2                       3
                  Number of Ablated Rules                                                    Number of Ablated Rules
                             (a)                                                                        (b)

 Figure 6: Study of robustness of different methods to different levels of KB incompleteness on
 the deductive reasoning dataset. Due to the limitation of NLI models in multi-step reasoning, per-
 formance of LLM-TH drops when multiple axioms are ablated from the KB. This restriction is
 addressed when Llama 3.1 (8B) with CoT prompting and few-shot examples is used to obtain the
 entailment scores, resulting in a robust performance from LLM-TH.s


                                                                      21
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       1.40       Geographical QA (Max Ablations: 2)                            1.40       Geographical QA (Max Ablations: 2)
                                            LLM-TH (Bart)                                                            LLM-TH (Bart)
                                            LLM-TH (RoBERTa)                                                         LLM-TH (RoBERTa)
       1.20                                 RAG+Zero-Shot GPT3.5
                                            RAG+Zero-Shot Gemini                1.20                                 RAG+Few-Shot GPT3.5
                                                                                                                     RAG+Few-Shot Gemini
                                            RAG+Zero-Shot Llama3                                                     RAG+Few-Shot Llama3
       1.00                                 RAG+Zero-Shot Mixtral
                                                                                1.00                                 RAG+Few-Shot Mixtral
Accuracy


                                                                         Accuracy
       0.80                                                                     0.80
       0.60                                                                     0.60
       0.40                                                                     0.40
       0.20                                                                     0.20
       0.00                                                                     0.00
              0                    1                         2                         0                    1                        2
                   Number of Ablated Rules                                                  Number of Ablated Rules
                             (a)                                                                      (b)

 Figure 7: Study of robustness of different methods to different levels of KB incompleteness on the
 geographical QA dataset. LLM-TH shows a more robust performance to ablation of commonsense
 axioms in this task, compared to deductive reasoning.


  E        E XPLANATION OF THE LLM-TH A LGORITHM


 In this section, we provide a detailed explanation of the LLM-TH algorithm, presented in Algorithm
 1.
 The algorithm takes as inputs the knowledge base (K), the query (q), a computational budget defined
 by the maximum number of iterations (max iters), the maximum number of found proofs shown by
 max proofs, and two optional sets of repair axioms: (i) the set of intended resolutions denoted by I,
 and (ii) the set of forbidden resolutions shown by F.
 As explained in Section 3.1, LLM-TH is not limited to finding a single proof to the query, but
 rather it can find a number of proofs with different plausibilities, a capability that is necessary for
 answering multiple-choice questions. For example, in the preference reasoning example provided in
 Figure 1, it finds a proof for each of the candidate recipes with a plausibility score assigned to each
 proof, which is used to rank the recipe options.
 The algorithm initializes an empty set, proofs, to store discovered proofs, an iteration counter i, and
 an initially empty priority queue P Q. P Q stores resolvent clauses and orders them according to
 their priority scores, using Equation 15. In the backward chaining approach used in LLM-TH, the
 first clause stored in P Q is ¬q with the priority of (1, 1, 0). The algorithm’s main loop executes
 as long as the priority queue (P Q) is not empty, the maximum proof limit is not reached, and the
 iteration cap is not exceeded. During each iteration, the clause c with the highest priority in P Q is
 dequeued and designated as the active clause. In the initial iteration, since P Q contains only ¬q,
 this clause becomes the first active clause.
 If the active clause is ⊥, the previous resolution step has resulted in a contradiction. The proof can
 then be reconstructed by tracing the ancestors of c, starting from its parent set Pc and continuing up
 to the initial clause ¬q. Once a proof is found, it is added to the set proofs. However, if c ̸= ⊥, the
 algorithm proceeds by selecting clauses to resolve with c. It first identifies βc , the set of candidate
 clauses in K that are resolvable with c. A clause must meet two conditions to be resolvable with c
 in a theory resolution step following Equation 3: (i) it must share the same arity as c, and (ii) it must
 have a different polarity from c. After forming βc , LLM-TH iterates through all clauses ctarget ∈ βc
 and resolves each with c via hyperresolution, as described in Equation 2, to obtain cres . It then forms
 the priority tuple using Equations 11 , 13 , and 14 , and adds cres to P Q based on this priority.
 The algorithm continues until either the maximum number of proofs is found, P Q becomes empty,
 or the maximum allowed number of iterations is reached.


                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    C OMMONSENSE R EASONING WITH LLM S

The general conception that humans have about the world and how it works, often referred to as
commonsense knowledge, and the ability to reason about it, known as commonsense reasoning, are
essential capabilities that average human beings possess. In order to be able to interact with the real
world and humans, AI agents are also required to obtain this knowledge (Baroni et al., 2017; Shen &
Kejriwal, 2023). Therefore, commonsense reasoning has been a central problem in AI over the past
decades (Moore, 1982; Liu & Singh, 2004; Davis & Marcus, 2015). With the advent of language
models, and particularly, transformer-based architectures, models were developed that exhibited a
decent performance on some commonsense reasoning tasks such as physical and social reason-
ing (Bisk et al., 2020; Sap et al., 2019). Further improvements were obtained by scaled language
models, i.e., LLMs, as they exhibited an outstanding capability of commonsense understanding and
reasoning across various evaluation benchmarks (Zhao et al., 2024; Krause & Stolzenburg, 2023;
Guo et al., 2024).
These improvements paved the way for inspecting new aspects of commonsense reasoning, such as
reasoning on problems involving logical inference, a vein of work referred to as complex common-
sense reasoning (Ismayilzada et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2021; He et al., 2021). The introduction of
this line of work shed light on important limitations of LLMs in challenging commonsense reason-
ing tasks. Although LLMs have shown outstanding reasoning performance on simple commonsense
reasoning benchmarks, they struggle with more challenging tasks, such as commonsense reasoning
in real-world use cases (Paul et al.).
These remaining challenges and the risk of reasoning errors restrict the deployability of LLMs in
real-world applications, especially in high-stakes scenarios. Furthermore, LLMs lack the factual
knowledge required to reason in various applications, such as information about recent events or
personal data (Toroghi et al., 2024b). In these applications, factual KBs such as knowledge graphs
have been widely exploited to represent factual knowledge in applications ranging from health-
care (Rastogi & Zaki, 2020) to recommendation (Toroghi et al., 2023; Raza et al., 2024; Toroghi
& Sanner, 2024). Despite the extensive amount of existing work on commonsense reasoning with
LLMs, to the best of our knowledge, no work has targeted the problem of combining commonsense
reasoning with reasoning over factual KBs. This problem is particularly important since LLMs show
factual hallucinations when they lack domain-specific knowledge (Huang et al., 2023; Tonmoy et al.,
2024). In this work, we aim to take complex logical commonsense reasoning task a step further, by
proposing a methodology that leverages both commonsense reasoning knowledge of the LLM, as
well as the factual knowledge of the KB.


G    P ROMPTS U SED F OR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We provide the prompts that we used for the LLMs in the experiments of this paper. They are also
included in our repository along with the implementation code and data.
Prompt for Preference Reasoning Task (Zero-shot and Few-shot CoT)

       Task: You will be given a query that asks for a recipe and five
       options that you have to choose from. Think step by step. First
       state your reason for your choice and then say: "Therefore, the
       selected recipe is <recipe id>.
     Query: {{QUERY}}
     [Examples if few-shot:]


Prompt for Multi-domain Deductive Reasoning Task (Zero-shot and Few-shot CoT)

     Task: You will be given a query about some knowledge graph
     entities in the form of a first order logic predicate that is
     either True or False (for example, "CanHoldIn(Apple, Basket)"
     which means one can hold an apple in a basket). Your task is to
     identify whether the answer to this query is "True" or "False"
     and also provide a proof of the answer. First, state your proof
     mentioning the rules you used and then say: "Therefore, the


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    answer is True" or "Therefore, the answer is False". Think step
    by step.
    Query: {{QUERY}}
    [Examples if few-shot:]

Prompt for Multi-domain Deductive Reasoning (RAG with Zero-shot and Few-shot CoT)

    Task: You will be given a query about some knowledge graph
    entities in the form of a first order logic predicate that is
    either True or False (for example, "CanHoldIn(Apple, Basket)"
    which means one can hold an apple in a basket) and a Knowledge
    Base containing a set of rules that will help you identify the
    answer. Your task is to identify whether the answer to the query
    is "True" or "False" and also provide a proof of the query using
    the knowledge base. First state your proof mentioning the rules
    you used and then say: "Therefore, the answer is True" or
    "Therefore, the answer is False". Think step by step.
    Query: {{QUERY}}
    KB: {{KB}}
    [Examples if few-shot:]

Prompt for Geographical QA Task (Zero-shot and Few-shot CoT)

    Task: You will be given a query about geographical entities in
    the form of a first order logic predicate that is either True or
    False. Your task is to identify whether the answer to the query
    is "True" or "False" and also provide a proof of the query. First
    state your proof mentioning the rules you used and then say:
    "Therefore, the answer is True" or "Therefore, the answer is
    False". Think step by step.
    Query: {{QUERY}}
    [Examples if few-shot:]

Prompt for Geographical QA Task (RAG with Zero-shot and Few-shot CoT)

    Task: You will be given a query about geographical entities in
    the form of a first order logic predicate that is either True or
    False, and a Knowledge Base containing a set of rules that will
    help you identify the answer. Your task is to identify whether
    the answer to the query is "True" or "False" and also provide a
    proof of the query using the knowledge base. First state your
    proof mentioning the rules you used and then say: "Therefore, the
    answer is True" or "Therefore, the answer is False". Think step
    by step.
    Query: {{QUERY}}
    KB: {{KB}}
    [Examples if few-shot:]


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H      A NECDOTAL E XAMPLES
To offer more insight into the responses and proofs provided by LLM-TH and the comparison base-
lines, this section presents anecdotal examples illustrating each model’s performance on the eval-
uated tasks. Since Llama3-70B shows the best overall performance for our comparison baselines
in the experimental results provided in Section 5, we show the exemplar outputs from this LLM.
Specifically, we showcase the outputs from the following models:

        • LLM-TRes
        • Zero-shot Chain of Thought prompting
        • Few-shot Chain of Thought prompting
        • RAG + Zero-shot Chain of Thought prompting
        • RAG + Few-shot Chain of Thought prompting

We apply these models to the Deductive reasoning and Geographical QA tasks studied in RQ1
and RQ2 and provide anecdotal examples to elucidate their capabilities and limitations. In each
anecdotal example, we present the query, the set of relevant facts and axioms from the KB, and the
ground truth proof, followed by the response that each model provides. We also indicate correct
proof steps with green color and highlight incorrect ones in red. It is noteworthy that since RQ2
requires access to the KB and studies the model’s ability to compensate for KB incompleteness, the
only relevant baselines are RAG-based models.
Examples of the experiments on the complete KB are provided in section H.1, and examples of
performance on the incomplete KB are detailed in section H.2.

H.1     E XPERIMENTS ON THE C OMPLETE KB

H.1.1     Deductive Reasoning

 Query: Does Sulfadiazine disinfect Rhodospirillaceae?
 Relevant Rules from the KB:
 Facts:
 (1) “Subclass of”(“Rhodospirillaceae”“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”),
 (2) “Gram Negative”(“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”)
 (3) “Treats Gram Negative”(“Sulfadiazine”)
 Axioms:
 (4)

      ∀A, B, C, “Subclass of”(A, B) ∧ “Gram Negative”(B) ∧ “Treats Gram Negative”(C)
                        =⇒ “Unresistant To”(A, C)|A: “Bacteria”, B: “Taxon”, C: “Antibiotic”
 (5)

      ∀A, B, “Unresistant To”(A, B) =⇒ “Can be Used to Treat”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”,
                                                                           “B: Antibiotic”


 (6)

      ∀A, B, “Can be Used to Treat”(A, B) =⇒ “Can be Used to Kill”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”,
                                                                            “B: Antibiotic”


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (7) ∀A, B, “Can be Used to Kill”(A, B) =⇒ “Disinfects”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”, “B: Antibiotic”
 Ground Truth Proof:
 1- Applying (1), (2), (3) to (4) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”, C/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Unresistant To”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”).
 2- Applying “Unresistant To”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (5)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Can be Used to Treat”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”)
 3-Applying “Can be Used to Treat”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (6)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Can be Used to Kill”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”)
 4- Applying “Can be Used to Kill”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (7)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 5- “Disinfects”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”).
 Therefore, the answer to the query is True.
 LLM-TH:
 query: “Disinfects”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”):
 Negated query: ¬“Disinfects”(“Rhodospirillaceae”,“Sulfadiazine”)
 Note: In the following sequent calculus formulae, we use “R” to refer to “Rhodospirillaceae”,
 “S” to represent “Sulfadiazine”, “GN” to show “Gram Negative”, “TGN”, to denote
 “Treats Gram Negative”, and “SO” to show “Subclass Of” due to space limitations.
 Step 1-
           ¬“Disinfects”(“R”,“S”) ¬“Can be Used to Kill”(A,B) ∨ “Disinfects”(A,B) .
                              ¬“Can be Used to Kill”(“R”,“S”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”}.
 Step 2-
 ¬“Can be Used to Kill”(“R”,“S”) “Can be Used to Kill”(A,B) ∨ ¬“Can be Used to Treat”(A,B) .
                            ¬“Can be Used to Treat”(“R”,“S”)”
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”}.
 Step 3-
  ¬“Can be Used to Treat”(“R”,“S”) “Can be Used to Treat”(A,B) ∨ ¬“Unresistant To”(A,B) .
                               ¬“Unresistant To”(“R”,“S”)
 Step 4-

 ¬“Unresistant To”(“R”,“S”) “Unresistant To”(A,B) ∨ ¬“SO”(A,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(C)
                        ¬“SO”(“R”,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(“S”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, C/“Sulfadiazine”}.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Step 5-
 ¬“SO”(“R”,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(“S”)                 “SO”(“R”, “R bacteria”) ∧ “GN”(“R bacteria”) ∧ “TGN”(“S”) .
                                                            ⊥
 Proof score: ρquery = (1, 1, 5)
                                                  ∗∗∗


 Zero-shot CoT:
 To prove the answer to the query, I will use the following rules from the knowledge base:
 1. Rhodospirillaceae is a type of Bacteria. (IsA(Rhodospirillaceae, Bacteria))
 2. Sulfadiazine is a type of Antibiotic. (IsA(sulfadiazine, Antibiotic))
 3. Antibiotics disinfect Bacteria. (Disinfects(Antibiotic, Bacteria))
 Using modus ponens on rules 1, 2, and 3, I can infer that: Disinfects(sulfadiazine, Rhodospirillaceae)
 Therefore, the answer is True.
 Few-shot CoT:
 1.Sulfadiazine is an antibacterial drug.
 2. Rhodospirillaceae is a family of bacteria.
 3. Sulfadiazine is not typically used as a disinfectant, but rather as an antibiotic to treat bacterial
 infections.
 Therefore, the answer is False.
 RAG + Zero-shot CoT:
 1. SubClassOf(Rhodospirillaceae, Rhodospirillaceae bacteria) (KB)
 2. GramNegative(Rhodospirillaceae bacteria) (KB)
 3. ∀ A:bacteria, B:Taxon, C:antibiotic, SubClassOf(A, B) && GramNegative(B) && TreatsGram-
 Negative(C) =⇒ UnResistantTo(A, C) (KB)
 4. UnResistantTo(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (inferred from 1, 2, and 3, with A = Rhodospir-
 illaceae, B = Rhodospirillaceae bacteria, and C = sulfadiazine)
 5. ∀ A:bacteria B:antibiotic, UnResistantTo(A, B) =⇒ CanBeUsedToTreat(A, B) (KB)
 6. CanBeUsedToTreat(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (inferred from 4 and 5)
 7. ∀ A:bacteria B:antibiotic, CanBeUsedToTreat(A, B) =⇒ CanBeUsedToKill(A, B) (KB)
  8. CanBeUsedToKill(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (inferred from 6 and 7)
 9. ∀ A:bacteria B:antibiotic, CanBeUsedToKill(A, B) =⇒ Disinfects(A, B) (KB)
 10. Disinfects(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (inferred from 8 and 9)
 Therefore, the answer is True.
 RAG + Few-shot CoT:
 1. Rhodospirillaceae is a gram negative bacteria,
 2. sulfadiazine treats gram negative bacteria,
 3. and sulfadiazine can be used to treat gram negative bacteria, therefore sulfadiazine can be used to
 treat Rhodospirillaceae.
 Therefore, the answer is True.
 Discussion:


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 These anecdotal examples demonstrate that on a complete knowledge base (KB), LLM-TH can
 successfully prove the query by resolving complementary clauses, without requiring the LLM to
 generate any additional axioms.
 An analysis of the proofs generated by the baseline methods reveals limitations in LLM reasoning,
 particularly in zero-shot and few-shot settings. For instance, the zero-shot CoT baseline asserts that
 “Antibiotics disinfect bacteria”; however, this statement is overly broad, as not all antibiotics can
 disinfect all types of bacteria. While the final answer in this case is correct, there is a flaw in one of
 the reasoning steps. Also, the few-shot CoT baseline produces an incorrect final answer due to an
 error in reasoning. In contrast, the RAG-based baselines, utilizing both prompting styles, correctly
 prove the query by leveraging retrieved facts from the KB.


H.1.2     Geographical QA

 Query: Can I drive between Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy?
 Relevant Rules from the KB:
 Facts:
 (1) “Located in”(“Biyabanak”, “Iran”),
 (2) “Located in”(“Ryam Frolovskiy”, “Russia”),
 (3) “Share Land Borders”(“Iran”, “Azerbaijan”)
 (4) “Share Land Borders”(“Azerbaijan”, “Russia”)
 Axioms:
 (5)

   ∀A, B, “Share Land Borders”(A, B) =⇒ “Land Connected”(A, B)|A : country, B : country
 (6)

   ∀A, B, C, “Land Connected”(A, B) ∧ “Land Connected”(B, C)
                       =⇒ “Land Connected”(A, C)|A : location, B : location, C : location
 (7)

   ∀A, B, C, D, “Located in”(A, C) ∧ “Located in”(B, D) ∧ “Land Connected”(C, D)
        =⇒ “Can Drive Between”(A, B)|A : location, B : location, C : location, D : location


 Ground Truth Proof:
 1- Applying (3) to (5) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Iran”, B/“Azerbaijan”} yields:
 (8) “Land Connected”(“Iran”, “Azerbaijan”).
 2- Applying (3) to (5) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Azerbaijan”, B/“Russia”} yields:
 (9) “Land Connected”(“Azerbaijan”, “Russia”).
 3- Applying (8), (9) to (6) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Iran”, B/“Azerbaijan”, C/“Russia”} yields:
 (10) “Land Connected”(“Iran”,“Russia”).



                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 4- Applying (1), (2), (10) to (7) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Biyabanak”, B/“Ryam Frolovskiy”, C/“Iran”, D/“Russia”} yields:
 (11) “Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”).
 Therefore, the answer to the query is True.
 LLM-TH:
 Proof for query “Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”)
 Negated query: ¬“Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”)
 Note: In the following sequent calculus formulae, we use “Bi” to refer to “Biyabanak”,
 “RF” to represent “Ryam Frolovskiy”, “Az‘” to refer to ‘Azerbaijan”, “CDB” to show
 “Can Drive Between”, “LI” to show “Located In”, “LC” to show “Land Connected”, and “SLB”
 to show ““Share Land Borders”” due to space limitations.
 Step 1-
       ¬“CDB”(“Bi”,“RF”) “CDB”(A,B) ∨ ¬“LI”(A,C) ∨ ¬“LI”(B,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D) .
                   ¬“LI(“Bi”,C)” ∨ ¬“LI”(“RF”,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Biyabanak”, C/“Ryam Frolovskiy”}.
 Step 2-
 ¬“LI”(“Bi”,C) ∨ ¬“LI”(“RF”,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D) “LI”(“Bi”,“Iran”) ∧ “LI”(“RF”,“Russia”) .
                               ¬“LC”(“Iran”,“Russia”)


 Under unification θ = {C/“Iran”, D/“Russia”}.
 Step 3-
              ¬“LC”(“Iran”,“Russia”) “LC”(A,C) ∨ ¬“LC”(A,B) ∨ ¬“LC”(B,C) .
                          ¬“LC”(“Iran”,B) ∨ ¬“LC”(B,“Russia”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Iran”, C/“Russia”}.
 Step 4-
                    ¬“LC”(“Iran”,B)      “LC”(“Iran”,B) ∨ ¬“SLB”(“Iran”,B) .
                                         ¬“SLB”(“Iran”,B)
 Step 5-
                ¬“LC”(B,“Russia”)       “LC”(B,“Russia”) ∨ ¬“SLB”(B,“Russia”) .
                                        ¬“SLB”(B,“Russia”)
 Step 6-
  ¬“SLB”(“Iran”, B) ∨ ¬“SLB”(B, “Russia”)         “SLB”(“Iran”,“Az”) ∧ “SLB”(“Az”,“Russia”) .
                                                  ⊥


 Under unification θ = {B/“Az”}.
 Proof score: ρquery = (1, 1, 6)
                                                  ∗∗∗


 Zero-shot CoT:
 To answer this query, I will use the following rules from the knowledge base:
 1. CanDriveBetween(x, y) =⇒ Connected(x, y)
 2. Connected(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy) =⇒ False (this is a fact in the knowledge base)



                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Using rule 1, I can infer that CanDriveBetween(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy) implies Con-
 nected(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy).
 However, according to rule 2, Connected(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy) is False.
 Therefore, the answer is False.
 Few-shot CoT:
 1.Biyabanak is a desert in Iran,
 2. and Ryam Frolovskiy is an island in the Caspian Sea, which is not connected to Iran by land.
 Therefore, the answer is False.
 RAG + Zero-shot CoT:
 1. LocatedIn(Biyabanak, Iran) (Given in KB)
 2. PartOf(Iran, Iran) ( Rule: ∀ A:place or location B:place or location, LocatedIn(A, B) =⇒
 PartOf(A, B) )
 3. ShareLandBorders(Iran, Azerbaijan) (Given in KB)
 4. LandConnected(Iran, Azerbaijan) ( Rule: ∀ A:country B:country, ShareLandBorders(A, B) =⇒
 LandConnected(A, B) )
 5. LocatedIn(Ryam Frolovskiy, Azerbaijan) (Assuming this is true, since it’s not given in KB)
 6. PartOf(Ryam Frolovskiy, Azerbaijan) ( Rule: ∀ A:place or location B:place or location, Locate-
 dIn(A, B) =⇒ PartOf(A, B) )
 7. CanDriveBetween(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy) ( Rule: ∀ A, B, C, D, LocatedIn(A, C) &&
 LocatedIn(B, D) && LandConnected(C, D) =⇒ CanDriveBetween(A, B)|A:location, B:location,
 C:location, D:location )
 Therefore, the answer is True.
 RAG + Few-shot CoT:
 1. Since Biyabanak is a desert in Iran,
 2. and Ryam Frolovskiy is a place in Russia,
 3.and Iran and Russia are land connected (although not explicitly stated in the provided KB, but it
 can be inferred from the general knowledge that Iran and Russia share a border), then it is possible
 to drive between Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy.
 Using the rule: ∀ A, B, C, D , LocatedIn(A, ?C) && LocatedIn(B, ?D) && LandConnected(?C, ?D)
 =⇒ CanDriveBetween(A, B) With A = Biyabanak, B = Ryam Frolovskiy, C = Iran, D = Russia
 Therefore, the answer is True.
 Discussion:
 Similar to the deductive reasoning experiment, LLM-TH produces the correct proof on a complete
 knowledge base (KB) without requiring the LLM to surface commonsense axioms from it.
 This example also highlights the limitations of the LLM-based baselines. For instance, the zero-shot
 CoT baseline incorrectly claims that Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy are not connected, leading to
 an incorrect final answer. Similarly, the few-shot CoT baseline provides an inaccurate statement
 about Ryam Frolovskiy, describing it as an island in the Caspian sea when it is, in fact, a forest in
 Russia.
 The RAG-based baselines further reveal challenges in the retrieval stage. For example, the relevant
 fact about the location of Ryam Frolovskiy is not retrieved, prompting the LLM to make assumptions
 in the zero-shot setting. Although the final answer in this case is correct, the reasoning steps contain
 errors and deviate from the correct proof. In the few-shot prompting setting, while the final answer
 is also correct, it is based on an inaccurate statement (in fact, Iran and Russia do not share a land
 border).



                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H.2     E XPERIMENTS ON THE I NCOMPLETE KB

H.2.1     Deductive Reasoning

 Query: Does Sulfadiazine resolve an infection caused by Rhodospirillaceae?
 Relevant Rules from the KB:
 Facts:
 (1) “Subclass of”(“Rhodospirillaceae”“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”),
 (2) “Gram Negative”(“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”)
 (3) “Treats Gram Negative”(“Sulfadiazine”)
 Axioms:
 (4)

      ∀A, B, C, “Subclass of”(A, B) ∧ “Gram Negative”(B) ∧ “Treats Gram Negative”(C)
                        =⇒ “Unresistant To”(A, C)|A: “Bacteria”, B: “Taxon”, C: “Antibiotic”
 (5)

      ∀A, B, “Unresistant To”(A, B) =⇒ “Can be Used to Treat”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”,
                                                                           “B: Antibiotic”


 (6)

      ∀A, B, “Can be Used to Treat”(A, B) =⇒ “Can be Used to Kill”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”,
                                                                            “B: Antibiotic”


 (7) ∀A, B, “Can be Used to Kill”(A, B) =⇒ “Disinfects”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”, “B: Antibiotic”
 Ground Truth Proof:
 1- Applying (1), (2), (3) to (4) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Rhodospirillaceae bacteria”, C/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Unresistant To”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”).
 2- Applying “Unresistant To”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (5)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Can be Used to Treat”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”)
 3-Applying “Can be Used to Treat”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (6)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 “Can be Used to Kill”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”)
 4- Applying “Can be Used to Kill”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”) to (7)
 with θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”} yields:
 5- “Disinfects”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”).


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 6- Using the commonsense axiom (absent from the KB) that:

   ∀A, B, “Disinfects”(A, B)
                    =⇒ “Resolves Infection Caused By”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”, “B: Antibiotic”
 Therefore, the answer to the query is True.
 LLM-TH:
 Proof for query “Resolves Infection Caused By”(“Rhodospirillaceae”, “Sulfadiazine”):
 Negated query: ¬“Resolves Infection Caused By”(“Rhodospirillaceae”,“Sulfadiazine”)
 Note: In the following sequent calculus formulae, we use “R” to refer to “Rhodospirillaceae”,
 “S” to represent “Sulfadiazine”, “GN” to show “Gram Negative”, “TGN”, to denote
 “Treats Gram Negative”, “SO” to show “Subclass Of” due to space limitations.
 Step 1-

 ¬“Resolves Infection Caused By”(“R”,“S”) “Disinfects(A,B)” ∨ ¬“Can be Used to Kill(A,B)” .
                              ¬“Can be Used to Kill”(“R”,“S”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”}.


 In this step, by theory resolving ¬“Resolves Infection Caused By”(“R”,“S”)                with
 “Disinfects”(A,B), the LLM successfully surfaced the commonsense axiom:

   ∀A, B, “Disinfects”(A, B)
                   =⇒ “Resolves Infection Caused By”(A, B)|A: “Bacteria”, “B: Antibiotic”.
 Step 2-
 ¬“Can be Used to Kill”(“R”,“S”) “Can be Used to Kill”(A,B) ∨ ¬“Can be Used to Treat”(A,B) .
                             ¬“Can be Used to Treat(“R”,“S”)”
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, B/“Sulfadiazine”}.
 Step 3-
  ¬“Can be Used to Treat”(“R”,“S”) “Can be Used to Treat”(A,B) ∨ ¬“Unresistant To”(A,B) .
                               ¬“Unresistant To(“R”,“S”)”
 Step 4-

 ¬“Unresistant To”(“R”,“S”) “Unresistant To”(A,B) ∨ ¬“SO”(A,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(C)
                        ¬“SO”(“R”,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(“S”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Rhodospirillaceae”, C/“Sulfadiazine”}.
 Step 5-
 ¬“SO”(“R”,B) ∨ ¬“GN”(B) ∨ ¬“TGN”(“S”)               “SO”(“R”, “R bacteria”) ∧ “GN”(“R bacteria”) ∧ “TGN”(“S”) .
                                                          ⊥
 Therefore, the query is proven to be True with the Proof score: ρquery = (1, 0.981, 5)
                                                 ∗∗∗


 RAG + Zero-shot CoT:
 1. SubClassOf(Rhodospirillaceae, Rhodospirillaceae bacteria) (from KB)



                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 2. GramNegative(Rhodospirillaceae bacteria) (from KB)
 3.    ∀A, B, C, SubClassOf(A, B) ∧ GramNegative(B) ∧ TreatsGramNegative(C)                       =⇒
 U nResistantT o(A, C) (from KB)
 4.             SubClassOf(Rhodospirillaceae, Rhodospirillaceae bacteria)                         =⇒
 PartOf(Rhodospirillaceae, Rhodospirillaceae bacteria) (from     KB,      using            the    rule
 ∀A, B, SubClassOf(A, B) =⇒ PartOf(A, B)|A: animal, B: Taxon)
 5. PartOf(Rhodospirillaceae, Rhodospirillaceae bacteria)∧GramNegative(Rhodospirillaceae bacteria)∧
 TreatsGramNegative(sulfadiazine) =⇒ UnResistantTo(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (from 2,
 4, and the assumption that sulfadiazine treats Gram-Negative bacteria)
 6. ∀A, B, UnResistantTo(A, B) =⇒ CanBeUsedToTreat(A, B)|A:bacteria, B:antibiotic (from KB)
 7.                UnResistantTo(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine)                                 =⇒
 CanBeUsedToTreat(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (from 5 and 6)
 8. ∀A, B, CanBeUsedToTreat(A, B) =⇒ CanBeUsedToKill(A, B)|A: bacteria, B: antibiotic (from
 KB)
 9.              CanBeUsedToTreat(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine)                                =⇒
 CanBeUsedToKill(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (from 7 and 8)
 10. ∀A, B, CanBeUsedToKill(A, B) =⇒ Disinfects(A, B)|A: bacteria, B: antibiotic (from KB)
 11.                 CanBeUsedToKill(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine)                             =⇒
 Disinfects(Rhodospirillaceae, sulfadiazine) (from 9 and 10) Therefore, the answer is True.

 RAG + Few-shot CoT:
 1- Rhodospirillaceae is a gram-negative bacteria,
 2- and sulfadiazine treats gram-negative bacterias. Therefore, the answer is True.
 Discussion:
 This example demonstrates how LLM-TH can perform commonsense reasoning on an incomplete
 KB. Since no complementary literal for “Resolves Infection Caused By” is found, LLM-TH invokes
 the LLM to perform a theory resolution step. In this step, it correctly selects “Disinfects” as the
 clause with the highest priority for theory resolution, enabling it to provide the correct proof.
 In this example, all baselines are also able to produce the correct proof. However, the RAG+zero-
 shot CoT baseline exhibits minor errors, such as selecting incorrect KB rules in step 4 and neglecting
 KB facts in step 5, instead basing its reasoning on an assumption.


H.2.2     Geographical QA

 Query: Can I take a road trip between Ryam Frolovskiy and Biyabanak?
 Relevant Rules from the KB:
 Facts:
 (1) “Located in”(“Biyabanak”, “Iran”),
 (2) “Located in”(“Ryam Frolovskiy”, “Russia”),
 (3) “Share Land Borders”(“Iran”, “Azerbaijan”)
 (4) “Share Land Borders”(“Azerbaijan”, “Russia”)
 Axioms:


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 (5)

   ∀A, B, “Share Land Borders”(A, B) =⇒ “Land Connected”(A, B)|A : country, B : country
 (6)

   ∀A, B, C, “Land Connected”(A, B) ∧ “Land Connected”(B, C)
                       =⇒ “Land Connected”(A, C)|A : location, B : location, C : location
 (7)

   ∀A, B, C, D, “Located in”(A, C) ∧ “Located in”(B, D) ∧ “Land Connected”(C, D)
        =⇒ “Can Drive Between”(A, B)|A : location, B : location, C : location, D : location


 Ground Truth Proof:
 1- Applying (3) to (5) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Iran”, B/“Azerbaijan”} yields:
 (8) “Land Connected”(“Iran”, “Azerbaijan”).
 2- Applying (3) to (5) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Azerbaijan”, B/“Russia”} yields:
 (9) “Land Connected”(“Azerbaijan”, “Russia”).
 3- Applying (8), (9) to (6) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Iran”, B/“Azerbaijan”, C/“Russia”} yields:
 (10) “Land Connected”(“Iran”,“Russia”).
 4- Applying (1), (2), (10) to (7) with the following substitution:
 θ = {A/“Biyabanak”, B/“Ryam Frolovskiy”, C/“Iran”, D/“Russia”} yields:
 (11) “Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”).
 5- Using the commonsense axiom (absent from the KB) that:

   ∀A, B, “Can Drive Between”(A, B)
                     =⇒ “Can Take Road Trip Between”(A, B)|A: “location”, “B: location”
 Therefore, the answer to the query is True.
 LLM-TH:
 Proof for query “Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”)
 Negated query: ¬“Can Drive Between”(“Biyabanak”, “Ryam Frolovskiy”)
 Note: In the following sequent calculus formulae, we use “Bi” to refer to “Biyabanak”,
 “RF” to represent “Ryam Frolovskiy”, “Az‘” to refer to ‘Azerbaijan”, “CTRTP” to show
 “Can Take Road Trip Between”, “CDB” to show “Can Drive Between”, “LI” to show “Located In”,
 “LC” to show “Land Connected”, and “SLB” to show ““Share Land Borders”” due to space limi-
 tations.
 Step 1-
       ¬“CTRTB”(“Bi”,“RF”) “CDB”(A,B) ∨ ¬“LI”(A,C) ∨ ¬“LI”(B,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D) .
                    ¬“LI(“Bi”,C)” ∨ ¬“LI”(“RF”,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Biyabanak”, C/“Ryam Frolovskiy”}.



                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 In this step, by theory resolving ¬“Can Take Road Trip Between”(“Bi”, “RF”)                 with
 “Can Drive Between”(A,B), the LLM successfully surfaced the commonsense axiom:

   ∀A, B, “Can Drive Between”(A, B)
                    =⇒ “Can Take Road Trip Between”(A, B)|A: “location”, “B: location”.


 Step 2-
 ¬“LI”(“Bi”,C) ∨ ¬“LI”(“RF”,D) ∨ ¬“LC”(C,D) “LI”(“Bi”,“Iran”) ∧ “LI”(“RF”,“Russia”) .
                               ¬“LC”(“Iran”,“Russia”)


 Under unification θ = {C/“Iran”, D/“Russia”}.
 Step 3-
              ¬“LC”(“Iran”,“Russia”) “LC”(A,C) ∨ ¬“LC”(A,B) ∨ ¬“LC”(B,C) .
                          ¬“LC”(“Iran”,B) ∨ ¬“LC”(B,“Russia”)
 Under unification θ = {A/“Iran”, C/“Russia”}.
 Step 4-
                      ¬“LC”(“Iran”,B)    “LC”(“Iran”,B) ∨ ¬“SLB”(“Iran”,B) .
                                         ¬“SLB”(“Iran”,B)
 Step 5-
                ¬“LC”(B,“Russia”)       “LC”(B,“Russia”) ∨ ¬“SLB”(B,“Russia”) .
                                        ¬“SLB”(B,“Russia”)
 Step 6-
  ¬“SLB”(“Iran”, B) ∨ ¬“SLB”(B, “Russia”)        “SLB”(“Iran”,“Az”) ∧ “SLB”(“Az”,“Russia”) .
                                                 ⊥


 Under unification θ = {B/“Az”}.


 Therefore, the query is proven to be True with the proof score: ρquery = (1, 0.994, 6)
                                                 ∗∗∗


 RAG + Zero-shot CoT:
 1- From the knowledge base, we have: PartOf(Biyabanak, Iran) (from the given KB)
 2- PartOf(Ryam Frolovskiy, Belarus) (not mentioned in the KB, but assuming it’s true for the sake
 of the query)
 3- Using the rule:
 “∀A, B, C, PartOf(A, B) ∧ PartOf(B, C) =⇒ PartOf(A, C)|A: location, B: location, C: location”,
 We can infer: PartOf(Biyabanak, Asia) (since Iran is part of Asia)
 4- and PartOf(Ryam Frolovskiy, Europe) (since Belarus is part of Europe)
 5- Using the rule:           ∀A, B, C, LandConnected(A, B) ∧ LandConnected(B, C)           =⇒
 LandConnected(A, C)|A:country, B:country, C:country, we can infer: Not LandConnected(Iran,
 Belarus) (since Iran is in Asia and Belarus is in Europe, and they are not land-connected)


                                                35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 6- Using the rule:“∀A, B, C, D, LocatedIn(A, C) ∧ LocatedIn(B, D) ∧ LandConnected(C, D) =⇒
 CanDriveBetween(A, B)|A: location, B: location, C: country, D: country”, we cannot infer
 CanDriveBetween(Biyabanak, Ryam Frolovskiy) since Iran and Belarus are not land-connected.
 Therefore, the answer is False.

 RAG + Few-shot CoT:
 1- To determine if you can take a road trip between Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy, we need to
 check if Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy are located in countries that are land connected.
 2- From the KB, we know that Biyabanak is part of Iran,
 3- and Ryam Frolovskiy is not mentioned in the KB, but since it is not mentioned,
 we will assume it is in Russia (based on the name).
 4- From the KB, we also know that Iran and Russia are land connected (rule 1).
 5- Using the rule “∀A, B, C, D, LocatedIn(A, C) ∧ LocatedIn(B, D) ∧ LandConnected(C, D) =⇒
 CanDriveBetween(A, B)|A: location, B: location, C: country, D: country”, we can infer that you can
 take a road trip between Biyabanak and Ryam Frolovskiy. Therefore, the answer is True.
 Discussion:
 This example further illustrates the successful application of LLM-based theory resolution by LLM-
 TH, where a theory resolution step leverages the LLM’s commonsense knowledge to address KB
 incompleteness. Specifically, in Step 1, the LLM surfaces a commonsense axiom to theory resolve
 ¬Can Drive Between” with ¬Can Take Road Trip Between”.
 This example also highlights the limitations of the RAG-based baselines. Due to a failure in retriev-
 ing facts about Ryam Frolovskiy, the RAG+Zero-shot CoT baseline makes an incorrect assumption
 about its location. Furthermore, subsequent reasoning steps are flawed, resulting in a wrong an-
 swer. Although the RAG+Few-shot CoT baseline provides the correct final answer, its reasoning
 process is not entirely reliable. Notably, because the LLM lacks access to a fact about the location
 of Ryam Frolovskiy, it makes an assumption about its location—which happens to be correct in this
 case. However, it also incorrectly references a rule in the KB that states Iran and Russia are land
 connected, even though no such rule exists in the KB.
 These examples underscore the limited reliability of existing LLM-based baselines when combining
 commonsense reasoning with factual information.


                                                36
