Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I MPROVING I NSTRUCTION -F OLLOWING IN L ANGUAGE
M ODELS THROUGH ACTIVATION S TEERING
 Alessandro Stolfo1∗ Vidhisha Balachandran2                Safoora Yousefi2
 Eric Horvitz2         Besmira Nushi2
 1                 2
     ETH Zürich       Microsoft Research


                                                A BSTRACT
           The ability to follow instructions is crucial for numerous real-world applications
           of language models. In pursuit of deeper insights and more powerful capabili-
           ties, we derive instruction-specific vector representations from language models
           and use them to steer models accordingly. These vectors are computed as the
           difference in activations between inputs with and without instructions, enabling
           a modular approach to activation steering. We demonstrate how this method can
           enhance model adherence to constraints such as output format, length, and word
           inclusion, providing inference-time control over instruction following. Our exper-
           iments across four models demonstrate how we can use the activation vectors to
           guide models to follow constraints even without explicit instructions and to en-
           hance performance when instructions are present. Additionally, we explore the
           compositionality of activation steering, successfully applying multiple instruc-
           tions simultaneously. Finally, we demonstrate that steering vectors computed
           on instruction-tuned models can transfer to improve base models. Our findings
           demonstrate that activation steering offers a practical and scalable approach for
           fine-grained control in language generation. Our code and data are available at
           https://github.com/microsoft/llm-steer-instruct.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Instruction-following capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have enhanced their practi-
cal applications for real-world usage. These advances are powered by instruction-tuning methods
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2024), which
align the model’s responses with user objectives, addressing the gap between pre-training and end-
user needs (Askell et al., 2021). Instruction tuning allows users to specify constraints on attributes
like format, tone, or length, which direct the model’s behavior and output (Zhou et al., 2023b; Zhang
et al., 2023; Lou et al., 2024). Gaining a deeper understanding of how LLMs internally represent
and follow these instructions is essential for developing more controllable and reliable models.1
In this paper, we use a mechanistic method to investigate how language models internally represent
various instructions and use these representations to influence and control the model’s behavior.
Prior research has shown that vector representations can be computed for tasks learned in context
(Hendel et al., 2023; Todd et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024) and various stylistic and semantic input
features (Zou et al., 2023; Azaria & Mitchell, 2023; Zheng et al., 2024; Templeton et al., 2024; Marks
& Tegmark, 2024, inter alia). These representations can be used for activation steering (Subramani
et al., 2022): directly intervening on the model’s activations to guide the generation. This approach
has been successfully applied to control text attributes such as honesty (Li et al., 2023; Qiu et al.,
2024; Zou et al., 2023), sentiment (Tigges et al., 2024), output style and tone (Turner et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2024; Scalena et al., 2024; von Rütte et al., 2024), harmfulness (Arditi et al., 2024; Wang
& Shu, 2024), and sycophancy (Panickssery et al., 2024; van der Weij et al., 2024).
However, user instructions in generative tasks can be more complex and involve multiple parameters
that need to be attended to and satisfied during generation (Sun et al., 2023). For example, users may
     ∗
     Work done while at Microsoft Research. Corresp. to stolfoa@ethz.ch and besmira.nushi@microsoft.com.
     1
     We use instruction to refer to specific constraints that can be added during interactive sessions with LLMs
in a modular way to modify or extend a base question or request. We further elaborate on this definition in §2.


                                                       1
                              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                               🤖
                                  Input

                                                          🤖
                                                                        Input                                                     Output
                                  List some facts about                 Write a rubric for performance                            {
                                  Lionel Messi.                         review of a so ware engineer                               “id": "performance_review_rubric",
                                  Format the output as                                                                             "type": "object",
                                  JSON.                                                                                            "proper es": {
                                                                                                                                    "code_quality": {
                                                          …             Extract                                       …               "type": "object",
                                                                    Residual Stream                                                   "proper es": {
                                                                      Ac va ons                                                        "documenta on": {
                                                                                                                                         "type": "string",

                                                          🤖
                               Input
                                                                                                                                         "descrip on": "Proper
                               List some facts about                                                                              documenta on of code"
                               Lionel Messi.                            ➖        🟰                                                     },
                                                                                                            Add Steering Vector
                                                                                                               x̃′l = x′l + cul        "readability": {
                                                                  x+l       xl   Instruc on                                              "type": "string",
                                                          …
                                                                                   Steering                                              "descrip on": "Code is readable and
                               Steering Vector                                      Vector        Steering                        well-structured"
                               Computa on                                            ul           at Inference Time
                                                                                                                                  […]



                              Figure 1: Instruction Steering Process. Steering vectors are computed as the difference in residual
                              stream activations between inputs with and without the instruction. These vectors are then applied
￼          ￼
                              during inference to adjust the model’s activations, guiding it to follow the desired instruction.
    ti   ti
          titi ti
                ti
                ti   ti ft
                         ti


                              ask for a response to include bullet lists, have a certain number of sentences, or include/exclude spe-
                              cific content. The complexity of such instructions stems from the high number of possible variations,
                              making it impractical to generate post-training data for all scenarios. In the quest for finding more
                              efficient methods for controlling instruction following and guided by previous research in language
                              model representations, we pose the question: Can we efficiently extract vector representations that
                              encode and control specific instruction-following behavior?
                              We investigate this using a contrastive, additive steering method (Turner et al., 2023; Panickssery
                              et al., 2024) that computes the difference in activations between inputs with and without an instruc-
                              tion (Figure 1, left), and applies this difference to guide the model to better follow instructions on
                              new inputs (Figure 1, right). While previous work focused on high-level stylistic aspects, we target
                              more diverse, verifiable instructions (Zhou et al., 2023a) that complement the base request’s seman-
                              tics (e.g., formatting, length constraints). These instructions are lower-level and more specific, with
                              multiple possible instantiations (e.g., “Do not mention the word {keyword}”). It remains unclear
                              whether models represent such instructions linearly and whether these representations can be used
                              to reliably elicit specific behaviors, which would enable finer control of LLM outputs.
                              We conduct experiments using the Phi-3 (Abdin et al., 2024), Gemma 2 2B and 9B (Gemma Team,
                              2024), and Mistral 7B (Jiang et al., 2023) models, focusing on three types of instructions: output
                              format (§3), output length (§4), and the inclusion/exclusion of specific words (§5). Our results on
                              the IFEval dataset (Zhou et al., 2023a) provide evidence that vector representations can encode a
                              wide range of instructions and enhance the model’s instruction-following performance. Notably, we
                              demonstrate that activation steering not only helps models follow constraints when no instruction
                              is provided in the input, but it can also reinforce instruction adherence even when instructions are
                              explicitly present, potentially countering instruction drift (Li et al., 2024). Furthermore, we show
                              that it is possible to simultaneously steer for multiple constraints, such as controlling both format
                              and length (§6). Finally, we present compelling evidence that cross-model steering–using vectors
                              computed on an instruction-tuned model to steer a base model–is effective and can sometimes yield
                              better adherence than same-model steering (§7), suggesting new possibilities for transferring task-
                              specific skills across models, similar to “task arithmetic” (Ilharco et al., 2023).
                              Our work represents an important step toward operationalizing techniques from mechanistic inter-
                              pretability to achieve practical improvements in scenarios with real-world utility.

                              2       S TEERING FOR I NSTRUCTION A DHERENCE
                              In this section, we define the types of instructions we consider (§2.1), introduce the methodology
                              used to compute the vectors and the steering procedure (§2.2), and describe the experimental setup,
                              including the data, metrics, and evaluation details (§2.3).

                              2.1       T YPES OF I NSTRUCTIONS

                              The concept of instruction-following has been used to describe the broad capability of a model to
                              answer any zero-shot query (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022). However, following prior work


                                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(Zhou et al., 2023a;b; Sun et al., 2023), we adopt a more specific definition of instruction that
refers to a constraint applied to a particular aspect of the model’s output. These constraints are
self-contained, modular, and can be imposed on various base queries. This definition decouples the
ability of the model to follow the instruction from its factual knowledge and domain-specific skills.
In our work, we focus on three specific types of instructions:
1. Format instructions, which dictate how the output should be presented. For instance, the model
   may be asked to produce responses in a specific format (e.g., “Provide the answer in JSON
   format”) or highlight parts of the response in a particular way (e.g., “Use asterisks to emphasize
   at least two sections of the answer”).
2. Length instructions, which specify the desired length of the output (e.g., “Answer using at most
   three sentences”).
3. Word-specific instructions, which control the inclusion or exclusion of specific words or phrases
   in the output (e.g., “Do not include the word AI in the answer”).

2.2   S TEERING P ROCEDURE

Activation (or representation) engineering involves constructing vectors of activation values which
cause desired changes to output text when added to the forward passes of a frozen LLM (Zou et al.,
2023). To identify a direction in the model’s residual stream2 that encodes information about a
specific instruction, we use a technique called difference-in-means (Belrose, 2023). This method ef-
fectively isolates key feature directions in the model’s internal activations (Marks & Tegmark, 2024;
Tigges et al., 2024) and has been used to control various behaviors such as refusal and sycophancy
(Arditi et al., 2024; Panickssery et al., 2024). We adapt this method to support finer-grained instruc-
tions with multiple possible instantiations (e.g., varying length, varying words to include and ex-
clude). The process involves pairing two versions of the same request: one with only the base query
(e.g., “List some facts about Lionel Messi”) and another that additionally includes the instruction we
want to represent (e.g., “List some facts about Lionel Messi, ensuring the output is valid JSON”).
Let us denote these two inputs by x (base query) and x+ (base query with instruction), and consider
a set of N such pairs (xi , x+                                       +
                               i ), i ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Let xi,l , xi,l ∈ R
                                                                             dmodel
                                                                                    be the values of the
residual stream vector on the two queries at the last token of the input at layer l ∈ {1, . . . , L}. We
isolate the internal representation corresponding to the instruction by computing the difference in the
residual stream vectors between the paired inputs. More formally, we compute a vector ul ∈ Rdmodel
representing the steering direction at layer l for a given instruction as:
                                                              N
                                     vl                1 X +
                             ul =         , where vl =     xi,l − xi,l .                                  (1)
                                    ∥vl ∥              N i

Averaging over different base queries allows us to capture the activation values most closely associ-
ated with the instruction, independent of the base query. The computation of the steering direction
is carried out using the representations at the last token of the input, which effectively encapsulate
the model’s behavior not only for the next-token-prediction task but also for the entire generation
that follows (Todd et al., 2024; Scalena et al., 2024).
After identifying the steering direction, we compute the steering vector by re-scaling the unit vector
ul by a coefficient, c ∈ R. For format instructions, we use a systematic scaling approach where the
value of c is selected to ensure that the residual stream activations are mapped to their mean value on
inputs that contain the instruction in question. In particular, during a forward pass on a new example
with residual stream values x′ ∈ RL×dmodel at a given token position, we compute:
                                                                  N
                                                              1 X +T
                               c = z̄ − x′T
                                         l ul , where z̄ =        x ul .                                  (2)
                                                              N i i,l

This dynamic adjustment allows the model to effectively incorporate the constraint without over-
or under-correcting its behavior. For length instructions, which have a more continuous nature,
we experiment and show results with different values of c, illustrating their impact on the model’s
    2
      The model’s residual stream is the per-token hidden state of dimensionality dmodel consisting of the sum
of all previous component outputs (Elhage et al., 2021).


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


output. Finally, for word-specific constraints, we compute the weight using Eq. (2) and additionally
perform a small grid search over neighboring values on a held-out set of examples to fine-tune the
steering effect. The steering vector cul is then added to the corresponding residual stream layer and
the forward pass is resumed with the updated residual stream value x̃′l = x′l + cul . This procedure
is carried out at a single layer across all token positions, motivated by previous findings that show
models tend to deviate from instructions as they generate more tokens (Li et al., 2024). To find the
optimal layer for steering, we perform a sweep across a subset of the model’s layers, measuring the
effect on a held-out set of queries and performing a perplexity-based quality check. Details about
this procedure are provided in Appendix E.

2.3    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Data. We use an augmented version of the IFEval dataset (Zhou et al., 2023a), which consists of 25
distinct instructions, each paired with multiple base queries and expressed in different phrasings, for
a total of 541 prompts. To evaluate format instructions, we focus on a subset of 163 examples that
specifically relate to the output format. This subset includes instructions such as “The entire output
should be wrapped in JSON format,” requests to use a particular language (e.g., “Please respond
using only the Punjabi language”), formatting requirements like “Wrap your entire response with
double quotation marks,” and casing instructions (e.g., “Answer using lowercase letters only”). A
complete list of the instructions used is provided in Appendix B.3 For length instructions, we gener-
ate prompts by concatenating base queries from IFEval to instructions derived from templates such
as “Answer using at most {n} sentences.” For word-specific instructions, we use a subset of IFEval
containing instructions about the inclusion or exclusion of keywords. The subset has 203 examples,
and each example contains a prompt with a single keyword-related instruction. For steering vec-
tor computation and layer selection, we construct a separate set of synthetically generated prompts
by combining base queries from IFEval with corresponding instruction descriptions to avoid test
information leakage. Additional details about the data used are provided in Apps. C and D.
Metrics. To quantify the models’ adherence to format instructions, we compute the “loose”
instruction-following accuracy using the official IFEval evaluation script. For length instructions,
we count the number of words or sentences in the model’s output. For word-specific constraints, we
verify the presence or absence of the specified keywords in the model’s response, again using the
IFEval evaluation script. We assess the statistical significance of differences in average instruction-
following accuracy with and without steering using McNemar’s test (McNemar, 1947). Results
where steering leads to a significant improvement (p-value < 0.01) are marked with an asterisk (*).
In addition to assessing the model’s instruction-following capabilities, it is important to verify that
the model still effectively addresses the base query, even when generating under constraints. To
measure the overall quality of the response, we set up a GPT-4o-based evaluation. For each base
query x, GPT-4o generates a set of five yes/no questions aimed at assessing the quality of the re-
sponse to x. For instance, given the query “Write an essay about the history of Martin Van Buren’s
presidency,” GPT-4o generates questions such as “Does the essay provide context on the political,
social, and economic climate during Van Buren’s presidency?” and “Is the essay written in clear,
grammatically correct English, and does it follow a logical structure?”. Next, given the original
query x, a model’s response to x, and the generated questions we prompt GPT-4o to answer each
question, provide a rationale for each yes/no response, or reply with “N/A” if the question is not ap-
plicable. We compute the proportion of questions answered positively for a given query and average
this score across all queries to obtain a response quality score. We repeat this experiment 3 times
and report the mean and standard error. Additional details are provided in Appendix F.4
Evaluation. We conduct experiments using the instruction-tuned versions of Phi-3 Mini (Abdin
et al., 2024), Gemma 2 2B, 9B (Gemma Team, 2024), and Mistral 7B v0.1(Jiang et al., 2023). In
addition, we investigate the transferability of steering vectors from the instruction-tuned to the base
versions of Gemma 2 2B and 9B. All models are evaluated in a zero-shot setting, with outputs
   3
      Although they are not strictly related to format, we include language constraints (e.g., “the answer should
be in German”) in this group, as, like other formatting instructions, they modify the surface-level presentation
of the output without affecting the underlying content.
    4
      Note that while the model’s response may be influenced by specific instructions, these instructions are
not provided to GPT-4o during the evaluation. The goal here is to focus the quality assessment solely on the
comprehensiveness and relevance of the response with respect to the base query.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) "Quotation" Instruction                                       (b) "Urdu Language" Instr.
                                                                                                                                   Table 1: Steering Vector Projections.
Cosine Similarity


                                                                  Cosine Similarity
                     1                                                                 1

                    0.9                                                               0.8                                          The projection onto the vocabulary space
                    0.8                                                               0.6                                          of the contrastively-computed vectors pro-
                    0.7
                                                                                      0.4                                          motes tokens that are semantically related to
                      0            10             20         30                          0            10             20         30
                                                                                                                                   the respective instruction.
                                         Layer                                                              Layer
                          (1) Different Query Same Instr.                                    (1) Different Query Same Instr.
                          (2) Same Query w/ and w/o Instr.                                   (2) Same Query w/ and w/o Instr.       Instruction      Layer   Top Tokens
                          (3) Different Queries                                              (3) Different Queries
                                                                                                                                    JSON Format       18      [{, json, ‘{, JSON
                                                                                                                                    Capitalize        28      PRO, TH,   FOR, AND
Figure 2: Residual stream similarity across layers.                                                                                 Highlight Text    26     *‘, *, *, (*, *\\
                                                                                                                                    Lowercase         18      lower, lowest, russ
Phi-3’s residual stream activations show higher cosine                                                                              Bullet List       28     *), •, *, *), •, */
similarity between examples with the same instruction                                                                               Quotation         26      ‘", ’", "", ", ´ "</
                                                                                                                                    Urdu Language     24      Islam, Pakistan, Pak
compared to those without, indicating effective cap-                                                                                Hindi Language    18      Indian, raj, India
ture of instruction-relevant features.                                                                                              German Lang.      16      die, im, dies, gener



decoded greedily. We assess our method’s performance by steering the model under two input
settings: (1) with text instructions provided in the input, and (2) without any text instructions. These
settings allow us to explore two questions: Are the computed steering vectors informative enough
to guide the model’s behavior even without explicit instructions? And can steering further improve
performance when instructions are provided in the input?


3                         F ORMAT I NSTRUCTIONS

Representational Analysis. To assess whether the model effectively captures instruction-related
information in its internal representations, we analyze Phi-3’s residual stream activations at the last
token of the input by calculating cosine similarity across three sets of inputs: (1) pairs of inputs
that share the same base query, one with and one without the instruction; (2) inputs with different
base queries but the same instruction; and (3) inputs with different base queries and no instruction.
High similarity in set (2) would suggest that the model captures a shared feature (the instruction),
while we expect set (1) to show relatively high similarity due to shared base queries, and set (3) to
show lower similarity due to the absence of any shared features. Figure 2 shows how these measures
evolve across layers for two instructions. For the “quotation” instruction, where the model is asked
to wrap the output in quotation marks, there is a clear difference between sets (2) and (3), indicating
that the instruction is partially captured (green vs. red lines in Figure 2a). For the “Urdu language”
instruction, set (2) shows higher similarity than set (1), suggesting strong representation of the in-
struction (green vs. blue lines in Figure 2b). These results indicate that the model can effectively
encode instruction-relevant features at the last input token, which supports steering model behavior
based on specific constraints. Additional representational analyses are provided in Appendix H.
Steering Vector Computation. We compute steering vectors for each of the 12 format-related
instructions in the IFEval subset and for the 19 language-based instructions specified in the dataset.
During the selection of the optimal steering later, we compare the validation score with and without
steering to ensure that the steering intervention leads to an improvement. If no layer shows an
improvement in the validation score, no steering is applied at test time. Details about the layers
selected for steering are provided in Appendix E. To ensure that the steering vectors effectively
capture the information related to the instructions, we inspect them by projecting the vectors onto
the model’s vocabulary space (nostalgebraist, 2020; Geva et al., 2022). We project the vectors using
the model’s unembedding matrix and examine the vocabulary tokens with the highest logit values.
Table 1 presents the top tokens associated with several of the instructions we consider. We observe
that the tokens promoted by the steering vectors are semantically related to the intended instruction,
providing an initial validation that the vectors are capturing the desired features.
Steering Results. We first evaluate steering on inputs without explicit text instructions (Figure 3a).
In this setting, the instruction-following accuracy without steering hovers around 10% as the input
has no information about the instruction. This non-zero accuracy reflects cases where the models
incidentally satisfy the instruction, such as when a model rephrases a sentence without using com-
mas, thus accidentally meeting the “no comma” constraint. When steering is applied, we observe a
consistent increase in instruction adherence across all models, with accuracy improving to approxi-
mately 30%. This shows that the steering vectors encode meaningful information of the instructions


                                                                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       (a) Accuracy w/o Text Instructions                    (b) Accuracy with Text Instr.                                          (c) Phi-3: Accuracy per Instruction
           0.4                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                 Quotation
                                                                                                                                                  Language
                                                                                                                                                                         Capital Word Freq.
           0.3                                                   0.8                                                                  End Checker
Accuracy


                                                      Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                              Highlight Text
                                                                                                                                     Capitalize
           0.2                                                   0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                Lowercase
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
                                                                                                                                   JSON Format
           0.1                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                                                              Constrained Resp.
                                                                                                                               umber Bullet Lists
            0                                                    0.5                                                                                                   Multiple Sect.
                 Phi-3*   Gemma 2 Mistral Gemma 2                      Phi-3*   Gemma 2 Mistral Gemma 2                                               Title      No Comma
                           2B IT* 7B Instr.* 9B IT*                               2B IT 7B Instr. 9B IT

                     Std. Inference     Steering                           Std. Inference    Steering                                                  Std. Inference        Steering


Figure 3: Format Instructions. (a) Instruction-following accuracy without explicit text instructions
shows significant improvement with steering across all models. (b) Steering enhances accuracy even
when text instructions are provided. (c) Per-instruction accuracy for Phi-3 without text instructions.
and can be effectively used to steer the models toward the intended behavior. Next, we evaluate
on inputs with instructions provided in the text (Figure 3b). As expected, the instruction-following
accuracy without steering is higher in this setting, ranging between 60% and 90%. Nevertheless,
steering still results in a notceable performance boost for two out of four models, demonstrating that
steering can enhance instruction adherence even when the instructions are explicitly given.
To further analyze which instructions benefit most from steering, we break down Phi-3’s perfor-
mance by instruction on input without explicit text instructions (Figure 3c). Notably, we observe
significant improvements for instructions such as “Lowercase,” which requires the output to be en-
tirely in lowercase characters, and “Highlight Text,” which asks the model to emphasize parts of
the response using markdown syntax. However, certain instructions display variability in steering
effectiveness. For instance, the “End Checker” instruction requires the model to finish the response
with a variable, input-dependent sentence (e.g., “Hope you agree with me,” or “Is there anything
else I can help you with?”). Because the steering vector is computed by averaging over all examples
containing this instruction, it likely fails to capture the specific sentence required in each individual
case, reducing its ability to steer the model toward precisely following this type of instruction.
Response Quality Evaluation. Figure 4 compares the aver-            Changes in Response Quality Score

age differences in response quality scores for the four mod-
                                                                                                        Avg. Quality Score Delta


                                                                         0
els. The two leftmost groups of bars show the score changes
due to steering, with and without input instructions (calculated     −0.05
only for cases where steering is applied). Satisfying specific
                                                                      −0.1
constraints during generation may lead to less comprehensive
responses and hence following instructions is expected to im-        −0.15
pact the response quality. To show this effect, we also present
                                                                            Steering         Steering    No Steering
the differences in quality scores observed when explicit text              w/o Instr.        w/ Instr. w/ vs. w/o Instr.

instructions are added to the base queries without steering. We                Phi-3                 Gemma 2B IT
                                                                               Mistral 7B I.         Gemma 9B IT
observe small decreases in quality score due to steering in the
setting including instructions (with the exception of Gemma
2B) while the decreases in the setting without instructions are Figure 4: Quality Score. Aver-
slightly larger but comparable to the effect caused by simply age response quality score changes
adding the instructions as text. However, we also observe in- for four models, comparing the ef-
stances where steering compromised the quality of generation– fects of steering with and without
examples where the model generated nonsensical tokens or input instructions to the effect of
repeated itself. These failures likely result from suboptimal adding instructions without steer-
steering or partially insufficient objectives during the search ing. Steering decreases quality
for layers to intervene, as steering for specific properties can similarly to adding instructions.
increase perplexity or reduce fluency (Turner et al., 2023; Stickland et al., 2024). We provide some
examples from the few cases we observed in Appendix F.

4            L ENGTH I NSTRUCTIONS
Steering Vector Computation. Length constraints can be specified in various ways, such as by the
number of sentences, words, or lines. However, unlike format instructions, it seems impractical to
compute a separate steering vector for each possible length constraint. Instead, we focus on captur-


                                                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Length vs. Steering Weights                              (b) Accuracy Per Length Constraint                           (c) Length: Pre- vs. Post-Steering
                                                                                 0.9
                                                                                                                                                0.6               Length constraint: 5


                                                                                                                          Probability Density
Probability Density
                                                                                 0.8


                                                                      Accuracy
                      0.04                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                 0.7
                      0.02
                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                 0.6
                           0
                               0            200             400                                                                                  0
                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                       1*       2*       3*   4*     5*                                       5                 10
                                     Length (# of words)
                                                                                             Max. # of Sentences                                                  Length
          Weight                     40       20       10         5
                                     0                                                      Std. Inference    Steering                                Std. Inference        Steering



Figure 5: Length Instructions. (a) Modulating the steering weight c effectively adjusts response
length, with larger values leading to more concise outputs. (b) Steering enhances adherence to the
maximum length constraints when they are explicitly specified in the input text. (c) Shift in the
response length distribution upon steering for outputs constrained to a maximum of 5 sentences.

Table 2: Example of Steering for Length Control. Responses to the same prompt with increasing
steering weights, resulting in progressively shorter outputs in terms of sentence and word count.

           Weight                  Resp. to “Write a movie plot that involves dream, fist fighting, and superpower.”                                     # of Sents.       # of Words
                                   In the bustling city of New Haven, a young, introverted artist named Alex dreams
                       0           of a world where his art comes to life. One night, Alex has a vivid dream where                                           15               324
                                   he discovers he possesses a unique superpower: the ability to bring [...]
                                   In a world where dreams can be harnessed as a source of power, a young,
                       5           introverted artist named Leo discovers he has the unique ability                                                           9               228
                                   to enter and manipulate the dreams of others [...]
                                   In a world where dreams can manifest into reality, a young woman named Elara
                      10                                                                                                                                     10               203
                                   discovers she possesses the rare ability to fight with her fists in her dreams [...]
                                   In a world where dreams can manifest reality, a young girl named Lila discovers
                      20                                                                                                                                      3                81
                                   she can unleash her latent superpower through her dreams [...]
                                   A young girl dreams of a superpower, fights a rival in a dream, and unleashes
                      40                                                                                                                                      1                23
                                   her power to save her village from destruction.


ing more general notions of conciseness and verbosity. To achieve this, we compute vector repre-
sentations for instructions that prompt the model to be brief (e.g., “The answer should be brief”) or
to provide more detailed responses (e.g., “Provide a long answer”). We synthetically generate these
prompts by appending such instructions to base queries from IFEval. After computing these steering
vectors, we evaluate the model on a separate set of IFEval base queries, this time appending length
instructions specified in terms of the number of sentences (e.g., “Answer using at most 3 sentences”).
Steering Results. Unlike format instructions, steering the model for length constraints allows for
continuous modulation, enabling interpolation between varying degrees of conciseness or verbosity.
To explore this, we manually adjust the steering weight c and examine how this affects the response
length. On a set of 50 base prompts without any explicit length instructions, we generate responses
from Phi-3 using different values of c, measuring the distribution of output lengths. As shown
in Figure 5a, increasing the value of c effectively shortens the model’s responses: larger steering
weights produce increasingly concise outputs. We provide an example of different outputs generated
on the same inputs with different steering weights in Table 2. Next, we assess whether steering
for length is effective even when the model is provided explicit length instructions. Using a set
of 200 base prompts, we introduce instructions that request the model to limit its response to a
maximum of n ∈ {1, . . . , 5} sentences. First, we evaluate how often the model adheres to this
constraint without steering (light blue bars in Figure 5b). Then, on the same inputs, we apply the
steering vector for conciseness with a weight of c = 20 (dark blue bars in Figure 5b). Across all
five values of n, we observe a significant and consistent improvement in how often the model’s
responses comply with the length constraint. Figure 5c further illustrates how steering shifts the
response length distribution toward shorter outputs while still allowing for variability and avoiding
overly short responses. We also conducted experiments with steering for longer outputs and for
exact output length, observing positive results (Appendix J). Finally, response quality evaluation
results are provided in Appendix F.


                                                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (a) Word-Inclusion Instructions                       (b) Word-Exclusion Instructions
       w/o Instr.                   w/ Instr.                  w/o Instr.                  w/ Instr.                        Table 3: Example of Word Ex-
 1                           1                           1                           1
                                                                                                                            clusion. The instruction alone
0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8
                                                                                                                            fails to exclude “step,” but steer-
0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6                                     ing successfully removes it.
0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4

0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2
                                                                                                                                         Resp. to “What are the steps to be
                                                                                                                                 Steer   followed for the documentation of a
      Phi-3   Gemma 2B IT         Phi-3   Gemma 2B IT         Phi-3* Gemma 2B IT*         Phi-3 Gemma 2B IT*                             GM in SAP? Do not use the word step.”
                Std. Inference       Steering                          Std. Inference       Steering
                                                                                                                                         Documenting a General Master
                                                                                                                                         in SAP involves [provides guide]
                                                                                                                                  No
                                                                                                                                         By following these steps, you can
Figure 6: Word-specific Instructions. (a) Steering improves                                                                              create comprehensive [...]
keyword inclusion accuracy for Phi-3 and Gemma 2 2B IT, with                                                                             ## Documenting a General Master
                                                                                                                                         (GM) in SAP: [provides guide]
and without explicit instructions. (b) Negative steering reduces                                                                 Yes
                                                                                                                                         By following this comprehensive guide,
the occurrence of undesired keywords, in both settings.                                                                                  you can create a well-structured [...]


5      W ORD - SPECIFIC I NSTRUCTIONS
Word Inclusion. For this set of instructions, we compute word-specific steering vectors. To gen-
erate these vectors, we append different phrasings of a request to include a specific word w (e.g.,
“please include the word {w} in your response”) to a set of base queries. These prompts are used
to compute a vector representation for the “include word {w}” instruction. While this requires a
separate steering vector for each keyword at inference time, the vectors can be generated on-the-fly
using arbitrary base queries unrelated to the keyword itself. Furthermore, these vectors can be com-
puted with a small number of examples; in our experiments, we use only 20 examples. The models
are then evaluated on the subset of IFEval that contains keyword inclusion/exclusion constraints.5
The results, presented in Figure 6a, demonstrate the effectiveness of steering for word inclusion.
By applying the word-specific steering vectors, we observe a notable increase in the frequency with
which the model successfully includes the requested keywords in its responses.
Word Exclusion. For keyword exclusion, we initially used the        (a) Multi-instr.: Format & Length
same procedure, appending instructions like “ensure the word         0.8
                                                                                                               Length Accuracy


w does not appear in the answer” to base queries and com-
puting the corresponding steering vectors. However, upon in-         0.6

specting the steering vectors, we found that projecting these        0.4
vectors onto the vocabulary space resulted in high logit val-
                                                                     0.2
ues for the tokens corresponding to the words meant to be ex-                 0.2       0.4       0.6     0.8
cluded. In other words, adding these vectors to the model’s                       Fomat Accuracy
residual stream actually increased the probability of generating             w/o Instr.        + Steering
                                                                    (b) Multi-instr.: Casing & Word Ex.
the very keywords we intended to exclude. To address this is-                w/ Instr.         + Steering
sue, instead of computing exclusion vectors, we compute the            1
                                                                                                               Casing Accuracy


vectors for inclusion and then subtract them from the model’s
residual stream. This technique effectively steers the model         0.5

away from using the words captured by the vector. Figure 6b
shows the results of steering for keyword exclusion using this         0
                                                                          0.6      0.7      0.8      0.9    1
approach. We observe that subtracting the inclusion vectors
significantly reduces the frequency of the undesired keywords                 Word   Exclusion  Accuracy
                                                                           w/o Instr.         + Steering*
in the model’s responses, both in cases where no textual in-
                                                                           w/ Instr.          + Steering
structions are present and where explicit exclusion instructions
are provided in the input. Table 3 reports an example where the
                                                                  Figure 7:            Multi-instruction
instruction to exclude a specific word is ineffective on its own,
                                                                  Steering. Steering for two in-
but applying steering successfully enforces the constraint.
                                                                  structions improves adherence to
                                                                  both.
6 M ULTI - INSTRUCTION S TEERING
Next, we present results on using our steering approach to handle multiple instructions simultane-
ously. With the same method as in the previous experiments, we steer the Phi-3 model for two
   5
     IFEval prompts may contain instructions for the inclusion or exclusion of multiple keywords in the same
example. We separate such cases into inputs with single-keyword instructions.


                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Cross-model Steering. (a,b) Steering vectors from instruction-tuned models transfer
effectively to base models, with cross-model steering outperforming same-model steering in Gemma
2 2B. (c) Cross-model steering for length instructions shortens output as steering weight increases.


instructions at once, applying the steering vectors at the layers previously identified as optimal for
each individual instruction. We opt for injecting multiple steering vectors simultaneously at differ-
ent locations instead of combining multiple steering vectors into a single one, as previous work has
shown the latter approach to be largely unsuccessful (van der Weij et al., 2024).
Figure 7 shows results from experiments with steering two instructions the same time: format (all 13
instructions) and length (Figure 7a), as well as lowercase and keyword exclusion (Figure 7b). In both
cases, steering leads to improvements on both axes. These findings suggest that steering for multiple
instructions at once is feasible and can lead to performance gains across different constraints. How-
ever, we anticipate that issues may arise in certain cases, particularly when dealing with conflicting
instructions, where further refinement may be necessary to balance competing constraints.



7   C ROSS - MODEL S TEERING

Instruction-tuned models show improved instruction-following abilities, suggesting they may also
form more effective instruction representations. This raises the question: can we leverage the repre-
sentations computed on instruction-tuned models to steer a base model more effectively? This idea
is motivated by prior work showing that fine-tuning reinforces existing mechanisms in language
models (Prakash et al., 2024) and that instruction tuning causes minimal weight changes (Lee et al.,
2024; Jain et al., 2024). Additionally, linear representations derived through mean activation dif-
ference and sparse autoencoders (Huben et al., 2024) have been shown to be transferable between
base and chat models (Panickssery et al., 2024; Kissane et al., 2024). To study this in our setting,
we conduct experiments with the base and instruction-tuned versions of Gemma 2 2B and 9B. We
focus on format instructions, using the same data and procedures outlined in §3. The key difference
is that we apply steering vectors computed on the instruction-tuned models to steer the base models,
comparing this approach to same-model steering (vectors computed on the base model).
In both the base query-only setting (Figure 8a) and with explicit instructions (Figure 8b), steering
base models using vectors computed on instruction-tuned counterparts yields performance gains
that demonstrate the transferability of instruction representations. Notably, in the case of Gemma
2 2B, cross-model steering outperforms same-model steering across both settings, highlighting its
potential for more effective instruction adherence in smaller models. We also explore cross-model
steering for length instructions. As described in §4, we compute a steering vector for conciseness
from the instruction-tuned version of Gemma 9B and apply it to the base version. Figure 8c shows
that increasing the steering weight shortens the outputs, demonstrating that representations learned
in instruction-tuned models can still meaningfully modulate the output in the base model’s space.
This is the first demonstration that cross-model steering–using vectors from instruction-tuned
models–can outperform same-model steering in base models. This finding suggests that special-
ized representations from fine-tuned models can be leveraged to steer base models more effectively,
opening new possibilities for composable transfer learning in instruction-based tasks where task
vectors may originate from different models that are instruction-tuned in specialized domains.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


8    R ELATED W ORK

Instruction Following. Training models to follow instructions is crucial for improving LLM per-
formance and ensuring safe deployment, with various methods developed to enhance instruction
adherence (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Chung et al.,
2024), and datasets designed to train and evaluate instruction-following behavior (Ye et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022; Finlayson et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2022; Longpre et al.,
2023; Köpf et al., 2023). Natural language instructions have demonstrated significant promise in
providing fine-grained control over model outputs (Zhou et al., 2023b). However, capable models
still struggle with tasks that require outputs to satisfy fine-grained, hard constraints (Sun et al., 2023)
and tend to drift from adhering to a constraint as the generation lengthens (Li et al., 2024). Moti-
vated by these challenges, our work investigates how to improve instruction-following behavior by
directly intervening on the model’s activations at inference time.
Language Model Representations. Our approach is inspired by prior research that shows it is pos-
sible to obtain vector representations encoding information about tasks on which a language model
has been trained (Ilharco et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024) or tasks learned in context (Hendel et al.,
2023; Todd et al., 2024). These studies are part of a broader body of work that examines the linear
representation of features such as truthfulness (Li et al., 2023; Azaria & Mitchell, 2023; Marks &
Tegmark, 2024), sentiment (Tigges et al., 2024), harmlessness (Zou et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024),
sychophancy (Perez et al., 2023; Panickssery et al., 2024; Sharma et al., 2024), factual knowledge
(Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024), and refusal (Arditi et al., 2024). In addition, recent works have em-
ployed sparse autoencoders to identify feature directions in an unsupervised manner (Bricken et al.,
2023; Huben et al., 2024; Templeton et al., 2024). A shared hypothesis across these works is that
LLMs represent features or concepts as linear directions in activation space (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Elhage et al., 2021; Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024; Olah, 2024). While
recent studies suggest that not all features may be linearly encoded (Engels et al., 2025; Csordás
et al., 2024), the linearity assumption has been effective for both concept erasure (Ravfogel et al.,
2020; Belrose et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2023; Guerner et al., 2024) and model steering.
Model Steering via Activation Editing. It is well-established that the generation of a language
model’s output can be manipulated by directly editing activation values during inference (Dathathri
et al., 2020; Subramani et al., 2022). Recent studies have shown that this approach can effectively
steer models to be more honest and truthful (Li et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2024), sycophantic (Pan-
ickssery et al., 2024; van der Weij et al., 2024), morally aligned with human values (Zou et al.,
2023; Lu & Panickssery, 2024), or to display different sentiments, output styles, and languages
(Turner et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Tigges et al., 2024; Scalena et al., 2024; von Rütte et al., 2024).
Steering methods have also been used to control the model’s uncertainty (Rahn et al., 2024), adopt
different personas (Cao et al., 2024), provide alternative factual answers (Hernandez et al., 2024),
and respond to harmful requests (Arditi et al., 2024; Wang & Shu, 2024). Similarly to some of
these works (Burns et al., 2023; Turner et al., 2023; Panickssery et al., 2024; Arditi et al., 2024;
van der Weij et al., 2024), we compute steering vectors based on input pairs that differ by a specific
feature—in our case, the presence or absence of instructions. However, while previous studies have
focused on high-level concepts such as sentiment, style, and safety, we focus on lower-level, hard
constraints defined through natural language instructions, allowing for finer-grained control of the
model’s output.


9    C ONCLUSION

We demonstrated the effectiveness of activation steering for improving language models’ adherence
to instructions. By computing steering vectors based on activation differences between inputs with
and without instructions, we guide models to follow constraints related to format, length, and word
inclusion/exclusion. These vectors capture meaningful instruction representations, enabling mod-
els to meet constraints even without explicit instructions, while also enhancing performance when
instructions are present. Additionally, we show that models can handle multiple constraints simul-
taneously, offering a flexible framework for controlled language generation. Finally, we explore
cross-model steering, revealing that vectors computed on instruction-tuned models can improve the
behavior of base models, in some cases surpassing same-model steering.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We submitted our code and data as supplementary materials, and they will be open-sourced upon
publication. §2.2 outlines our methodology in detail. Information about the datasets we used, as
well as the procedures for obtaining and augmenting them, is provided in §2.3, along with Apps. C
and D. §2.3 also contains the details of the evaluation metrics we employed and the process for
generating model outputs. Appendix F provides further details on the implementation of our quality
score metric. Additional implementation and experimental details are included in Appendix G.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to express our gratitude to Andy Arditi, Ahmed Awadallah, Natasha Butt, Varun
Chandrasekaran, Arthur Conmy, Nico Daheim, Saibo Geng, Suriya Gunasekar, Neel Joshi, Sid-
dharth Joshi, Mazda Moayeri, Neel Nanda, Harsha Nori, Kyle O’Brien, Vibhav Vineet, and Vilém
Zouhar for their valuable feedback and insightful discussions throughout the development of this
project. We also extend our thanks to the AI Frontiers group at Microsoft Research, with special
recognition to Ece Kamar for practical support. Alessandro acknowledges the support of armasuisse
Science and Technology through a CYD Doctoral Fellowship.


R EFERENCES
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen
 Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko,
 Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Qin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dong-
 dong Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao Cheng, Parul Chopra, Xiyang
 Dai, Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Jianfeng Gao, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit
 Garg, Allie Del Giorno, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao,
 Russell J. Hewett, Wenxiang Hu, Jamie Huynh, Dan Iter, Sam Ade Jacobs, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin
 Jin, Nikos Karampatziakis, Piero Kauffmann, Mahoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim,
 Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars Liden,
 Xihui Lin, Zeqi Lin, Ce Liu, Liyuan Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Chong
 Luo, Piyush Madan, Ali Mahmoudzadeh, David Majercak, Matt Mazzola, Caio César Teodoro
 Mendes, Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel Perez-
 Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Liliang Ren, Gustavo
 de Rosa, Corby Rosset, Sambudha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim,
 Michael Santacroce, Shital Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Swadheen Shukla,
 Xia Song, Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea Tupini, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chunyu Wang, Guanhua
 Wang, Lijuan Wang, Shuohang Wang, Xin Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Wen Wen, Philipp
 Witte, Haiping Wu, Xiaoxia Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Ji-
 long Xue, Sonali Yadav, Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan,
 Chenruidong Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan
 Zhang, and Xiren Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your
 phone, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219.

Andy Arditi, Oscar Balcells Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Rimsky, Wes Gurnee, and
  Neel Nanda. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. In The Thirty-
  eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=pH3XAQME6c.

Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Her-
 nandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack
 Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. A general language assistant as a labora-
 tory for alignment, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00861.

Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it’s lying. In Houda
 Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
 guistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 967–976, Singapore, dec 2023. Association for Computational Lin-


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.68. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.findings-emnlp.68.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernan-
  dez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Ka-
  plan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862.

Nora Belrose.  Diff-in-means concept editing is worst-case optimal: Explaining a re-
  sult by Sam Marks and Max Tegmark, 2023. URL https://blog.eleuther.ai/
  diff-in-means/.

Nora Belrose, David Schneider-Joseph, Shauli Ravfogel, Ryan Cotterell, Edward Raff, and Stella
  Biderman. LEACE: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form. In Thirty-seventh Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=awIpKpwTwF.

Steven Bird and Edward Loper. NLTK: The natural language toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL
  Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pp. 214–217, Barcelona, Spain, jul 2004. Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/P04-3031.

Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai.
  Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embed-
  dings.   In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/
  file/a486cd07e4ac3d270571622f4f316ec5-Paper.pdf.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
  Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, Robert Lasenby, Yifan Wu, Shauna Kravec,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Tim Maxwell, Nicholas Joseph, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Alex Tamkin, Karina
  Nguyen, Brayden McLean, Josiah E Burke, Tristan Hume, Shan Carter, Tom Henighan, and
  Christopher Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language models with dictionary
  learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. URL https://transformer-circuits.
  pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.

Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ETKGuby0hcs.

Yuanpu Cao, Tianrong Zhang, Bochuan Cao, Ziyi Yin, Lu Lin, Fenglong Ma, and Jinghui Chen.
  Personalized steering of large language models: Versatile steering vectors through bi-directional
  preference optimization. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=7qJFkuZdYo.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
  Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned
  language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(70):1–53, 2024. URL https:
  //www.jmlr.org/papers/v25/23-0870.html.

Róbert Csordás, Christopher Potts, Christopher D Manning, and Atticus Geiger. Recurrent neural
  networks learn to store and generate sequences using non-linear representations. In Yonatan Be-
  linkov, Najoung Kim, Jaap Jumelet, Hosein Mohebbi, Aaron Mueller, and Hanjie Chen (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
  NLP, pp. 248–262, Miami, Florida, US, November 2024. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.blackboxnlp-1.17. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2024.blackboxnlp-1.17/.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason
  Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to con-
  trolled text generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1edEyBKDS.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Gan-
  guli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal
  Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris
  Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.
  URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.

Joshua Engels, Eric J Michaud, Isaac Liao, Wes Gurnee, and Max Tegmark. Not all language model
  features are linear. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=d63a4AM4hb.

Matthew Finlayson, Kyle Richardson, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. What makes instruction
 learning hard? an investigation and a new challenge in a synthetic environment. In Yoav Goldberg,
 Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 414–426, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, dec
 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.27. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.27.

Gemma Team. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.

Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers
 build predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
 Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing, pp. 30–45, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, dec 2022. Asso-
 ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.3. URL https:
 //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.3.

Clément Guerner, Anej Svete, Tianyu Liu, Alexander Warstadt, and Ryan Cotterell. A geometric
  notion of causal probing, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15054.

Prakhar Gupta, Cathy Jiao, Yi-Ting Yeh, Shikib Mehri, Maxine Eskenazi, and Jeffrey Bigham. In-
  structDial: Improving zero and few-shot generalization in dialogue through instruction tuning. In
  Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 505–525, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emi-
  rates, dec 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.
  33. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.33.

Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent space and time. In The Twelfth Interna-
 tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=jE8xbmvFin.

Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández
  del Rı́o, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy,
  Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array program-
  ming with NumPy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, sep 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.

Roee Hendel, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. In-context learning creates task vectors. In Houda
  Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 9318–9333, Singapore, dec 2023. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.624. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/2023.findings-emnlp.624.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Evan Hernandez, Belinda Z. Li, and Jacob Andreas. Inspecting and editing knowledge rep-
  resentations in language models. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=ADtL6fgNRv.

Shih-Cheng Huang, Pin-Zu Li, Yu-chi Hsu, Kuang-Ming Chen, Yu Tung Lin, Shih-Kai Hsiao,
  Richard Tsai, and Hung-yi Lee. Chat vector: A simple approach to equip LLMs with instruc-
  tion following and model alignment in new languages. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 10943–10959, Bangkok, Thailand, aug 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.590.

Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. Sparse
  autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=F76bwRSLeK.

Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Wortsman, Ludwig Schmidt, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
  and Ali Farhadi. Editing models with task arithmetic. In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  6t0Kwf8-jrj.

Samyak Jain, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Kemal Oksuz, Tom Joy, Philip Torr, Amartya Sanyal, and
  Puneet K. Dokania. What makes and breaks safety fine-tuning? a mechanistic study. In ICML
  2024 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=BS2CbUkJpy.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
  lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
  Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
  Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.

Connor Kissane, Robert Krzyzanowski, Arthur Conmy, and Neel Nanda.   SAEs (usu-
  ally) transfer between base and chat models.   Alignment Forum, 2024.   URL
  https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/fmwk6qxrpW8d4jvbd/
  saes-usually-transfer-between-base-and-chat-models.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In ICML 2022 Workshop on Knowledge Retrieval and
  Language Models, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6p3AuaHAFiN.

Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi Rui Tam, Keith
  Stevens, Abdullah Barhoum, Duc Nguyen, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi, Shahul ES, Sameer
  Suri, David Glushkov, Arnav Dantuluri, Andrew Maguire, Christoph Schuhmann, Huu Nguyen,
  and Alexander Mattick. Openassistant conversations - democratizing large language model
  alignment. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 47669–47681. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2023/file/949f0f8f32267d297c2d4e3ee10a2e7e-Paper-Datasets_
  and_Benchmarks.pdf.

Andrew Lee, Xiaoyan Bai, Itamar Pres, Martin Wattenberg, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, and Rada
  Mihalcea. A mechanistic understanding of alignment algorithms: A case study on DPO and
  toxicity. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=dBqHGZPGZI.

Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=aLLuYpn83y.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kenneth Li, Tianle Liu, Naomi Bashkansky, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and
  Martin Wattenberg. Measuring and controlling instruction (in)stability in language model di-
  alogs. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=60a1SAtH4e.

Sheng Liu, Haotian Ye, Lei Xing, and James Y. Zou. In-context vectors: Making in context learn-
  ing more effective and controllable through latent space steering. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  dJTChKgv3a.

Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V
  Le, Barret Zoph, Jason Wei, and Adam Roberts. The flan collection: Designing data and methods
  for effective instruction tuning. In Krause, Andreas and Brunskill, Emma and Cho, Kyunghyun
  and Engelhardt, Barbara and Sabato, Sivan and Scarlett, Jonathan (ed.), Proceedings of the 40th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 22631–22648. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v202/longpre23a.html.

Renze Lou, Kai Zhang, and Wenpeng Yin. Large language model instruction following: A survey
  of progresses and challenges. Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–43, 08 2024. ISSN 0891-2017.
  doi: 10.1162/coli a 00523. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_a_00523.

Dawn Lu and Nina Panickssery. Investigating bias representations in llama 2 chat via activation
  steering, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00402.

Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language
  model representations of true/false datasets. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=aajyHYjjsk.

Quinn McNemar. Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or
  percentages. Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157, 1947. URL https://link.springer.com/
  article/10.1007/bf02295996.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean.          Dis-
  tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.   In C.J.
  Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2013. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/
  file/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf.

Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task general-
  ization via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov,
  and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, Dublin, Ireland, may
  2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.244. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.

Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom. Transformerlens, 2022.            URL https://github.com/
  TransformerLensOrg/TransformerLens.

Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world mod-
  els of self-supervised sequence models. In Yonatan Belinkov, Sophie Hao, Jaap Jumelet, Na-
  joung Kim, Arya McCarthy, and Hosein Mohebbi (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th BlackboxNLP
  Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 16–30, Singapore, dec
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.2. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.blackboxnlp-1.2.

nostalgebraist. Interpreting GPT: The logit lens.  LessWrong, 2020.
  URL           https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/
  interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Christopher Olah. What is a linear representation? what is a multidimensional feature? Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  july-update/.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Gray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  TG8KACxEON.
Nina Panickssery, Nick Gabrieli, Julian Schulz, Meg Tong, Evan Hubinger, and Alexander Turner.
  Steering llama 2 via contrastive activation addition. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
  Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15504–15522, Bangkok, Thailand, aug 2024.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.828.
Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geom-
  etry of large language models. In Salakhutdinov, Ruslan and Kolter, Zico and Heller, Kather-
  ine and Weller, Adrian and Oliver, Nuria and Scarlett, Jonathan and Berkenkamp, Felix (ed.),
  Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 39643–39666. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/park24c.html.
Emanuel Parzen. On estimation of a probability density function and mode. The Annals of Math-
  ematical Statistics, 33(3):1065–1076, 1962. ISSN 00034851. URL http://www.jstor.
  org/stable/2237880.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf.
Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Benjamin
  Mann, Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela
  Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jack-
  son Kernion, James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Ka-
  mal Ndousse, Landon Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang,
  Neerav Kingsland, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver
  Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tam-
  era Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny
  Hernandez, Deep Ganguli, Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. Discover-
  ing language model behaviors with model-written evaluations. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
  Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2023, pp. 13387–13434, Toronto, Canada, jul 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.847. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-acl.847.
Plotly Technologies Inc. Collaborative data science, 2015. URL https://plot.ly.
Nikhil Prakash, Tamar Rott Shaham, Tal Haklay, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Fine-tuning
  enhances existing mechanisms: A case study on entity tracking. In The Twelfth International


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=8sKcAWOf2D.
Yifu Qiu, Zheng Zhao, Yftah Ziser, Anna Korhonen, Edoardo Ponti, and Shay B Cohen. Spectral
  editing of activations for large language model alignment. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=pqYceEa87j.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Lan-
  guage models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. URL https:
  //insightcivic.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/language-models.pdf.
Nate Rahn, Pierluca D’Oro, and Marc G Bellemare. Controlling large language model agents with
  entropic activation steering. In ICML 2024 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=3eBdq2n848.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, Hila Gonen, Michael Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. Null it out: Guard-
  ing protected attributes by iterative nullspace projection. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie
  Schluter, and Joel Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7237–7256, Online, jul 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.647. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.acl-main.647.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
  Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
  Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
  bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
  Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
  Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le
  Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
Daniel Scalena, Gabriele Sarti, and Malvina Nissim. Multi-property steering of large language
  models with dynamic activation composition. In Yonatan Belinkov, Najoung Kim, Jaap Jumelet,
  Hosein Mohebbi, Aaron Mueller, and Hanjie Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP
  Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 577–603, Miami, Florida,
  US, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
  blackboxnlp-1.34. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.blackboxnlp-1.34/.
Shun Shao, Yftah Ziser, and Shay B. Cohen. Gold doesn’t always glitter: Spectral removal
  of linear and nonlinear guarded attribute information. In Andreas Vlachos and Isabelle Au-
  genstein (eds.), Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1611–1622, Dubrovnik, Croatia, may 2023. Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.eacl-main.118. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.118.
Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R.
 Bowman, Esin DURMUS, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R Johnston, Shauna M Kravec, Timo-
 thy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan,
 Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models.
 In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=tvhaxkMKAn.
Asa Cooper Stickland, Alexander Lyzhov, Jacob Pfau, Salsabila Mahdi, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  Steering without side effects: Improving post-deployment control of language models. In Neurips
  Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  tfXIZ8P4ZU.
Nishant Subramani, Nivedita Suresh, and Matthew Peters. Extracting latent steering vectors from
  pretrained language models. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio
  (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 566–581,

                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Dublin, Ireland, may 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  findings-acl.48. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.48.
Jiao Sun, Yufei Tian, Wangchunshu Zhou, Nan Xu, Qian Hu, Rahul Gupta, John Wieting, Nanyun
   Peng, and Xuezhe Ma. Evaluating large language models on controlled generation tasks. In
   Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
   Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3155–3168, Singapore, dec 2023.
   Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.190. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.190.
Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen,
  Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L
  Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, C. Daniel Freeman, Theodore R. Sumers,
  Edward Rees, Joshua Batson, Adam Jermyn, Shan Carter, Chris Olah, and Tom Henighan.
  Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 sonnet. Trans-
  former Circuits Thread, 2024. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/
  scaling-monosemanticity/index.html.
Curt Tigges, Oskar John Hollinsworth, Neel Nanda, and Atticus Geiger. Language models linearly
  represent sentiment, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iGDWZFc7Ya.
Eric Todd, Millicent Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau.
  Function vectors in large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AwyxtyMwaG.
Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, Gavin Leech, David Udell, Juan J Vazquez, Ulisse Mini, and
  Monte MacDiarmid. Activation addition: Steering language models without optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2308.10248, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10248.
Teun van der Weij, Massimo Poesio, and Nandi Schoots. Extending activation steering to broad
  skills and multiple behaviours, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.05767.
Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Gregor Bachmann, and Thomas Hofmann. A language
  model’s guide through latent space, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14433.
Haoran Wang and Kai Shu. Trojan activation attack: Red-Teaming large language models using acti-
  vation steering for safety-alignment, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09433.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei,
  Atharva Naik, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Anjana Arunkumar, David Stap, Es-
  haan Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob An-
  derson, Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Maitreya Patel, Mehrad Moradshahi,
  Mihir Parmar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravse-
  haj Singh Puri, Rushang Karia, Savan Doshi, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan
  Reddy A, Sumanta Patro, Tanay Dixit, and Xudong Shen. Super-NaturalInstructions: General-
  ization via declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva,
  and Yue Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 5085–5109, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, dec 2022. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.340. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.340.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
Wes McKinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In Stéfan van der Walt and
 Jarrod Millman (eds.), Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pp. 56 – 61, 2010.
 doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a. URL https://scipy.org.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bb4VGOWELI.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qinyuan Ye, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. CrossFit: A few-shot learning challenge for cross-
  task generalization in NLP. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and
  Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
  ural Language Processing, pp. 7163–7189, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, nov
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.572. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.572.
Hanqing Zhang, Haolin Song, Shaoyu Li, Ming Zhou, and Dawei Song. A survey of controllable
  text generation using transformer-based pre-trained language models. ACM Comput. Surv., 56(3),
  oct 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3617680. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3617680.
Chujie Zheng, Fan Yin, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, Kai-Wei Chang, Minlie Huang, and
  Nanyun Peng. On prompt-driven safeguarding for large language models. In ICLR 2024 Workshop
  on Secure and Trustworthy Large Language Models, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=lFwf7bnpUs.
Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Siddhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou,
   and Le Hou. Instruction-following evaluation for large language models, 2023a. URL https:
   //arxiv.org/abs/2311.07911.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Ethan Wilcox, Ryan Cotterell, and Mrinmaya Sachan.
 Controlled text generation with natural language instructions. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brun-
 skill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceed-
 ings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings
 of Machine Learning Research, pp. 42602–42613. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023b. URL https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v202/zhou23g.html.
Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander
  Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li,
  Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt
  Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation engineering: A top-down ap-
  proach to AI transparency, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405.
Vilém Zouhar. Ryanize bib, 2023. URL https://github.com/zouharvi/ryanize-bib.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

While our work demonstrates the potential of activation steering for improving instruction adher-
ence, it has multiple limitations that highlight avenues for future research. Activation steering in-
volves several degrees of freedom, including the selection of the model layer to intervene at, de-
termining the steering weight, and identifying where in the input or output sequence to apply the
intervention. While our method systematically selects these parameters based on paired examples
that differ by the presence of an instruction, it does not fully explore the space of possible interven-
tions, leaving room for optimization. For instance, the quality of instruction representations directly
impacts the effectiveness of steering. Representations computed from inputs where the model fails
to adhere to instructions may reduce the efficacy of steering. Future work could explore filtering
out such representations during vector computation to improve results, although this would require
additional instruction-following accuracy checks, which our current approach avoids. Furthermore,
our method applies a fixed steering weight throughout the generation process. Dynamically modu-
lating the steering weight during generation (Scalena et al., 2024) could adapt the intervention to the
evolving context and improve performance.
Another area for exploration is the effect of the number of examples used to compute steering vec-
tors. Previous research indicates that clean concept representations can be obtained with relatively
few examples (e.g., 128; Arditi et al., 2024). In our experiments, steering vectors computed from as
few as 20 examples proved effective. However, we did not extensively investigate how varying the
size of the example set affects the quality of these vectors. Future research could focus on optimizing
this balance between computational efficiency and steering performance.
While we consider a reasonably large and diverse set of instructions in our experiments, the range
of possible real-world user requests is vast and cannot be exhaustively represented. Additionally,
our use of perplexity (computed with GPT-2; Radford et al., 2019) as a proxy for output quality
focuses on detecting issues in fluency and coherence but may miss subtler forms of degradation,
such as factual inaccuracies or logical inconsistencies. Incorporating more nuanced quality metrics
or task-specific evaluations could improve parameter selection.
Finally, an interesting direction for future work stems from our cross-model steering experiments.
In our work, we experiment with transferring steering vectors from instruction-tuned to base models
of the same family and parameter size. An interesting avenue for future research is exploring the
transferability of steering vectors across models with different architectures or sizes, potentially by
learning transformations that map the latent space of one model to another.



B    L IST OF I NSTRUCTIONS

In Table 4, we provide a list of the instructions and examples used in the subset of the IFEval
dataset for our experiments about the output format (§3). For the “language” instructions, the dataset
includes the following languages: German, Urdu, Portuguese, Korean, Marathi, Punjabi, Kannada,
Farsi, Swahili, Russian, Hindi, Arabic, Nepali, Telugu, and Gujarati.



C    E XTRACTING IFE VAL BASE Q UERIES

To obtain base queries without instructions, we use GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024)6 to strip the instructions
from the base queries, as the IFEval dataset does not explicitly annotate the instructions within the
prompts. We use a one-shot prompt a fixed in-context example. The prompt used is reported in Ta-
ble 5. These base queries are then used to generate additional base query-instruction combinations,
augmenting the original dataset. Further details on the data used for steering vector computation and
evaluation are provided in Appendix D.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Format-Related Instructions and Examples. Format-related instructions used in our ex-
periments, along with examples illustrating the specific constraints the model is expected to follow.

 Instruction               Example
 No Comma                  You are not allowed to use any commas in your response.
 Lowercase                 Please ensure that your response is in English, and in all lowercase letters
 Language                  Please respond using only the Kannada language, no other language is allowed.
 JSON Format               Wrap the entire output in JSON format. You can use markdown ticks such as “‘.
 Quotation                 Wrap your entire response with double quotation marks.
 Multiple Sections         Write a 4 section [base query]. Each section should be explicitly noted as Section X.
                           Your answer must contain exactly 6 bullet point in Markdown using the following
 Number of Bullet Points
                           format:\n* Bullet point one.\n* Bullet point two.\n... \n* Bullet point six
 Highlighted Sections      At least 15 sections should be highlighted with markdown such as *highlighted section*.
 Title                     Your answer must have a title contained in double angular brackets, such as <<title>>.
 Capitalize                Make sure your entire response is in English, and in all capital letters.
 Capital Word Frequency    Use words in all capital letters at least 3 times to highlight key points.
                           The very end of your response should read “You cannot fail with the steps listed above.”
 End Checker
                           No other words should follow this phrase.
                           Answer with exactly one of the following phrases: “My answer is yes.”, “My
 Constrained Response
                           answer is no.”, “My answer is maybe.”


                               Table 5: Prompt for Instruction Removal.

 Given a question that imposes a set of constraints on the answer, make the question
 simpler by removing all the constraints. You will be given the original question
 and a set of constraints to remove from it, and should output the simplified question
 with the constraints removed. Nothing else should be removed other than the listed
 constraints.
 For example:

 <original question>
 I am planning a trip to Japan, and I would like thee to write an itinerary for my
 journey in a Shakespearean style. You are not allowed to use any commas in your
 response.
 <\original question>

 <constraints>
 [punctuation:no comma]
 <\constraints>

 <output>
 I am planning a trip to Japan, and I would like thee to write an itinerary for my
 journey in a Shakespearean style.
 <\output>

 <original question>
 Write a 300+ word summary of the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/
 wiki/Raymond III Count of Tripoli. Do not use any commas and highlight at least 3
 sections that has titles in markdown format, for example *highlighted section part
 1*, *highlighted section part 2*, *highlighted section part 3*.
 <\original question>

 <constraints>
 [punctuation:no comma, detectable format:number highlighted sections,
 length constraints:number words]
 <\constraints>

 <output>


                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           Table 6: Prompt for Instruction Addition.

 Given a simple question, we want to make the question a bit harder by adding
 constraints to the way it can be answered. You will be given the original question
 and a constraint to add to it, and should output the harder question with the
 constraint integrated into it. Nothing else should be added or removed from the
 question. Only the constraint should be added to the question.
 For example:

 <original question>
 The opposite of youth is not age, but ...?
 <\original question>

 <constraints>
 [detectable format:number highlighted sections]
 <\constraints>

 <output>
 The opposite of youth is not age, but ...? Highlight at least 2 sections in your
 answer with markdown, i.e. *highlighted section*.
 <\output>

 <original question>
 Write a 300+ word summary of the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/
 wiki/Raymond III Count of Tripoli. Do not use any commas and highlight at least 3
 sections that has titles in markdown format, for example *highlighted section part
 1*, *highlighted section part 2*, *highlighted section part 3*.
 <\original question>

 <constraint>
 detectable format:number highlighted sections {’num highlights’:        2}
 <\constraint>

 <output>


D       DATA AND V ECTOR C OMPUTATION D ETAILS

Format Instructions. The steering vectors and layer selection for format instructions are computed
using a separate set of synthetically generated prompts. To generate a synthetic dataset containing
all base prompts with all instructions from the IFEval dataset, we start with the base prompts as
described in Appendix C. We then create an augmented version of the IFEval dataset by combining
each base prompt with every available instruction. This is done by prompting GPT-4o using in-
context examples, as shown in Table 6. When adding a constraint to a base prompt, we include
a randomly selected in-context example of the same type of constraint from the single-constraint
dataset. These single-constraint examples are generated by prompting GPT-4o to remove all but one
instruction from each prompt. For this, we use a fixed, manually curated in-context example. This
procedure is carried for each base query and each format instruction. We then filter out any base
query and instruction combinations that appear in the evaluation set to ensure that the base queries
used for steering vector computation and layer selection do not overlap with those in the evaluation
prompts. This process yields approximately 450 examples for each instruction, which are used for
both the steering vector computation and for validation. We provide examples of data generated
using this procedure in Table 7.
For validation, we use a set of 96 examples (8 per instruction), sampled from the synthetically data
described above. For format instruction evaluation, we utilize the format-related subset of IFEval
queries (163 in total), which includes the 13 distinct instructions detailed in Appendix B.
Length Instructions. For length instructions, the steering vectors are computed using a fixed set
of 50 IFEval base queries, obtained as described in Appendix C. To this set, we append various
manually-annotated phrasings of instructions that request the model to generate concise responses,
such as “Be concise” or “The answer should be brief.”
The evaluation data used in §4 and Appendix J consists of a separate set of 200 base queries. Al-
though IFEval contains some length-related instructions, it offers limited examples with significant
variation in length constraints and expressed in different ways (e.g., “I don’t want anything longer
    6
        https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 7: Examples of Synthetically-generated Data.

 Condition                                Example
                                          Write a 300+ word summary of the wikipedia page https://
                                          en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli. Do not
 Original IFEval prompt (3 constraints)   use any commas and highlight at least 3 sections that have titles
                                          in markdown format, for example *highlighted section part 1*,
                                          *highlighted section part 2*, *highlighted section part 3*.
 Synthetic single-constraint              Write a summary of the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org
 punctuation:no comma                     /wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli. Do not use any commas.
                                          Write a summary of the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/
 Synthetic single-constraint              wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli. Highlight at least 3
 detectable format:                       sections that have titles in markdown format, for example
 number highlighted sections              *highlighted section part 1*, *highlighted section part 2*,
                                          *highlighted section part 3*.
 Synthetic single-constraint              Write a 300+ word summary of the wikipedia page
 length constraint:number words           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli.
                                          Write a summary of the wikipedia page https://en.wikipedia.org/
 Synthetic no-constraint base query
                                          wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli.
 Synthetic augmented with                 Write a 300+ word summary of the wikipedia page https://
 detectable format:                       en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond III, Count of Tripoli. Your
 number bullet lists                      answer should contain exactly 3 bullet points in markdown
                                          format. Use * to indicate bullets, like: * xyz * abc * opq



than 30 words,” or “Answer using five paragraphs”). We opt for synthetically generating data to
enable consistent evaluation across a set of constraints varying over a narrower range (1 to 5 sen-
tences).
Word-specific Instructions. For word-specific instructions, we compute vector representations for
inclusion constraints, where the model is instructed to include a specific keyword in the output
(e.g., “The output should contain the word {w}” or “Ensure that the word {w} is included in the
response”). For each keyword, we use a set of 20 base queries randomly sampled from those gen-
erated as described in Appendix C, ensuring none of the queries used for vector computation are
reused in evaluation. The topics and content of these base queries are often semantically unrelated
to the keyword being included. The same procedure is carried out for word-exclusion instructions
in Appendix K.
For validation, we use GPT-4o to synthetically generate a set of questions similar to the base queries
in IFEval. Additionally, the prompt requests the generation of a list of words likely to appear in
the answer to each question. These question-word pairs (276 in total) are used for grid search
validation of word inclusion and exclusion. For evaluation, we use IFEval examples containing
keyword inclusion and exclusion instructions. Many examples contain multiple keyword constraints
in a single query, so we separate these into individual prompts, each requesting the inclusion or
exclusion of a single keyword. This process yields 86 evaluation prompts for keyword inclusion and
117 for keyword exclusion.


E    S TEERING L AYER AND W EIGHT S ELECTION

When selecting the steering layer and weight, our goal is to identify a combination that improves
instruction-following accuracy without compromising the fluency or comprehensiveness of the out-
put. While instruction-following accuracy can be quantified through specific checks, evaluating
fluency and comprehensiveness is more challenging, as thorough evaluations, such as our GPT-4o-
based procedure, are computationally expensive and impractical for validation. To address this, we
use perplexity computed by a smaller model as a proxy (GPT-2; Radford et al., 2019). The rationale
is that very low perplexity values can indicate outputs where steering has significantly degraded
quality. For each layer-weight combination, we compute the fraction of low-perplexity outputs (be-


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: Steering Layers for Format Instructions. Layer indices used for steering across different
models and evaluation settings (with and without explicit instructions) for each instruction in the
format subset. A dash (“-”) indicates that no steering is performed.

  Model Name                     Phi-3             Gemma 2 2B IT           Mistral 7B Instr.      Gemma 2 9B IT
  Setting                w/o Instr. w/ Instr.    w/o Instr. w/ Instr.    w/o Instr. w/ Instr.   w/o Instr. w/ Instr.
  Capital Word Freq.         18        20            21         23           12         24           16          -
  Capitalize                 28        22            11         11           28         30           28          8
  Lowercase                  18        30            17          7           18          6           22          -
  Constrained Resp.           -         -             -          -            -          -            -          -
  JSON Format                 -         6             -         13           16          -            -         10
  Multiple Sections           -         8             -          9            -          -            -         28
  Number Bullet Lists        20        16             5          -           24         12           16         12
  Highlighted Text           26        18             5          -           24         26           12         10
  Title                       -         -             -          -            -          -           34          -
  No Comma                   10        12            11          5           14         26           22          -
  End Checker                 -        18             -          5            -         24            -          -
  Quotation                  26        24            11         23            -          -           34         12


Table 9: Steering Layers for Language. Layer indices used for steering across different models
and evaluation settings (with and without explicit instructions) for each language-related instruction.
A dash (“-”) indicates that no steering is performed. In most cases with explicit text instructions,
steering was unnecessary as the models typically followed the instruction and generated responses
in the requested language.

  Model Name              Phi-3               Gemma 2 2B IT            Mistral 7B Instr.       Gemma 2 9B IT
  Setting         w/o Instr. w/ Instr.      w/o Instr. w/ Instr.     w/o Instr. w/ Instr.    w/o Instr. w/ Instr.
  Language Ar           18        16             -         15           22          -           20         20
  Language Bg           22         -            19          -           18          6           22          -
  Language Bn            -         -             -          -            -         18           20          -
  Language De           16         -            15          -           16          -           20          -
  Language Fa           20         -             -          -            -          -           22          -
  Language Fi           20         -            15          -           20         12           22          -
  Language Gu            -        14             -          -            -          -            -          -
  Language Hi           22        14            15          7            -          -           22         12
  Language It           16         -            15          -           18          -           20          -
  Language Mr           30        14            17         15            -          -           24          -
  Language Pa            -         -             -          -            -          -            -          8
  Language Pt           16         -            15          7           16          -           20          -
  Language Ru           16         -            15          -           18          -           22          -
  Language Sw           20         -             -          -            -         24           22         20
  Language Ta            -         6             -          -            -          -           22          -
  Language Te            -         -             -          7            -          -           20          -
  Language Th            -         -             -          5            -          -           20          -
  Language Ur           28         -             -         15            -          -           28          -
  Language Vi           20         -            15          -            -         12           20          -



low a threshold) and exclude configurations where this fraction is non-zero.7 Among the remaining
configurations, we select the one with the highest validation accuracy. Additionally, we compare
the validation accuracy for each layer against a baseline without steering to ensure the intervention
provides an improvement. If no layer improves upon the baseline, steering is not applied at test time.
In cases where multiple layers achieve the same highest accuracy, we select the earliest layer. The
perplexity threshold provides a mechanism for balancing instruction-following accuracy against the
risk of quality degradation. A higher threshold results in a more conservative steering procedure but
may exclude valid parameter combinations that could yield higher accuracy. In our experiments, we
set the threshold to 2.5 for format instructions and 4 for word-specific instructions. This systematic
approach ensures effective steering while maintaining output quality.
Layer Selection Results. In Table 8, we provide the layer indices used in our steering procedure for
each instruction in the format subset (excluding language) across all models and evaluation settings
(with and without explicit text instructions). We observe that for “Constrained Response” and “Ti-
   7
     In non-instruction-tuned models low perplexity may occur even without steering. In these cases we exclude
layers if the post-steering fraction exceeds the baseline value observed before steering.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 Table 10: Prompt for Quality Evaluation Question Generation.

 The following is a prompt that is used to evaluate the generations from a large
 language model. We do not know how to evaluate the quality of model answers for this
 prompt. Can you come up with 5 of less questions that can break down the quality to
 simpler evaluation tasks that we can then ask about the model answer? Each question
 should have a simple yes, no answer.
  Prompt: {{ prompt without instruction }}
 List all sub questions in the following format:
 Output:
 1: Question: <question>
 2: Question: <question>
 ...
 N: Question: <question>


                         Table 11: Prompt for Quality Score Evaluation.

 We need to evaluate the quality of generations from a large language model. You will
 be given an input prompt, the response from a language model and a set of questions
 assessing the quality of the response. You need to review the response against the
 input prompt and provide an answer to each question as either ’Yes’, ’No’ or ’Not
 Applicable’ if the question does not apply to the case along with a reason for your
 answer.
   Prompt: {{ prompt without instruction }}
   Response: {{response}}
 Questions: {{evaluation questions}}
 List your answers in the following format:
 Output:
 1. Question: <question>. Reason: <reason>: Answer: <answer>
 2. Question: <question>. Reason: <reason>: Answer: <answer>
 ...
 N. Question: <question>. Reason: <reason>: Answer: <answer>


tle,” virtually no layer improves performance with steering. The “Constrained Response” instruction
asks the model to respond using only “yes,” “no,” or “maybe,” while the “Title” instruction requires
the answer to include a title wrapped in angular brackets (e.g., “<>”). In these cases, the steer-
ing vectors sometimes push the model too aggressively toward outputting instruction-related tokens,
resulting in poor outputs (e.g., repeating characters like “<<<<”). For language instructions, the
selected layers are listed in Table 9. For length instructions, we intervene at layer 12 in Phi-3 and
layer 16 in Gemma 2 9B. For word-specific instructions, we use Phi-3’s layer 24 and 28, and Gemma
2 2B IT’s layers 24 and 22 for for inclusion and exclusion, respectively. The validation results used
for layer and weight selection selection are reported in Appendix K).
Candidate Weights. We base the selection of the steering weight on the computation in Eq. (2).
For format instructions, the weight from Eq. (2) is used directly (i.e., for each layer, there procedure
above include a single layer-weight combination). For length and format instructions, the value
computed in Eq. (2) is averaged across different inputs and is used as a reference to determine a range
of suitable steering weights. For length instructions, we experiment with multiple weight values,
highlighting the continuous nature of the constraint. For word inclusion instructions, we notice that
in some cases (particularly with Gemma 2B), the weight is too low to impact the model’s output.
This could be because the steering vector is averaged across inputs regardless of whether the model
satisfies the constraint. This issue tends to be more pronounced for word-specific constraints (than,
e.g., for format instructions) since the strength of the instruction signal can vary greatly depending
on whether the word is related to the base query (e.g., including a word related to the query is easier
than including an unrelated one). To address this, in the selection procedure described above, we
consider a small set of weights based on the value c̄ (i.e., the value c computed as in Eq. (2) averaged
across different inputs). For Phi-3 c̄ ≈ 52 at layer 28 and c̄ ≈ 42 at layer 26, and we use the set
{40, 60, 80, 100} as grid-search value across the layers {24, 26, 28}. For Gemma 2 2B IT, c̄ ≈ 55
at layer 22 and c̄ ≈ 74 at layer 24, and we use the set {60, 80, 100, 120} as grid-search value across
the layers {22, 24}.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F     R ESPONSE Q UALITY E VALUATION

F.1   E VALUATION P ROCEDURE

To evaluate the quality of the model generated responses, we first use the base queries outlined
in Appendix C and prompt GPT-4o to produce 5 questions about the query to evaluate any model
generated answer to the query (prompt reported in Table 10). For each model generated response in
our evaluation, we then prompt GPT-4o to provide a binary “yes/no” answer to each question and
“Not Applicable” if the question is not applicable to the query, along with a reason (prompt in Table
11). An aggregate quality score is computed as the average % of questions that is scored as “yes”.
We run the experiment three times for each model and report the quality score and standard error to
account for any non-determinism from the GPT-4o based evaluator.

F.2   E XAMPLES OF Q UALITY S CORE C HANGES

While our evaluation procedure assesses how well the model’s answers address the base queries,
the method used to select steering locations and weights is based on IFeval’s instruction-following
accuracy metric. This metric consists of checks that verify specific aspects of the model’s output
related to instructions but sometimes these checks may be incomplete. For example, the default met-
ric in IFEval for section-related formatting checks that the model includes sections in the generation
but it does not check whether there is content in the section or the quality of the content if present.
Therefore, in such cases this sometimes results in the selection of layer indices and steering weights
that over-steer the model, leading to outputs that satisfy the instruction but have poor quality (e.g.,
repetitive token sequences). An example of this can be seen in the first row of Table 12. These issues
are more prevalent in the Phi and Mistral models, compared to the Gemma models (noticeable from
the smaller deltas for these models in Figure 4). This discrepancy may be due to Gemma’s longer
training and a better size/performance tradeoff, potentially making them more robust to activation
steering.
Another source of quality drops can be minor factual inconsistencies in the model’s responses. Steer-
ing may sometimes cause slight deviations from factual accuracy, which our quality score metric
captures by incorporating GPT-4-generated questions about correctness. For example, in the sec-
ond row of Table 12, the model inaccurately states that Kentucky, Missouri, and Mississippi were
part of the original 13 colonies. While these inconsistencies can affect quality scores, they are not
widespread and represent a general challenge for activation steering. Addressing factual consistency
is difficult when selecting the steering location and weight, but it remains an important aspect to con-
sider in future work. Finally, quality score drops can also result from small and arbitrary differences
in the output, as shown in the third row of Table 12, in which the output looks reasonably good, but
the model fails to follow the correct rhyme scheme for a limerick (AABBA), and the quality score
drops by 0.6.
In conclusion, it is well-known that direct intervention on a model’s activations can sometimes
compromise the quality of the output. In our case, we observe relatively few instances where this
happens, but improvements could be made. Future work could mitigate these issues by conducting
a more exhaustive grid search over layers and steering weights, or by better modulating the steering
intensity (Scalena et al., 2024; Stickland et al., 2024).

F.3   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

We apply the response quality evaluation procedure to outputs generated by steering the model
for length and word-specific instructions, following the same approach used for format constraints
in §3. As in the previous section, we analyze the outputs produced by Phi-3, reporting the score
changes due to steering both with and without explicit text instructions, as well as the quality score
differences when text instructions are added without steering.
Length Instructions. Figure 9a presents the results for length constraints. We analyze a subset of
100 outputs from the generation process used for Figure 5b in §4 (which evaluated 200 examples).
The model is steered with a weight of c = 20 on a set of base prompts, applying different length
constraints requesting the model to answer using at most n sentences (n ∈ 1, . . . , 5). The two
leftmost columns in Figure 9a show the changes in quality score when steering the model on inputs


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 12: Examples of Changes in Quality Score. In the first case, the model is steered for the
“Uppercase” instruction, which causes the output to become repetitive, resulting in a significant
quality score drop from 1 to 0.4. In the second case, the model inaccurately states that Kentucky,
Missouri, and Mississippi were part of the 13 colonies, leading to a drop in quality score from 0.8 to
0. In the third case, while the output looks fairly good, the model fails to follow the correct rhyme
scheme for a limerick (AABBA), and the quality score drops from 0.8 to 0.2. These examples are
taken from the top 10 outputs generated by Phi-3 with the largest drop in quality score.

 Query                               Output w/o Steering                     Output w/ Steering
 The Legend of the Sword and the     1. Introduction to Wan Wan:\n -         [...] 14. WAN WAN’S RE-
 Fairy is a movie in which Wan       Wan Wan is a cunning and am-            DEMPTION IS A MIRACLE,
 Wan is a villain. Write a story     bitious antagonist in the movie         AS HE AND THE SWORD
 about Wan Wan’s character in list   ”The Legend of the Sword and            AND THE FAIRY’S GIRL FIND
 format.                             the Fairy.”\n - She is a skilled sor-   HARMONY AND LOVE.\n 15.
                                     ceress with a deep-seated desire        WAN      WAN’S  REDEMP-
                                     for power and control.\n 2. Early       TION IS A TEACHING, AS
                                     Life:\n - Wan Wan was born into         HE LEARNS THE VALUE
                                     a noble family, but her parents         OF LOVE, HONOR, AND
                                     were killed in a tragic accident        SELFLESSNESS.\n 16. WAN
                                     when she was young.\n - She was         WAN’S REDEMPTION IS A
                                     raised by her grandmother, who          MIRACLE, AS HE AND THE
                                     taught her the [...]                    SWORD AND THE FAIRY’S
                                                                             GIRL FIND HARMONY AND
                                                                             LOVE.\n 17. WAN WAN’S
                                                                             REDEMPTION IS A TEACH-
                                                                             ING, AS [...]
 What is the difference between      The 13 colonies, also known as          The 13 colonies, also known as
 the 13 colonies and the other       the Thirteen Colonies, were a           the Thirteen Colonies, were a
 British colonies in North Amer-     group of British colonies on the        group [...] These colonies were:
 ica?                                Atlantic coast of North America         \1. Virginia \2. Massachusetts
                                     founded in the 17th and 18th cen-       \3. New Hampshire \n 4. Rhode
                                     turies that declared independence       Island \5. Connecticut\n 6. New
                                     in 1776 and formed the United           York\n 7. New Jersey\n 8. Penn-
                                     States. The other British colonies      sylvania\n 9. Maryland\n 10.
                                     in North America, often referred        Delaware\n 11. \n *Kentucky*
                                     to as the Middle and Southern           (not originally a British colony,
                                     colonies, were established later        but later admitted as a state)\n
                                     and had different characteristics.      12. *Missouri* (not originally a
                                     \n 1. Location: The 13 colonies         British colony, but later admitted
                                     were located along the Atlantic         as a state)\n 13. *Mississippi*
                                     [...] \n 2. Economy: The 13             (not originally a British colony,
                                     colonies [...] \n 3. Settlement         but later admitted as a state) [...]
                                     Patterns: [...]
 Write a limerick about writing a    Whose verses were both sharp            There once was a poet named
 limerick.                           and clean.\n He penned a limer-         Kent,\n Whose limericks were
                                     ick,\n With wit so quick,\n And         quite the event.\n He wrote one
                                     the rhythm was quite the ma-            with glee,\n A limerick, you
                                     chine.                                  see,\n That was about writing a
                                                                             limerick, a test.


with and without length instructions. These values are averaged over the 5 constraints, as the steering
procedure applied is the same way for all 5 constraints (adding the conciseness vector with weight
c = 20). A negative delta is expected, as steering the model to produce shorter responses generally
reduces the comprehensiveness of the answer. This pattern is confirmed by the rightmost columns
in Figure 9a, which represent the difference in quality score when length instructions are explicitly
provided in the input text. The different colors correspond to the number of sentences (n), and
as expected, shorter length constraints lead to larger drops in quality score. Although the effect
of steering is not directly comparable to any specific length constraint (since steering applies an
additional reduction in length without a one-to-one mapping between steering weight and sentence
count), we observe that the changes in quality scores due to steering remain within a reasonable
range when compared to those induced by text instructions.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              (a) Changes in Response Quality: Length                                                       (b) Word Inclusion                                                                    (c) Word Exclusion


                                                                                                          Avg. Qual. Score Delta


                                                                                                                                                                                                Avg. Qual. Score Delta
                                   0


     Avg. Qual. Score Delta
                                                                                                                                    0.05                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                  Length
                              −0.05                                               Constraint                                          0                                                                                     0
                                                                                                   Avg.                            −0.05                                                                                 −0.05
                               −0.1                                                                1
                                                                                                                                    −0.1                                                                                  −0.1
                                                                                                   2
                              −0.15                                                                                                −0.15                                                                                 −0.15
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                   4                                        St            St         No                                                            St            St         No
                                                                                                                                               e             e                                                                        e             e
                               −0.2                                                                                                        w/ erin w/ erin w Ste                                                                  w/ erin w/ erin w Ste
                                                                                                   5                                          o
                                                                                                                                                 In
                                                                                                                                                     g       In g / vs erin                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            g       In g / vs erin
                                                                                                                                                    str        s tr.    .w g                                                               str        s tr.    .w g
                                                                                                                                                        .                 /o                                                                   .                 /o
                                        Steer    Steer          No Steering                                                                                                  In                                                                                     In
                                                                                                                                                                                s  tr.                                                                                 str.
                                       w/o Ins. w/ Ins.       w/ vs. w/o Instr.


Figure 9: Changes in the Response Quality Scores. Quality score deltas for (a) length instructions,
(b) word inclusion, and (c) word exclusion, across three conditions: steering without instructions,
steering with instructions, and no steering with vs. without instructions.

               (a) Steering w/o Instr.                                                       (b) Steering w/ Instr.                                                                       (c) No Steering w/ vs. w/o Instr.

                              60        Mean: -0.03                                               60                 Mean: -0.00                                                               60                            Mean: -0.00
Frequency (%)


                                                                                  Frequency (%)


                                                                                                                                                                               Frequency (%)
                              50                                                                  50                                                                                           50

                              40                                                                  40                                                                                           40

                              30                                                                  30                                                                                           30

                              20                                                                  20                                                                                           20

                              10                                                                  10                                                                                           10

                              0                                                                   0                                                                                            0
                                       −0.5               0          0.5                                  −0.5                                  0               0.5                                                        −0.5                 0                0.5

                                            Quality Score Delta                                                                    Quality Score Delta                                                                           Quality Score Delta


Figure 10: Distribution of Quality Score Changes for Word Inclusion. Histograms of qual-
ity score deltas under three conditions: (a) steering without explicit instructions, (b) steering with
explicit instructions, and (c) no steering, comparing outputs with and without instructions. The dis-
tributions show minimal impact on quality scores across all settings, with mean values close to zero,
with most shifts falling within the [-0.25, 0.25] range.


Word-specific Instructions. In Figures 9b and 9c, we report the changes in quality scores for
instructions that request the inclusion or exclusion of a specific word in the answer.
The decrease in quality is minimal across all scenarios, the largest drop observed when steering for
word inclusion without explicit instructions (around -0.03). We further investigate this by examin-
ing the empirical distributions of the score deltas for word inclusion instructions (Figure 10). The
distributions appear centered around 0, with a few outliers showing deviations larger than 0.4. We
perform a paired two-sided t-test to assess whether the means of these three distributions are signif-
icantly different. The p-values for the three tests (one for each pair) are all greater than 0.05 (0.25,
0.98, and 0.26). While the lack of significance does not prove that the distributions are identical, we
interpret this as evidence of the minimal impact our steering procedure has on the model’s ability to
address the base queries.
Format: Breakdown by Instruction. Figure 11 presents the quality score deltas for format instruc-
tions, broken down by individual instructions across all four models (Phi-3, Gemma 2 2B IT, Mistral
7B IT, and Gemma 2 9B IT). The three settings compared are steering without explicit instructions,
steering with explicit instructions, and no steering but comparing outputs with and without explicit
instructions.

F.4                                Q UALITY S CORE /ACCURACY T RADE - OFF

We investigate how the steering weight c mediates the trade-off between instruction-following ac-
curacy and output quality degradation for word exclusion constraints. Figure 12 shows the quality
score and accuracy obtained by steering Phi-3 with varying negative values of c (as we subtract
the word-inclusion vector, as explained in §5 and Appendix J). In both settings (with and without
explicit text instructions), larger absolute steering weights lead to higher instruction-following ac-
curacy. This improvement comes at the cost of a gradual decrease in quality score, indicating a
trade-off between strict adherence to constraints and maintaining output comprehensiveness. The


                                                                                                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                           (a) Qual. Scores of Phi-3 on Format Instr.                                                             (b) Qual. Scores of Gemma 2 2B IT on Format Instr.


  Avg. Qual. Score Delta


                                                                                                         Avg. Qual. Score Delta
                            0.2
                                                                                                                                        0
                              0
                                                                                                                                  −0.1
                           −0.2                                                                                                   −0.2
                           −0.4                                                                                                   −0.3
                           −0.6                                                                                                   −0.4
                                     Ca

                                           Co

                                                    En

                                                 En

                                                 Lo

                                                 JS

                                                 M

                                                 N

                                                 N

                                                 H

                                                 Q

                                                 Ti


                                                                                                                                            Ca

                                                                                                                                                   Co

                                                                                                                                                            En

                                                                                                                                                            En

                                                                                                                                                            Lo

                                                                                                                                                            JS

                                                                                                                                                            M

                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                                                            H

                                                                                                                                                            Q

                                                                                                                                                            Ti
                                                   o

                                                   um ma


                                                                                                                                                              o

                                                                                                                                                              um ma
                                                   ig


                                                                                                                                                              ig
                                                   uo t T


                                                                                                                                                              uo
                                                   ul


                                                                                                                                                              ul
                                                    tle


                                                                                                                                                               tle
                                                     O


                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                     w


                                                                                                                                                                w
                                                     d

                                                     gl


                                                                                                                                                              d

                                                                                                                                                                gl
                                      pi


                                                                                                                                                pi
                                             ns


                                                                                                                                                       ns
                                                      hl


                                                                                                                                                                 hl
                                                      Co ect


                                                                                                                                                                 Co
                                                      tip


                                                                                                                                                                 tip
                                                       N


                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                       er


                                                                                                                                                                  er
                                                       ta


                                                                                                                                                                  ta
                                                        is


                                                                                                                                                                   is
                                        ta


                                                                                                                                                  ta
                                                        Ch d R


                                                                                                                                                                   Ch d R
                                                         be


                                                                                                                                                                    be
                                               tr


                                                                                                                                                         tr
                                                         ig


                                                                                                                                                                    ig
                                                           h


                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                           ca tal


                                                                                                                                                                      ca tal
                                                           m


                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                           tio


                                                                                                                                                                      tio
                                                           Fo


                                                                                                                                                                      Fo
                                                           le


                                                                                                                                                                      le
                                           lW


                                                                                                                                                  lW
                                                 ai


                                                                                                                                                         ai
                                                            h


                                                                                                                                                                       ht
                                                             ec


                                                             r


                                                                                                                                                                        ec


                                                                                                                                                                        r
                                                              Ca


                                                                                                                                                                         Ca
                                                               se


                                                                                                                                                                          se
                                                               ne req


                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                               rm


                                                                                                                                                                          rm
                                                               S


                                                                                                                                                                          Se
                                                               n


                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                               Bu


                                                                                                                                                                          Bu
                                                                ke


                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                             or


                                                                                                                                                       or


                                                                                                                                                                           Te ists
                                                                 pi


                                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                                                             er
                                                                  ex


                                                                                                                                                                             ct
                                                                  at


                                                                                                                                                                              at
                                                                  lle


                                                                                                                                                                              lle
                                                d


                                                                                                                                                       d


                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                   r


                                                                                                                                                                                xt
                                                                     io


                                                                                                                                                                                 io
                                                                      t
                                                                      F


                                                                      t


                                                                                                                                                         Fr


                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                        es


                                                                                                                                                                                   es
                                                                        ns


                                                                                                                                                                                    ns
                                                                         Li


                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                           eq
                                                                           p.


                                                                                                                                                                                      p.
                                                                            st
                                                                             .


                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                               s
                                          Setting           Steering w/o Instr.                                                                  Setting              Steering w/o Instr.
                                                            Steering w/ Instr.                                                                                        Steering w/ Instr.
                                                            No Steering w/ vs. w/o Instr.                                                                             No Steering w/ vs. w/o Instr.

                           (c) Qual. Scores of Mistral 7B IT on Format Instr.                                                     (d) Qual. Scores of Gemma 2 9B IT on Format Instr.
  Avg. Qual. Score Delta


                                                                                                         Avg. Qual. Score Delta
                                                                                                                                   0.2

                              0                                                                                                         0

                           −0.2                                                                                                   −0.2

                           −0.4                                                                                                   −0.4
                                     Ca

                                           Co

                                                    En

                                             En

                                             Lo

                                             JS

                                             M

                                             N

                                             N

                                             H

                                             Q

                                             Ti


                                                                                                                                            Ca

                                                                                                                                                   Co

                                                                                                                                                            En

                                                                                                                                                       En

                                                                                                                                                       Lo

                                                                                                                                                       JS

                                                                                                                                                       M

                                                                                                                                                       N

                                                                                                                                                       N

                                                                                                                                                       H

                                                                                                                                                       Q

                                                                                                                                                       Ti
                                               o

                                               um ma


                                                                                                                                                         o

                                                                                                                                                         um ma
                                               ig


                                                                                                                                                         ig
                                               uo t T


                                                                                                                                                         uo
                                               ul


                                                                                                                                                         ul
                                                tle


                                                                                                                                                          tle
                                                 O


                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                 w


                                                                                                                                                           w
                                                 d

                                                 gl


                                                                                                                                                              d

                                                                                                                                                           gl
                                      pi


                                                                                                                                                pi
                                             ns


                                                                                                                                                       ns
                                                  hl


                                                                                                                                                            hl
                                                  Co ect


                                                                                                                                                            Co
                                                  tip


                                                                                                                                                            tip
                                                   N


                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                   er


                                                                                                                                                             er
                                                   ta


                                                                                                                                                             ta
                                                    is


                                                                                                                                                              is
                                        ta


                                                                                                                                                  ta
                                                    Ch d R


                                                                                                                                                              Ch
                                                     be


                                                                                                                                                               be
                                                 tr


                                                                                                                                                        tr
                                                     ig


                                                                                                                                                               ig
                                                       h


                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                       ca tal


                                                                                                                                                                 ca tal
                                                       m


                                                                                                                                                                 m
                                                       tio


                                                                                                                                                                 tio
                                                       Fo


                                                                                                                                                                 Fo
                                                       le


                                                                                                                                                                 le
                                           lW


                                                                                                                                                  lW
                                                 ai


                                                                                                                                                         ai
                                                        h


                                                                                                                                                                  ht
                                                         ec


                                                         r


                                                                                                                                                                   ec


                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                          Ca


                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                           se


                                                                                                                                                                     se
                                                           ne req


                                                                                                                                                                     ne req
                                                           rm


                                                                                                                                                                     rm
                                                           S


                                                                                                                                                                     Se
                                                           n


                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                           Bu


                                                                                                                                                                     Bu
                                                            ke


                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                            or


                                                                                                                                                                      or


                                                                                                                                                                      Te ists
                                                             pi


                                                                                                                                                                       p
                                                                                                                                                                        er
                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                              ex


                                                                                                                                                                        ct
                                                              at


                                                                                                                                                                         at
                                                              lle


                                                                                                                                                                         lle
                                                               d


                                                                                                                                                                          d


                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                               r


                                                                                                                                                                           xt
                                                                                                                                                                            Re
                                                                 io


                                                                                                                                                                            io
                                                                  t
                                                                  F


                                                                  t


                                                                                                                                                                             F


                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                    es


                                                                    ns


                                                                                                                                                                               ns
                                                                     Li


                                                                                                                                                                               L
                                                                                                                                                                               sp
                                                                       p.


                                                                        st


                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                           s


                                          Setting           Steering w/o Instr.                                                                  Setting              Steering w/o Instr.
                                                            Steering w/ Instr.                                                                                        Steering w/ Instr.
                                                            No Steering w/ vs. w/o Instr.                                                                             No Steering w/ vs. w/o Instr.



Figure 11: Quality score deltas for format instructions across all models and settings. (a) Phi-3,
(b) Gemma 2 2B IT, (c) Mistral 7B IT, (d) Gemma 2 9B IT. Bars represent the average quality score
delta under three conditions: steering without explicit instructions (purple), steering with explicit
instructions (orange), and no steering but comparing outputs with and without explicit instructions
(light blue).

                                     (a) Quality Score vs. Accuracy: w/o Instr.                                                   (b) Quality Score vs. Accuracy: w/ Instr.
                                     0.9                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                  0.9
                                     0.8
                             Value


                                                                                                         Value


                                                                                                                                  0.8

                                     0.7
                                                                                                                                  0.7

                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                     0.6
                                             0        -10   -20    -40   -60     -80    -100 -120 -150                                      0      -10        -20    -40   -60    -80      -100 -120 -150

                                                                  Steering Weight c                                                                                 Steering Weight c
                                                              Quality score            Accuracy                                                                  Quality Score          Accuracy



Figure 12: Trade-off Between Quality Score and Accuracy on Word Exclusion. (a) Results
for steering without explicit text instructions, showing increasing accuracy at the cost of a gradual
decrease in quality. (b) Results for steering with explicit instructions, demonstrating a similar trend
with higher baseline accuracy.


smooth transitions in both metrics suggest that tuning c offers fine-grained control over this balance,
highlighting the flexibility of activation steering.

G                           I MPLEMENTATION AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Tokenization and Decoding. Steering vectors are computed at the last token of the input. For
instruction-tuned models, this typically corresponds to the <|assistant|> token, which marks
the transition from user input to the start of the model’s generation.8 For non-instruction-tuned
models, we follow previous work (Kojima et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2024) and structure the prompt
as “Q: {problem}\nA:.” Model outputs are decoded greedily, with a maximum generation length
              8
                           https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/chat_templating


                                                                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               (a) "Lowercase" Instruction                                        (b) "JSON" Instruction                                            (c) "German Language" Instr.


Cosine Similarity


                                                                   Cosine Similarity


                                                                                                                                     Cosine Similarity
                     1                                                                  1                                                                 1

                    0.9                                                                0.9                                                               0.9

                    0.8                                                                0.8
                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                    0.7                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                         0.7
                      0             10             20         30                         0            10             20         30                          0            10             20         30

                                          Layer                                                             Layer                                                              Layer
                           (1) Different Query Same Instr.                                   (1) Different Query Same Instr.                                    (1) Different Query Same Instr.
                           (2) Same Query w/ and w/o Instr.                                  (2) Same Query w/ and w/o Instr.                                   (2) Same Query w/ and w/o Instr.
                           (3) Different Queries                                             (3) Different Queries                                              (3) Different Queries



Figure 13: Residual stream similarity across layers. Cosine similarity of residual stream activa-
tions across layers for three instructions: (a) “Lowercase,” (b) “JSON,” and (c) “German Language.”
Comparisons are made between: (1) different queries with the same instruction (green), (2) same
query with and without the instruction (blue), and (3) different queries without instruction (red).
Results are shown for Phi-3 across all layers.


of 2048 tokens for format and length experiments, and 1024 tokens for keyword experiments. For
efficiency, validation runs use a reduced maximum length of 384 tokens.
Tools and Libraries. For length-related experiments, word counts are measured as the number
of space-separated sequences of characters and sentence counts are determined using NLTK (Bird
& Loper, 2004). To assess whether the score improvement from steering is significantly differ-
ent from standard inference, we carry out McNemar’s test (McNemar, 1947). In particular, we
use the exact version of the test, which uses the binomial distribution and is more conservative.
The error bars reported in Figures 4 and 9 represent the standard error of the quality score com-
puted over three different runs of GPT-4o. The smoothed empirical distributions shown in Figures
Figure 5a, Figure 5c, Figure 8c, Figure 17a, and Figure 17c are obtained using kernel density es-
timation (Parzen, 1962). Our experiments were carried out using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
and the TransformersLens library (Nanda & Bloom, 2022). We performed our data anal-
ysis using NumPy (Harris et al., 2020) and Pandas (Wes McKinney, 2010). Our figures were
made using Plotly (Plotly Technologies Inc., 2015). The paper’s bibliography was curated using
Ryanize-bib (Zouhar, 2023).


H                         A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : R EPRESENTATIONS

Similarity of Activations. Figure 13 shows the cosine similarity of residual stream activations in
Phi-3 across different input sets. As described in §3, we compare the similarity of representations
between: (1) pairs of inputs sharing the same base query, one with and one without the instruction;
(2) inputs with different base queries but the same instruction; and (3) inputs with different base
queries and no instruction. The similarity scores are reported across Phi-3’s layers for three instruc-
tions: “lowercase” (no uppercase characters, Figure 13a), “JSON” (response formatted as JSON,
Figure 13b), and “German Language” (Figure 13c).
Geometry of Steering Vectors. We perform a t-SNE dimensionality reduction on per-example in-
struction vectors, calculated as the difference in activations between inputs with and without explicit
instructions, at layer 20 of Phi-3. The visualization for format instructions shows varying levels of
cluster separation (Figure 14a). Specifically, instructions like “No Comma,” “Lowercase,” “JSON
Format,” “Title,” and “Quotation” form distinct and well-separated clusters, indicating the model’s
ability to encode these constraints clearly. Instructions such as “Capitalize” and “Capital Word
Frequency” cluster closely together, reflecting their similar semantic nature. In contrast, vectors for
instructions like “End Checker” and “Constrained Response” are more dispersed, with no clear clus-
tering, suggesting these instructions are less distinctly represented in the model’s activation space.
Figure 14b presents a t-SNE dimensionality reduction of vectors computed for length instructions at
layer 12 of Phi-3. Specifically, we include vectors derived from sentence-specific instructions (e.g.,
“answer using n sentences,” n ∈ 1, . . . , 5) as well as more general “conciseness” and “verbosity”
instructions, as described in §4. A clear linear trend emerges, with vectors for longer output in-


                                                                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        (a) t-SNE of Format Instruction Vectors                                                     (b) t-SNE of Length Instruction Vectors
                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                     Instruction                                                                                         Instruction
                         4                                                                                                                                                      verbosity
                                                                          No Comma
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                          Highlight Text
    t-SNE component 2


                                                                                                t-SNE component 2
                                                                          Capitalize                                                                                            n=5
                         2                                                                                           0.5
                                                                          Quotation
                                                                                                                                                                                n=4
                                                                          End Checker                                 0
                         0                                                Capital Word Freq.
                                                                                                                                                                                n=3
                                                                          Constrained Resp.                         −0.5
                                                                          Lowercase
                        −2                                                                                                                                                      n=2
                                                                          Number Bullet Lists                        −1
                                                                                                                           Longer
                                                                          Title                                                                                                 n=1
                                                                                                                           Outputs
                        −4                                                JSON Format                               −1.5
                                                                          Multiple Sections                                                                                     conciseness
                                             0                   5                                                           −3        −2          −1             0

                                       t-SNE component 1                                                                             t-SNE component 1


Figure 14: t-SNE visualization of per-example instruction vectors. (a) Format instruction vectors
at layer 20 of Phi-3 for format instructions. Distinct clusters emerge for certain instructions (e.g.,
“No Comma,” “Lowercase,” “JSON Format”), while others (e.g., “End Checker,” “Constrained Re-
sponse”) show less clear separation. (b) Vectors derived from length instructions at layer 12 of Phi-3.
Vectors corresponding to concise outputs cluster on one end, while those for larger sentence counts
(n > 2) cluster on the opposite end.

                        (a) Accuracy of Phi-3 on Format Instr.                                                      (b) Accuracy of Gemma 2 2B IT on Format Instr.
                         1                                                                                            1
    Accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy


                        0.5                                                                                         0.5



                         0                                                                                            0
                              Q

                                En atio

                                N

                                La m r

                                Ti uag

                                H

                                N igh

                                M ber ext

                                JS le lle

                                Co Fo ctio sts

                                Lo tra at

                                En ca d R

                                Ca sh


                                                                                                                           Q

                                                                                                                            En atio

                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            La m r

                                                                                                                            Ti uag

                                                                                                                            H

                                                                                                                            N igh

                                                                                                                            M ber ext

                                                                                                                            JS ple lle

                                                                                                                            Co Fo ctio sts

                                                                                                                            Lo tra at

                                                                                                                            En rca d R

                                                                                                                            Ca sh
                                  o


                                  um t


                                                                                                                              o


                                                                                                                              um t
                                  ig


                                                                                                                              ig
                               uo


                                                                                                                            uo
                                  ul


                                                                                                                              ul
                                   tle e


                                                                                                                               tle e
                                    O


                                                                                                                                O
                                    ng m


                                                                                                                                ng m
                                    w ine


                                                                                                                                w ine
                                    d


                                    gl se es


                                                                                                                                d


                                                                                                                                gl se es
                                    pi Ca


                                                                                                                                pi Ca
                                    ns


                                                                                                                                ns rm ns
                                     hl


                                                                                                                                 hl
                                     Co cke


                                                                                                                                 Co cke
                                     tip Bu


                                                                                                                                 ti Bu
                                      N Se Li


                                                                                                                                  N Se Li
                                      er


                                                                                                                                  e
                                      t


                                                                                                                                  t
                                      i


                                                                                                                                  i
                                      ta pi


                                                                                                                                  ta pi
                                       Ch


                                                                                                                                   Ch
                                         l W ta


                                                                                                                                    l W ta
                                          e


                                                                                                                                      e
                                            r
                                            n


                                                                                                                                        n
                                              m ns


                                              or


                                                                                                                                         or l
                                              T


                                                                                                                                         T
                                              a


                                                                                                                                          a
                                                 d


                                                                                                                                            d
                                                   t


                                                   Fr


                                                                                                                                              t


                                                                                                                                              Fr
                                                    l

                                                      eq


                                                                                                                                                 eq
                                                       po


                                                                                                                                                  po
                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                           ns


                                                                                                                                                      ns
                                                              e


                                                                                                                                                         e
                             Setting       w/o Instr.      w/o Instr. + Steering                                      Setting         w/o Instr.        w/o Instr. + Steering
                                           w/ Instr.       w/ Instr. + Steering                                                       w/ Instr.         w/ Instr. + Steering

                        (c) Accuracy of Mistral 7B IT on Format Instr.                                              (d) Accuracy of Gemma 2 9B IT on Format Instr.
                         1                                                                                            1
    Accuracy


                                                                                                Accuracy


                        0.5                                                                                         0.5



                         0                                                                                            0
                              Q

                                En atio

                                N

                                La m r

                                Ti uag

                                H

                                N igh

                                M ber ext

                                JS le lle

                                Co Fo ctio sts

                                Lo tra at

                                En ca d R

                                Ca sh


                                                                                                                           Q

                                                                                                                            En atio

                                                                                                                            N

                                                                                                                            La m r

                                                                                                                            Ti uag

                                                                                                                            H

                                                                                                                            N igh

                                                                                                                            M ber ext

                                                                                                                            JS ple lle

                                                                                                                            Co Fo ctio sts

                                                                                                                            Lo tra at

                                                                                                                            En rca d R

                                                                                                                            Ca sh
                                  o


                                  um t


                                                                                                                              o


                                                                                                                              um t
                                  ig


                                                                                                                              ig
                               uo


                                                                                                                            uo
                                  ul


                                                                                                                              ul
                                   tle e


                                                                                                                               tle e
                                    O


                                                                                                                                O
                                    ng m


                                                                                                                                ng m
                                    w ine


                                                                                                                                w ine
                                    d


                                    gl se es


                                                                                                                                d


                                                                                                                                gl se es
                                    pi Ca


                                                                                                                                pi Ca
                                    ns


                                                                                                                                ns rm ns
                                     hl


                                                                                                                                 hl
                                     Co cke


                                                                                                                                 Co cke
                                     tip Bu


                                                                                                                                 ti Bu
                                      N Se Li


                                                                                                                                  N Se Li
                                      er


                                                                                                                                  e
                                      t


                                                                                                                                  t
                                      i


                                                                                                                                  i
                                      ta pi


                                                                                                                                  ta pi
                                       Ch


                                                                                                                                   Ch
                                         l W ta


                                                                                                                                    l W ta
                                          e


                                                                                                                                      e
                                            r
                                            n


                                                                                                                                        n
                                              m ns


                                              or


                                                                                                                                         or l
                                              T


                                                                                                                                         T
                                              a


                                                                                                                                          a
                                                 d


                                                                                                                                            d
                                                   t


                                                   Fr


                                                                                                                                              t


                                                                                                                                              Fr
                                                    l

                                                      eq


                                                                                                                                                 eq
                                                       po


                                                                                                                                                  po
                                                         .


                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                           ns


                                                                                                                                                      ns
                                                              e


                                                                                                                                                         e


                             Setting       w/o Instr.      w/o Instr. + Steering                                      Setting         w/o Instr.        w/o Instr. + Steering
                                           w/ Instr.       w/ Instr. + Steering                                                       w/ Instr.         w/ Instr. + Steering



Figure 15: Accuracy Breakdown by Format Instruction Across Models and Settings. (a) Phi-3,
(b) Gemma 2 2B IT, (c) Mistral 7B IT, and (d) Gemma 2 9B IT. Bars represent accuracy for format
instructions under four settings: no explicit instruction (blue), steering without explicit instruction
(red), explicit instruction without steering (green), and explicit instruction with steering (purple).


structions clustering at one end of the plot and those for concise outputs clustering at the opposite
end.


I                       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : F ORMAT I NSTRUCTIONS

Validation Results. Figure 16 provides examples of the results from the layer selection procedure.
As detailed in Appendix E, we evaluate instruction-following accuracy and the fraction of low-
perplexity outputs after steering at different layers. Panels (a) and (b) show examples obtained with
Phi-3 in the no-instruction setting. In the first case (“Multiple Sections” instruction), the perplexity


                                                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a) Accuracy vs. Low Perpl.: Multiple Sect.                         (b) Accuracy vs. Low Perpl.: Lowercase                                     (c) Accuracy vs. Low Perpl.: JSON Format
                       1


Value


                                                                            Value


                                                                                                                                               Value
                                                                                       0.5                                                                           0.5
                      0.5



                       0                                                                0                                                                             0
                            0              10              20          30                    0               10           20              30                               0                  10            20

                                           Layer Index                                                         Layer Index                                                                Layer Index
                                Accuracy                                                          Accuracy                                                                     Accuracy
                                Fraction of Low-perplexity Outputs                                Fraction of Low-perplexity Outputs                                           Fraction of Low-perplexity Outputs



Figure 16: Results from the layer selection procedure. (a, b) Examples from Phi-3 in the no-
instruction setting: (a) for “Multiple Sections,” the perplexity check prevents selecting a layer
with degraded output quality; (b) for “Lowercase,” accuracy improves without quality loss. (c)
For Gemma 2 2B IT with explicit “JSON Format” instructions, later layers lead to over-steering,
with a degradation in both accuracy and quality.

                (a) Length vs. Steering Weights                                     (b) Accuracy Per Length Constraint                                         (c) Length: Pre- vs. Post-Steering
                                                                                                                                                                                          Length constraint: 4


                                                                                                                                               Probability Density
                                                                                       0.9                                                                           0.8
Probability Density


                                                                                       0.8
                                                                            Accuracy


                        0.01                                                                                                                                         0.6

                                                                                       0.7                                                                           0.4
                      0.005
                                                                                       0.6                                                                           0.2
                            0
                                0        200         400         600                                                                                                   0
                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                 1*       2*        3*         4*         5                                               5                   10
                                        Length (# of words)
                                                                                                           # of Sentences                                                                     Length
  Weight                            40          20              10     5
                                    0                                                                 Std. Inference           Steering                                         Std. Inference           Steering



Figure 17: Additional Results for Length Instructions. (a) The distribution of output lengths when
steering Phi-3 using a vector for verbosity, with varying steering weights. (b) Steering significantly
improves accuracy for sentence-specific length constraints (n ∈ 1, . . . , 5) in 4 of 5 cases. (c) For
n = 4, steering shifts the output length distribution closer to the target.


check prevents the selection of a layer that would otherwise lead to a decrease in output quality, as
indicated by a sharp rise in the fraction of low-perplexity outputs. Panel (c), which corresponds to
the “JSON Format” instruction applied to Gemma 2 2B IT with explicit input instructions, illustrates
a scenario where accuracy and output quality are correlated: steering at later layers degrades both
quality and accuracy.
Accuracy Breakdown by Instruction. Figure 15 provides a breakdown of instruction-following
accuracy across specific format instructions for all models and evaluation settings: no explicit in-
struction, steering without explicit instruction, explicit instruction without steering, and explicit
instruction with steering. Across all models, steering improves accuracy for many instructions in
the absence of explicit text instructions (blue vs. red bars). Notably, casing-related instructions
(“Lowercase” and “English Capital”) benefit strongly from steering, with Phi-3 and Gemma 2 2B
IT achieving higher accuracy with steering alone than with explicit instructions (red vs. green bars).
Certain instructions like “Title” and “Constrained Response” show near-perfect adherence with ex-
plicit instructions alone, leaving little room for improvement through steering.


J                       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : L ENGTH I NSTRUCTIONS

Steering for Longer Outputs. In Figure 17a, we show the distribution of output lengths when the
model is steered using a verbosity vector. This vector is computed from inputs containing instruc-
tions to generate verbose responses (e.g., “Provide a long answer”). Similar to our procedure for
the conciseness vector in §4, we apply different steering weights to modulate verbosity. Using the
same 50 base prompts as in Figure 5a, the results show that higher steering weights result in longer
outputs, demonstrating that activation steering can effectively control output length by adjusting a
single scalar value.


                                                                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Validation Acc. vs Low Perplexity: Phi-3 on Inclusion                                                Validation Acc. vs Low Perplexity: Phi-3 on Exclusion


  Fract. of Low-perpl. Outputs


                                                                                                       Fract. of Low-perpl. Outputs
                                 0.06


                                 0.04                                                                                                 0.05

                                 0.02
                                                      L26, c=40                                                                                                                                           L28, c=-100

                                   0                                                                                                              0
                                    0.8                 0.85                 0.9                0.95                                                                          0.3           0.4            0.5          0.6         0.7

                                                                  Accuracy                                                                                                                               Accuracy
                                               Validation Runs                                                                                                                      Validation Runs
                                               Run with Max Accuracy with 0 Low-Perplexity Outputs                                                                                  Run with Max Accuracy with 0 Low-Perplexity Outputs

                                 Validation Acc. vs Low Perpl.: Gemma on Inclusion                                                    Validation Acc. vs Low Perpl.: Gemma on Exclusion
  Fract. of Low-perpl. Outputs


                                                                                                       Fract. of Low-perpl. Outputs
                                    1


                                  0.5                                                                                                 0.3
                                                                                          L24, c=80
                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                    0

                                                                                                                                      0.1                                               L22, c=-120
                                 −0.5
                                                                                                                                       0
                                  −1
                                        0.88               0.9               0.92              0.94                                                                           0.2            0.3             0.4          0.5             0.6

                                                                  Accuracy                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                Validation Runs                                                                                                                     Validation Runs
                                                Run with Max Accuracy with 0 Low-Perplexity Outputs                                                                                 Run with Max Accuracy with 0 Low-Perplexity Outputs



Figure 18: Steering Layer and Weight Selection for Word-specific Instructions. Each panel
shows instruction-following accuracy (x-axis) vs. fraction of low-perplexity outputs (y-axis). Blue
dots represent validation runs; red markers indicate the selected configuration with maximum accu-
racy and zero low-perplexity outputs. Results are shown for Phi-3 and Gemma 2 2B IT.



Table 13:       Examples of Tokens Promoted                                                                                                                            Validation Acc. vs Low Perplexity: Phi-3 on Exclusion
                                                                                                                                        Fract. of Low-perpl. Outputs


by Word-exclusion Vectors. Projecting word-                                                                                                                            0.15

exclusion vectors onto the vocabulary results in                                                                                                                        0.1
cases where the excluded word is promoted. This
suggests that word-exclusion vectors may not effec-                                                                                                                    0.05

tively steer the model toward avoiding these words.                                                                                                                      0
The vectors are computed at layer 30 of Phi-3.                                                                                                                                        0.3          0.4           0.5          0.6     0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
 Word                                          Top Tokens                                                                                                                                         Subtraction of Inclusion Vector
 books                                          books, Books, books, book, engl                                                                                                                   Addition of Exclusion Vector

 congress                                       Congress, parlament, Legisl
 Europe                                          European, europé, Europe, Europe
 urbanization                                   urban, urban, Urban, urb, rural                                                         Figure 19: Validation Accuracy vs. Per-
 chromosomes                                   chrom, chrom, engl, genom, Zob                                                           plexity Trade-off for Word Exclusion.
 water vapor                                    water, Water, water, agua                                                               Subtracting word-inclusion vectors (green)
 fish                                           fish, Fish, fish, aqu, marine
 adult                                          youth, Youth, Child, Children                                                           outperforms adding word-exclusion vectors
 hypothesis                                     instead, engl, invece, Instead                                                          (red), showing the limitations of the latter.



Steering for Exact Length. We experiment with sentence-specific length instructions to evaluate
the effectiveness of steering in improving adherence to explicit length constraints. Specifically, we
compute steering vectors for instructions such as “Answer using n sentences” (n ∈ 1, . . . , 5) and
apply them to steer the model toward satisfying the corresponding constraints. In these experiments,
we use Phi-3 and the same combination of steering layer and weight as in §4 (layer 12, c = 20).
The results in Figure 17b show that steering significantly improves the model’s adherence to the
specified lengths when explicit instructions are present in the input. Notably, steering produces
statistically significant improvements in 4 out of the 5 cases. Figure 17c illustrates the effect of
steering on the distribution of output lengths for a specific constraint (n = 4 sentences). Steering
shifts the distribution closer to the target length, with a sharper peak at the desired value, while still
maintaining some natural variability.


                                                                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS : W ORD - SPECIFIC I NSTRUCTIONS
Validation Results. As described in Appendix E, to determine the optimal steering layer and weight
parameter for each model-setting combination, we validate our approach by jointly considering
instruction-following accuracy and the fraction of low-perplexity outputs. The x-axis in each panel
of Figure 18 represents the instruction-following accuracy, while the y-axis shows the fraction of
low-perplexity outputs, which we aim to minimize. For each model and setting, we select the layer
and weight combination that achieves the highest accuracy, provided the fraction of low-perplexity
outputs is zero. Red markers indicate the chosen configurations.
Steering using Word-exclusion Vectors. Following our approach for word inclusion, we compute
instruction vectors for word exclusion. However, projecting these exclusion vectors onto the model’s
vocabulary via the unembedding matrix often results in high logit values for tokens corresponding
to the word that should be excluded. Examples of this phenomenon are shown in Table 13. While
this effect does not occur in all cases (e.g., for words like “adult” and “hypothesis”), the presence
of a positive signal for the excluded word in the logit space suggests that these vectors may coun-
teract the intended steering effect. To confirm this, we compare the performance of steering using
word-exclusion vectors versus subtracting word-inclusion vectors for the same words. As shown
in Figure 19, subtracting word-inclusion vectors consistently yields higher accuracy and achieves a
better accuracy-to-low-perplexity trade-off than adding word-exclusion vectors. These results indi-
cate that subtracting inclusion vectors is a more effective and reliable method for steering the model
to avoid specific words.


                                                 34
