Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A NYPREFER : A N AGENTIC F RAMEWORK FOR
P REFERENCE DATA S YNTHESIS
                      ∗
  Yiyang Zhou1 Zhaoyang Wang1∗ Tianle Wang1∗ Shangyu Xing1† Peng Xia1† Bo Li1†
  Kaiyuan Zheng3† Zijian Zhang1† Zhaorun Chen4 Wenhao Zheng1 Xuchao Zhang5
  Chetan Bansal5 Weitong Zhang1 Ying Wei2 Mohit Bansal1 Huaxiu Yao1
 1
   UNC-Chapel Hill 2 NTU 3 University of Washington
 4
   UChicago 5 Microsoft Research
 {yiyangai,zhaoyang,huaxiu}@cs.unc.edu


                                              A BSTRACT
             High-quality preference data is essential for aligning foundation models with hu-
             man values through preference learning. However, manual annotation of such data
             is often time-consuming and costly. Recent methods often adopt a self-rewarding
             approach, where the target model generates and annotates its own preference data,
             but this can lead to inaccuracies since the reward model shares weights with the
             target model, thereby amplifying inherent biases. To address these issues, we pro-
             pose Anyprefer, a framework designed to synthesize high-quality preference
             data for aligning the target model. Anyprefer frames the data synthesis pro-
             cess as a cooperative two-player Markov Game, where the target model and the
             judge model collaborate together. Here, a series of external tools are introduced
             to assist the judge model in accurately rewarding the target model’s responses,
             mitigating biases in the rewarding process. In addition, a feedback mechanism
             is introduced to optimize prompts for both models, enhancing collaboration and
             improving data quality. The synthesized data is compiled into a new preference
             dataset, Anyprefer-V1, consisting of 58K high-quality preference pairs. Ex-
             tensive experiments show that Anyprefer significantly improves model align-
             ment performance across four main applications, covering 21 datasets, achiev-
             ing average improvements of 18.55% in five natural language generation datasets,
             3.66% in nine vision-language understanding datasets, 30.05% in three medical
             image analysis datasets, and 16.00% in four visuo-motor control tasks.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Foundation models, including large language models (LLMs) and large vision-language models
(LVLMs), have greatly enhanced AI model’s ability to understand text, interpret images, and follow
human instructions. Despite their impressive performance in many tasks, they still face reliability
issues such as hallucinations, stemming from misalignment with human instructions (Thakur et al.,
2024; Ouyang et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023) or different modality
information (Zhou et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024b; Yu et al., 2024b). To address these misalign-
ment issues, recent studies have employed preference learning techniques—such as reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Yu et al., 2024a; Sun et al., 2023) and direct preference
optimization (DPO) (Deng et al., 2024a; Rafailov et al., 2024), to align the outputs of foundation
models with human preferences in LLMs or to harmonize multimodal knowledge in LVLMs.
The success of preference fine-tuning techniques hinges on the availability of high-quality, large-
scale preference datasets. Researchers currently employ two main methods for constructing these
datasets. The first involves human annotation, which yields high-quality data but is often limited
in scale due to its labor-intensive nature (Yu et al., 2024a; Ji et al., 2024). The second method uses
external AI models to generate preference data Li et al. (2023c); Zhou et al. (2024a); however, this
approach may fail to capture the inherent preferences of the target model being fine-tuned, render-
ing the generated data less useful. Recently, the self-rewarding (Zhou et al., 2024a; Yuan et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2025) approach samples the target model’s own outputs as responses and uses
the model itself to reward these responses, constructing preference pairs. While promising, this
    ∗
        Lead author, † Core contributor


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                             Feedback for Prompt
                                                                Optimization



          Natural   Natural                                      Candidate Response
         Language   Image                                         1. In this … [rank 1]
                                                                  2. This is … [rank 2]
                                                                  3. think … [rank 3]
         Medical                Target Model   Judge Model
         Image
                    Robotics                                      4. …
                                                                                                           Reward Model

            Data Source



                                                                         Knowledge Captured

                                Web Search Grounded LLaVA-Med            1. Bounding box: [256, 512 …] …
                                             SAM                         2. Label: dog, cat …
                     External                                                                              Preference
                                                                         3. Short caption: this image …
                      Tools                                                                                 Dataset
                                               …
                                    LLaMA          BLIP-2


Figure 1: The figure illustrates the Anyprefer framework. First, Anyprefer selects the nec-
essary tools based on the input prompt to obtain supplementary information, which is then inte-
grated into a knowledge base. Next, the target model generates several responses for the input data.
The judge model then ranks these responses using the constructed knowledge base. Subsequently,
Anyprefer combines the best and worst-ranked responses into a preference pair. The reward
model will then evaluate the quality of this preference pair, and all unqualified pairs will go through
the optimization stage to refine its quality by using the proposed feedback mechanism.

method depends on the performance of the target model when serving as its own reward model.
Inaccurate rewarding can bias the generated preference pairs, seriously compromising data quality.
Therefore, improving the process of synthetic preference data synthesis is crucial for effective pref-
erence fine-tuning, given the scarcity of high-quality preference data and the challenges associated
with annotation.
In this paper, as illustrated in Figure 1, we propose Anyprefer, a self-evolving synthetic pref-
erence data synthesis framework designed to automatically curate high-quality preference datasets.
Anyprefer models the preference data synthesis process as a two-player cooperative Markov
game between the Target Model and the Judge Model, parameterized by input prompts, to achieve a
universal goal: maximizing the quality of preference data, as reflected by feedback from the Reward
Model. Here, the goal for the target model is to generate high-quality pairwise preference data and
the goal for the judge model is to provide robust and consistent ranking for the generated response.
Achieving this universal goal requires collaboration between the target model and the judge model.
Anyprefer supports various downstream applications, such as natural language generation, nat-
ural vision-language understanding, medical image analysis, and visuo-motor control. Specifically,
Anyprefer generates preference data following the process of (1) response sampling, (2) response
rewarding, (3) data quality evaluation, and (4) prompt optimization. First, in sampling stage, the tar-
get model generates a set of candidate responses based on the input prompts. Next, the judge model
leverages external tools to gather relevant knowledge for rewarding these responses. Once ranked,
the responses are used to construct preference data, which is then fed into a reward model to eval-
uate whether the preference data meets general quality criteria. Finally, with the feedback from
the reward model, we refine the policy of the target model and the policy for the judge model by
improving the prompt for these two models. Throughout this process, the target model and judge
model act as cooperative players, working together to enhance preference data quality.
Why Introducing Tools in Judge Model? The inclusion of external tools is essential for ensuring
annotation accuracy. Anyprefer strategically selects tools based on the input data to extract valu-
able information, mitigating bias during response rewarding. Additionally, the feedback mechanism
introduced in the policy stage not only dynamically adjusts input prompts but also shares feedback
with these tools, further enhancing their performance in supporting the judge model.
In summary, the primary contribution of this paper is Anyprefer, the first automatic framework for
preference data synthesis. Experimental results across four key applications—natural language gen-
eration, vision-language understanding, medical image analysis, and visuo-motor control—spanning
21 datasets or tasks, demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of Anyprefer in generating
high-quality preference data and facilitating effective preference fine-tuning. In these four applica-


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Statistics comparison of Anyprefer-V1 with existing preference datasets. The column
“Scale” stands for the size of the generated dataset. In the column “Applications”, NL stands for
natural language tasks, IMG stands for natural images tasks, MED stands for medical tasks and CTRL
stands for visuo-motor control tasks. In the column “Data Type”, Img-Txt stands for image-text,
Img-Ctrl-Seq stands for image-control sequences. Column “Multi-iter” stands for if the generation
process is a multi-iteration process or not.

    Dataset Name     Scale   Human Effort   Response Generator      Tasks       Data Type       Multi-iter.
    HH-RLHF          161K        High          Human Label            NL           Text            No
    Nectar           183K        Low              GPT-4               NL           Text            No
    Orca-DPO-Pairs   13K         Low              GPT-4               NL           Text            No
    UltraFeedback    64K         Low              GPT-4               NL           Text            No
    LLaVA-RLHF       10K         High              Llava             IMG          Img-Txt          No
    RLAIF-V          34K         Low              MLLM               IMG          Img-Txt          No
    POVID            17K         Low        GPT-4+Target Model       IMG          Img-Txt          No
    VLFeedback       80K         No         Open source LVLMs     IMG|MED         Img-Txt          No
                                                                   NL|IMG|     Text; Img-Txt;
    Anyprefer-V1     58K         No            Target model                                        Yes
                                                                  MED|CTRL      Img-Ctrl-Seq


tions, Anyprefer achieves improvements of 18.55%, 3.66%, 30.05%, and 14.50%, respectively.
Additionally, our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the tool-augmented judgment and
feedback mechanism. Furthermore, we have compiled the synthesized data into a new preference
dataset, Anyprefer-V1, comprising 58K high-quality preference pairs. As shown in Table 1,
compared to previous synthesized preference data, Anyprefer-V1 includes a broader range of
application scenarios and data types. This will benefit the open-source community and further ad-
vance AI alignment research.

2      A NYPREFER
To address the challenges of synthesizing high-quality preference data, we propose an automatic
framework called Anyprefer, which models the preference data synthesis process as a two-player
cooperative Markov game. As illustrated in Figure 1, the target model and the judge model serve as
two collaborative players working together to perform preference data synthesis. The target model
first generates response candidates based on the input prompt, while the judge model integrates
information from various tools to accurately reward and rank the responses. The ranked candidates
are then evaluated by a reward model to ensure they meet general data quality criteria. Feedback
from the reward model is used to optimize both the input prompts and the tools employed, enhancing
the quality of low-quality preference data pairs. Ultimately, qualified preference pairs are used as
preference data for preference fine-tuning. In the following sections, we will first detail the problem
formulation and then discuss how to generate the preference data for preference fine-tuning.

2.1     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We discuss the formulation of the proposed Anyprefer framework. To begin with, we denote
the input data prompt as x (e.g., a natural image) and the set of knowledge tools {Mi }Mi=1 . Each
knowledge tool Mi (e.g., Grounded SAM (Ren et al., 2024)) takes the data x as the input and output
a sequence qi = Mi (x) extracting the information from x using model Mi as a delegate.
We model the preference data synthesis as a two-player cooperative Markov Game (MG). In par-
ticular, the first player is the target model πt which takes the data x as input and generate a set of
candidates {yc }C                                                                                  C
                   c=1 . The second player is the judge model πj , it takes the candidate set {yc }c=1 and
                                    M
the knowledge base model {qi }i=1 as an input, then outputs the preference pair {y+ , y− }. From
the model selection perceptive, judge model πj actively aggregates the information from qi and rank
the {yc } output by πt . Since both πt and πj are language-based models, the input prompt pt and
pj can be used to serve as their parameters, respectively. The goal of this MG is to generate a set of
preference pair {y+ , y− } by the collaboration between the judge model and the target model, so that
the collected preference data can improve the preference fine-tuning of the target model πt . Gener-
ally, it is costly and time-consuming to directly evaluate the preference fine-tuning performance in


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


every step, we instead use a reward model R(y+ , y− ) to provide a surrogate reward by evaluating
whether the target model benefits from the preference data {y+ , y− }. Therefore the goal of this
framework can be formulated as

                   arg max E(y+ ,y− ) R(y+ , y− ) | πt (·|pt ), πj (·|pj ), x, {qi }i ,       (1)
                      pt ,pj

where the expectation is taken over (y+ , y− ) ∼ πj (·|{yc }c ; {qi }i ; pj ) and yc ∼ πt (·|x; pt ). Ac-
cording to equation 1, in the preference data generation process, it is feasible to optimize prompt pt
and pj simultaneously using policy optimization with prompt-based gradient ascent (Pryzant et al.,
2023). We provide a more detailed discussion and additional results in Appendix B to highlight the
significance of the two-play cooperation framework.

2.2   R ESPONSE S AMPLING AND R EWARDING
To synthesize preference data using Anyprefer, the first stage is sampling several candidate re-
sponses. Specifically, for a given input prompt x, we sample C unique response candidates {yc }C  c=1
from the target model πt (·|pt ), where pt is initialized with the input prompt x. In our experimental
setup, C is universally set to 5, balancing diversity of samples with sampling costs.
After sampling the candidate responses, the next step is to use the judge model to accurately re-
ward and rank these responses {yc }C   c=1 . To reduce potential bias from relying solely on the target
model for evaluation (Yuan et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024), we introduce a tool-augmented rewarding
strategy for a more comprehensive evaluation. These knowledge tools gather relevant information
from various perspectives to assist the judge model πj in providing accurate rewards. Based on the
input prompt and candidate response, along with its own parameters (policy), i.e., the system prompt
pj , the judge model strategically aggregates information captured by external tools for evaluation.
Specifically, the tools extract relevant information qi = Mi (x) from the input prompt x. The judge
model πj then leverages this extracted knowledge qi to provide an overall score πj (·|yc ; {qi }i ; pj )
for each candidate response yc . Finally, the candidates are ranked, and the top-scoring response is
selected as the preferred response y+ , while the lowest-scoring is selected as the dispreferred re-
sponse y− , forming the preference pair {y+ , y− }. The initial system prompt pj used in the judge
model are detailed in Appendix D. And note that this prompt as part of the policy parameters can be
constantly updated through the formulated two-player MG framework.

2.3   DATA Q UALITY E VALUATION
Ideally, after identifying the preference pair {y+ , y− }, we can directly use it to fine-tune the target
model, collecting performance feedback to enhance the prompts pj and pt of both the judge model
and target model. This, in turn, improves the data synthesis process. However, the fine-tuning
process can be costly and time-consuming, which prevents the immediate feedback for updating
the judge model and the target model, setting barriers for effectively optimizing the policy. To
address this issue, we instead adapt LLM-as-a-Judge strategy (Zheng et al., 2023) to a LLM-based
reward model R to judge the data quality. Here, the used LLM-as-a-Judge prompt can be found
in the Appendix D. This reward model can evaluate the quality of the generated preference pair
{y+ , y− } and return a reward R(y+ , y− ) that reflects the quality, and diversity of every preference
pair. Generated preference pairs with high-quality rewards will be directly collected into the final
preference dataset, while the others will be re-generated via the cooperation between the target
model and judge model, using an updated policy guided by the reward R(y+ , y− ).

2.4   L EARNING FROM THE F EEDBACK
To effectively refine and improve the filtered low-quality preference data, we can use the obtained
reward R(y+ , y− ) as the feedback to optimize the policy of the target model and judge model as
illustrated in equation 1. Specifically, for updating the policy of the target model πt , the input prompt
pt can be optimized to increase the probability of sampling more high-quality and diverse responses
from the target model πt . For updating the policy of the judge model πj , the used system prompt pj
will be also optimized, which will finally affect the aggregation of the tools information. Motivated
by Pryzant et al. (2023) and Yuksekgonul et al. (2024), this policy optimization process is similar
to normal gradient descent, where the feedback R(y+ , y− ) can be viewed as the gradients passing
through the models to update their parameters pt and pj . Thus, we formulae this process as follows:

               pt ← pt + η∇pt E R(y+ , y− ) ,           pj ← pj + η∇pj E R(y+ , y− ) ,                  (2)


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Anyprefer Framework for Preference Data Synthesis
Require: Dataset D; Target model πt ; Judge model πj ; Reward model R; Knowledge tools {Mi }M        i=1 ; Reward
  threshold τ
Ensure: A set of high-quality preference pairs and optimized prompts pt , pj
  for each x ∈ D do
      repeat
         1. Generate candidate responses {yc }C c=1 using the target model πt with prompt pt
         2. πj aggregates knowledge {qi }i∈S from external tools {Mi }i∈S for each candidate response yc ,
  where S is the selected tools decided by the strategy of πj
         3. Compute judge scores πj (·|yc ; {qi }i∈S ; pj ) for each candidate response yc using the judge model
  πj with knowledge {qi }i∈S
         4. Rank candidate responses {yc }C c=1 based on judge scores
         5. Select top-scoring and lowest-scoring responses to form preference pairs (y+ , y− )
         6. Evaluate preference pairs using R to obtain reward R(y+ , y− )
         if R(y+ , y− ) < τ then
              Update prompts pt and pj using policy gradient ascent based on R(y+ , y− )
      until R(y+ , y− ) ≥ τ



where η is the prompt adjustment step. The above policy gradient method aims at iteratively refining
the input prompt (parameters) pt and pj of the target model πt and judge model πj , respectively.
By iteratively updating these parameters, the updated players {πt , πj } are expected to better coop-
erate on generating preference pairs that meet criteria of the reward model and increase the reward.
Finally, the proposed policy optimization are expected to effectively enhance the quality of the gen-
erated preference data.

2.5   I TERATIVE P REFERENCE F INE -T UNING
In this section, after curating the high-quality preference data, we fine-tune the target model through
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024). This process yields a stronger model,
which we then replace as the target model. Then, the enhanced target model collaborates with the
judge model to generate new preference data, which is subsequently used to fine-tune the target
model. This iterative process can be repeated for multiple rounds. Details are in Appendix A.1.
3     E XPERIMENT
In this section, empirically demonstrate how the preference data constructed by Anyprefer effec-
tively enhances the performance of various foundation models across four downstream applications.
We address the following key questions: (1) Does the preference data generated by Anyprefer
improve model performance across diverse applications and benchmarks? (2) Can Anyprefer
boost the capabilities of different foundation models through iterative preference learning? (3) Is
there a positive correlation between the surrogate reward provided by the reward model and the
performance of preference fine-tuning on the target model (i.e., the actual reward)? (4) What is the
quality of the preference data automatically synthesized by Anyprefer?

3.1   A PPLICATIONS AND E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS
This section provides an overview of the downstream applications along with their corresponding
experimental settings, deployment details, evaluation benchmarks, and baselines. The downstream
applications include natural language generation, vision-language understanding, medical image
analysis, and visuo-motor control, which are detailed below:
Natural Language Generation. The first application is using large language models for natural
language generation. We utilize LLaMA2-7B-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) as the target model. We
use GPT-4o as the judge model, which will utilize two tools: DuckDuckGo for web search (duc) and
FsfairX-LLaMA3-RM-v0.1 (Xiong et al., 2024) for response quality assessment. The GPT-4o
is also adopted as the reward model to provide the immediate feedback for the generated preference
pair. For baseline methods, we include original LLaMA2 model, self-rewarding Yuan et al. (2024)
and meta rewarding Wu et al. (2024a) for comparison. For evaluation, we use three natural language
benchmarks: GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), ARC-easy/challenge (Clark et al., 2018), and AlpacaE-
val (Li et al., 2023d), covering commonsense question answering, math reasoning and alignment
domains. Implementation details are provided in Appendix A.2.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: We evaluated Anyprefer using benchmarks from four applications. The target model
represents the original model before preference fine-tuning. For medical image analysis, “B” for
BLEU, “R” for ROUGE-L, “M” for METEOR, “C” for closed, and “O” for open tasks. In medical
iamge analysis, “RAD”: VQA-RAD, “IU”: IU-Xray.


Natural Vision-Language Understanding. The second downstream application is using large
Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) for natural vision-language understanding. In this application,
we use LLaVA-1.5 7B as the target model. For tool selection, we leverage several state-of-the-
art vision models as external knowledge sources, including the visual detection model Florence-2-
large (Xiao et al., 2023), the short captioning model BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023b), and the detection
and segmentation model Grounded SAM (Ren et al., 2024). Additionally, we employ a powerful
central multimodal model, GPT-4o, to integrate and interpret all the information for judgment and
reward assessment. For baselines, we compare original LLaVA-1.5 7B model and LLaVA-1.5 7B
with the self-rewarding approach Yuan et al. (2024), vlfeedback Li et al. (2024a) and meta reward-
ing Wu et al. (2024a). For evaluation, we follow the setup from Zhou et al. (2024a) and validate
Anyprefer on three types of benchmarks: comprehensive benchmarks, general QA benchmarks,
and hallucination benchmarks. For specific configurations, please refer to Appendix A.3.
Medical Image Analysis. Furthermore, we also evaluate Anyprefer in medical image analysis
(MIA). Here, we use LLAVA-Med v1.5 (Li et al., 2023a) as the target model, which is a variant of
LLaVA fine-tuned specifically for medical image understanding. For the tools and reward model
selection, we use several powerful medical models in specific tasks (e.g., detection, captioning) as
external knowledge source, including MiniGPT-Med (Alkhaldi et al., 2024), MedVInT (Zhang et al.,
2023), CheXagent (Chen et al., 2024c) and a powerful central multimodal model (i.e., GPT-4o) for
understanding and integrating all the information into judgment and rewarding. It is worthwhile
to noting that the current Med-LVLMs are unable to generate high-quality data as preferred re-
sponses (Xia et al., 2024). Therefore, unlike natural language generation and vision-language under-
standing applications, we utilize the target model solely to synthesize dispreferred responses (Chen
et al., 2024d), while the ground truth serves as the preferred responses. For evaluation, we con-
duct experiments on two tasks using three datasets: VQA-RAD (Lau et al., 2018) and SLAKE (Liu
et al., 2021) for the medical VQA task, and IU-Xray (Demner-Fushman et al., 2016) for the report
generation task. Implementation details are provided in Appendix A.4.
Visuo-Motor Control. The final application in Anyprefer is using vision-language-action model
for visuo-motor control (VMC). In this case, we employ OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) as the target
model. To implement Anyprefer, we use the image segmentation model Grounded SAM 2 (Ren
et al., 2024) as a tool to segment the objects involved in the tasks and obtain their pixel coordinates.
We then employ GPT-4o as a judge model to generate trajectory cost functions based on the pixel co-
ordinate information and task prompts, including path cost, grasp cost, and collision cost. Following
a feedback mechanism, the feedback generated by the scoring model is fed back to the judge model
to produce prompts better suited for the current task, improving object segmentation and trajectory
generation through multiple iterations. For baselines, we include several mainstream robotic mod-
els, including RT-1 (Brohan et al., 2022), Octo-small (Team et al., 2024), Octo-base (Team et al.,
2024), and OpenVLA-SFT (OpenVLA fine-tuned on the Simpler-Env (Li et al., 2024b) dataset
through SFT). We evaluate our model and the baseline models on four WidowX Robots tasks within
the Simpler-Env (Li et al., 2024b): “placing the carrot on a plate”, “putting the spoon on a towel”,
“stacking the green cube on top of the yellow cube”, and “placing the eggplant into a basket”. We
compare the generated trajectories with the ground truth trajectories, evaluating the accuracy of task
completion by the generated trajectories. See detailed implementations in Appendix A.5.

                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.2   M AIN R ESULTS
In Figure 2, we compare Anyprefer with four key baselines: the original target model, self-
rewarding, meta-rewarding and vlfeedback. Detailed results, along with values from additional
baselines tailored to each specific application, are provided in Table 4 to 15 in Appendix. Overall,
Anyprefer demonstrates significant improvements across various applications, including natural
language generation, vision-language understanding, medical image analysis, and visuomotor con-
trol. Specifically, in natural language generation, Anyprefer achieves up to a 10.92% increase
in accuracy on the GSM8K and ARC datasets compared to the best baseline. On vision-language
understanding benchmarks, Anyprefer outperforms both the original LLaVA-1.5 and the self-
rewarding approach, notably achieving a 6.8% improvement on the VisWiz dataset. For medical im-
age analysis, Anyprefer delivers the best performance, with an average improvement of 31.05%
in medical VQA and report generation tasks. In visuomotor control, we observed success rate in-
creases of up to 14.5% across various tasks.
Additionally, the self-rewarding approach and meta-rewarding also surpass the original target model,
further demonstrating the effectiveness of synthesized preference data. By integrating tool infor-
mation and feedback-guided policy optimization, Anyprefer significantly enhances the model’s
ability to generate more accurate and high-quality responses, making the constructed preference
data more precise and effective. Moreover, in specialized domains like medical image analysis and
visuomotor control, where data scarcity often leads to unstable performance in target models, the
inclusion of additional tools and feedback mechanisms helps overcome the knowledge limitations
of the original models, resulting in substantial performance gains.

3.3   A BLATION S TUDY
We conduct ablation studies to evaluate the effec- Table 2: Ablation study on the impact of
tiveness of incorporating tools for response judg- tools and feedback. The table presents the
ment and the feedback mechanism for policy opti- average scores for each benchmark. “T” rep-
mization. The results in Table 2 demonstrate that resents tool-augmented judgment, and “F”
introducing additional tools significantly improves represents feedback mechanism.
overall model performance compared to the origi-
nal model that only use GPT-4o as the judge model.        T  TF LLM LVLM Med-LVLM VLA
This outcome aligns with our expectations, as the ex-
                                                                   56.88  67.90       23.35     28.0
ternal tools enhance the comprehensiveness of the
                                                         !         59.88  68.82       25.24     30.5
judge model in rewarding and ranking candidate re-       ! ! 61.03        69.61       30.60     40.5
sponses, while also reducing bias in the ranking pro-
cess to some extent. Moreover, incorporating the feedback mechanism to optimize the policy—both
the prompts for the target model and the judge model—further boosts performance, with an average
improvement of 21.51% across all applications. For more specific results, please refer to Tables 5, 9,
12 and 15 in the Appendix. These findings indicate that the feedback mechanism elevates the qual-
ity of preference data, thereby strengthening the target model. To further validate the role of tools
in Anyprefer and the benefits of the joint two-player framework, we have conducted detailed
ablation studies on these two aspects in Appendix B, specifically in Tables 5, 9, 15, and 12.


 Figure 3:          The performance of                Figure 4: Impact of tools (T) and feedback
 Anyprefer at different iterations                    (F) on judge model.
 over all applications.
                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.4   C AN A NYPREFER S UPPORT M ODEL S ELF -I MPROVEMENT ?
In this section, we validate if Anyprefer can continuously improve model performance across
four applications through iterative updates. At each iteration, the Anyprefer framework gener-
ate the preference data, and then use the data to fine-tune the target model. As shown in Figure 3,
we report the performance of Anyprefer in natural language generation, vision-language un-
derstanding, medical image analysis, and visuomotor control. Through multiple iterative updates,
Anyprefer exhibits significant performance improvements in all tasks. For instance, in natu-
ral language generation, the model demonstrates a notable score increase on the GSM8K dataset
compared to the baseline. Similarly, in vision-language understanding and medical image analy-
sis, the model demonstrates significant progress, achieving improvements of 3.66% and 31.02%,
respectively. In the visuo-motor control task, Anyprefer shows the most significant improvement
in success rate, with a 16.00% increase compared to the base model. These results indicate that
Anyprefer exhibits strong self-improvement capabilities across all four applications, improving
the quality of preference data with each iteration, leading to better overall model performance.

3.5   A NALYSIS OF J UDGE M ODEL
In this section, we use natural vision-language understanding as an example to analyze the scoring
accuracy of the judge model with and without tools (T) and feedback mechanism (F). We man-
ually selected 200 examples, consisting of 100 samples generated using tool-captured knowledge
and feedback mechanisms, and 100 samples generated without them. A human evaluation was con-
ducted following the criteria outlined in Appendix D. The results, as shown in Figure 4, demonstrate
that the introduction of tools and feedback mechanisms significantly improves the accuracy of the
judge model: with tools and feedback mechanisms, the judge model’s accuracy reaches 89.6%,
whereas without them, it is only 67.2%, showing an absolute improvement of approximately 22.4%.
This suggests that tools and feedback mechanisms can greatly enhance the judge model’s evaluation
accuracy, resulting in better ranking of responses generated by the target model.

3.6   A NALYSIS OF R EWARD M ODEL
Furthermore, we conducted experiments to evaluate
whether the surrogate reward scores provided by the re-
ward model in Anyprefer are highly correlated with
the actual reward scores, i.e., the preference fine-tuning
performance of the target model. We compared the corre-
lation between the target model’s performance over three
preference fine-tuning iterations in Anyprefer and the
surrogate reward scores corresponding to the preference
data pairs generated by the target model during those
iterations. As shown in Figure 5, the preference data
produced by Anyprefer consistently improves the tar-
get model’s performance across all four applications over
three iterations. Moreover, as the iterations progress, the
average surrogate reward score generated by our reward Figure 5: Impact of tools and feedback
model increases in parallel with the target model’s per- on judge model accuracy.
formance. This indicates a strong correlation between the
surrogate reward scores and the direct evaluation results of preference tuning, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our reward model in providing reliable surrogate rewards.

3.7   A NALYSIS OF S YNTHESIZED DATASET D IVERSITY AND Q UALITY
In this section, we evaluate the preference data Anyprefer-V1 synthesized by Anyprefer,
comparing it against existing synthesized preference datasets to verify its diversity and qualtiy. Di-
versity is analyzed using methods from (Zhao et al., 2024), while data quality are evaluated through
manual annotations and GPT-4 scoring, which are detailed as follow:
Data Diversity. For diversity, we categorize the datasets in Table 1 into two groups: natu-
ral language datasets and multimodal datasets. We select two representative datasets from each
group and randomly sample 2,000 instances from each. Specifically, HH-RLHF and Orca are
chosen for the natural language group, while LLaVA-RLHF and VLFeedback are selected for
the multimodal group. The text data from both groups are mapped using the text encoder


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


from CLIP-ViT-Base, and the image data in the multimodal group are mapped using the tar-
get model’s image encoder. We apply t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to project
these embeddings into a two-dimensional space, as shown in Figure 6 (see more quantitative
analysis in Appendix C). The results show that Anyprefer-V1 nearly covers the full range
of other datasets, both for text-only and multimodal data. Moreover, it occupies regions of
the embedding space that are not covered by other datasets, highlighting its greater diversity.

Data Quality. For quality assessment, we ran-
domly sampled 800 examples for manual eval-
uation, focusing primarily on two aspects: the
difficulty of the data and the satisfaction level
with the data. Specific scoring criteria and guide-
lines are provided in Appendix D.3. The results,
shown in Figure 7, demonstrate that the difficulty
of the preference data constructed by our frame-
work mostly falls within the moderate range, with
a reasonable distribution that avoids being too dif-
                                                     Figure 6: Comparison of Anyprefer-V1 and
ficult or too simple. Moreover, the human evalua-
                                                     other representative datasets in t-SNE mapping.
tion results indicate that annotators are generally
satisfied with the data generated by Anyprefer, which suggests that the preference data con-
structed by Anyprefer is of high quality. Furthermore, we randomly selected 200 examples from
the VLFeedback, Orca, and our constructed Anyprefer-V1 datasets, and used GPT-4o to score
them on a scale of 1 to 10, with a higher score indicating higher data quality. The results are repre-
sented as bar charts in part (b) of Figure 7. From the results we can see that it is clear that the data
constructed by our framework received relatively higher scores, aligning with the manual validation
results. This further demonstrates the high quality of the data generated by Anyprefer.
3.8   C ASE S TUDY
In this section, we present and analyze several cases
from the dataset, Anyprefer-V1, constructed by
Anyprefer. We generated four cases, each correspond-
ing to one application scenario: natural language gen-
eration, vision-language understanding, medical image
analysis, and visuo-motor control, as shown in Figure 8.
From the figure, we observe that the differences between
the preferred and dispreferred responses in the prefer-
ence pairs generated by Anyprefer are often quite
subtle. For instance, in the vision-language understand-
ing case, the dispreferred response mentions ”kiwis and
grapefruit,” a minor discrepancy. This aligns with our ex-
pectation that more similar answers make it harder for
the target model to differentiate between them. Further-
more, even in domains where preference data is scarce
in literature, such as visuo-motor control, Anyprefer         Figure 7: Data quality evaluation. (a)
generates high-quality preference pairs. In one example,      shows the results of manual evaluation
the preferred response successfully places the eggplant on    from two aspects, and (b) represents the
the plate, while the dispreferred response nearly grabs the   results of GPT-4o scoring.
eggplant but ultimately fails.

4 R ELATED W ORK
Various empirical studies applying scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) to the
training of foundation models have demonstrated the importance of the data size. To effectively scale
the training data, synthetic data generation has emerged as a popular and cost-effective alternative,
primarily leveraging advanced LLMs to produce high-quality data (Josifoski et al., 2023; Gunasekar
et al., 2023; Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023). In the post-training stage, especially for the
preference training, high-quality preference data also faces the challenges in scaling.
Preference Data Generation. To effectively scale up the size of high quality preference data,
self-play and self-rewarding methods have gained increasing attention as a practical method to self-


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Case study. A checkmark indicates the preferred response, while a cross represents the
dispreferred response. Errors and hallucinations in the dispreferred response are highlighted in red.

generate the training data without external supervision and models (Yuan et al., 2024; Singh et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2024d; Wu et al., 2024b; Cheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). These methods
usually consist of two steps: self-generating data and fine-tuning. And these two steps can be itera-
tively proceeding. Another line of research is Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF)
which utilizes advanced LLMs to label response pairs (Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023) for accurate
rewarding and ranking. Meanwhile, the preference data generation for VLMs starts with CSR (Zhou
et al., 2024b), which extends this concept to VLMs, to generate high quality vision-language pref-
erences. Following CSR, SIMA (Wang et al., 2024b) is proposed to self-generate responses and
employ an in-context self-critic mechanism to select response pairs for preference tuning. Similarly,
Deng et al. (2024b) successfully applied the self-training manner to image comprehension.
Though these methods have successfully applied synthetic data generation to preference training,
they commonly have the rewarding bias issue which means that their ranking annotations for those
self-generated data are not accurate. For self-rewarding methods (Yuan et al., 2024; Singh et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2024d; Wu et al., 2024b; Cheng et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Chen et al.,
2024b; Wang et al., 2025), there are no explicit constraints on the rewarding function, resulting
in unreliable annotations. To mitigate this issue, our method introduces a series of external tools
into the preference data rewarding process to ensure the rewarding accuracy. Existing works (Bai
et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024a; Tong et al., 2025) that use AI feedback to annotate
preference data may alleviate the rewarding bias issue, however, they often overlook improving the
quality of response sampling. To improve the quality of the sampled response, we introduce a two-
player cooperative Markov Game framework to enable the immediate feedback for the policy model,
which can help refine the response quality. Besides the proposed tool integration and feedback
mechanism, we also apply preference data synthesis to multi domains including natural language
generation, natural VL understanding, medical image analysis, and visuo-motor control, greatly
benefiting the community.

5   CONCLUSION
This paper introduces the Anyprefer framework, an automatic system for synthesizing high-
quality preference data across diverse applications. Anyprefer establishes a cooperative Markov
game that synchronizes the target model with a judge model while incorporating external tools
and feedback mechanisms. This approach improves both the quality and diversity of the generated
preference data, Anyprefer-V1, which can be used to fine-tune the target model and enhance
its performance. Experimental results show that the proposed Anyprefer framework significantly
boosts performance in various applications such as natural language generation, vision-language un-
derstanding, medical image analysis, and visuo-motor control. Moreover, the experiments demon-
strate the effectiveness of Anyprefer in enabling model self-improvement, and highlight the value
of tool-augmented response judgment and feedback mechanisms.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
This paper proposes the Anyprefer framework for automatically generating preference datasets,
applied across multiple domains. The constructed datasets strictly adhere to ethical guidelines,
ensuring that no sensitive information is included and minimizing potential bias during the data
construction process. All experiments and data usage in this research comply with ethical stan-
dards. We acknowledge the potential issues related to fairness and bias that may arise when using
automated tools for generating preference data. Therefore, we have adhered to relevant ethical stan-
dards throughout the data creation and evaluation process to ensure fairness and transparency. No
personally identifiable information was collected or processed in this study.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of the results from Anyprefer, we provide detailed experimental
setups and dataset construction processes. In Section 1, we explain the dataset creation, annotation
guidelines, and data collection methods, with further elaboration in Appendix A. Additionally, in
Section A, we provide a thorough description of the benchmark testing and evaluation procedures,
with clearly defined metrics to facilitate independent verification of our results. To further support
research and application in the community, we have also made the generated Anyprefer prefer-
ence dataset publicly available for download and use by other researchers.

R EFERENCES
Duckduckgo search engine. https://duckduckgo.com/.
Asma Alkhaldi, Raneem Alnajim, Layan Alabdullatef, Rawan Alyahya, Jun Chen, Deyao Zhu,
  Ahmed Alsinan, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-med: Large language model as a general
  interface for radiology diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04106, 2024.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Jeffrey P Bigham, Chandrika Jayant, Hanjie Ji, Greg Little, Andrew Miller, Robert C Miller, Robin
   Miller, Aubrey Tatarowicz, Brandyn White, Samual White, et al. Vizwiz: nearly real-time an-
   swers to visual questions. In Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on User interface
   software and technology, pp. 333–342, 2010.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
Zhaorun Chen, Yichao Du, Zichen Wen, Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Zhenzhen Weng, Haoqin
  Tu, Chaoqi Wang, Zhengwei Tong, Qinglan Huang, et al. Mj-bench: Is your multimodal reward
  model really a good judge for text-to-image generation? arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04842, 2024a.
Zhaorun Chen, Zhuokai Zhao, Zhihong Zhu, Ruiqi Zhang, Xiang Li, Bhiksha Raj, and Huaxiu Yao.
  Autoprm: Automating procedural supervision for multi-step reasoning via controllable question
  decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11452, 2024b.
Zhihong Chen, Maya Varma, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Magdalini Paschali, Louis Blankemeier, Dave
  Van Veen, Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Alaa Youssef, Joseph Paul Cohen, Eduardo Pontes Reis,
  et al. Chexagent: Towards a foundation model for chest x-ray interpretation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.12208, 2024c.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play fine-tuning
  converts weak language models to strong language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01335,
  2024d.
Pengyu Cheng, Tianhao Hu, Han Xu, Zhisong Zhang, Yong Dai, Lei Han, and Nan Du. Self-playing
  adversarial language game enhances llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10642, 2024.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
 Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An
 open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https:
 //lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
  Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
  solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Marc D Kohli, Marc B Rosenman, Sonya E Shooshan, Laritza Rodriguez,
  Sameer Antani, George R Thoma, and Clement J McDonald. Preparing a collection of radiol-
  ogy examinations for distribution and retrieval. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
  Association, 23(2):304–310, 2016.

Yihe Deng, Pan Lu, Fan Yin, Ziniu Hu, Sheng Shen, James Zou, Kai-Wei Chang, and Wei Wang. En-
  hancing large vision language models with self-training on image comprehension. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19716, 2024a.

Yihe Deng, Pan Lu, Fan Yin, Ziniu Hu, Sheng Shen, James Zou, Kai-Wei Chang, and Wei Wang.
  Enhancing large vision language models with self-training on image comprehension, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19716.

Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Length-controlled al-
  pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475, 2024.

Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu
  Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Yunsheng Wu, and Rongrong Ji. Mme: A comprehensive evaluation
  benchmark for multimodal large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2306.13394.

Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
  Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are
  all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644, 2023.

Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre
  Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, et al. Direct language model alignment from
  online ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792, 2024.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.

Jiaming Ji, Mickel Liu, Josef Dai, Xuehai Pan, Chi Zhang, Ce Bian, Boyuan Chen, Ruiyang Sun,
   Yizhou Wang, and Yaodong Yang. Beavertails: Towards improved safety alignment of llm via a
   human-preference dataset. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

Martin Josifoski, Marija Sakota, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. Exploiting asymmetry for
 synthetic training data generation: Synthie and the case of information extraction. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2303.04132, 2023.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
 Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
 vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Jason J Lau, Soumya Gayen, Asma Ben Abacha, and Dina Demner-Fushman. A dataset of clinically
  generated visual questions and answers about radiology images. Scientific data, 5(1):1–10, 2018.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton
  Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, Abhinav Rastogi, et al. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning
  from human feedback with ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Hoifung Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: training a large language-and-vision assis-
  tant for biomedicine in one day. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 28541–28564, 2023a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023b.
Lei Li, Zhihui Xie, Mukai Li, Shunian Chen, Peiyi Wang, Liang Chen, Yazheng Yang, Benyou
  Wang, and Lingpeng Kong. Silkie: Preference distillation for large visual language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10665, 2023c.
Lei Li, Zhihui Xie, Mukai Li, Shunian Chen, Peiyi Wang, Liang Chen, Yazheng Yang, Benyou
  Wang, Lingpeng Kong, and Qi Liu. Vlfeedback: A large-scale ai feedback dataset for large
  vision-language models alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09421, 2024a.
Xuanlin Li, Kyle Hsu, Jiayuan Gu, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Homer Rich Walke, Chuyuan Fu,
  Ishikaa Lunawat, Isabel Sieh, Sean Kirmani, et al. Evaluating real-world robot manipulation
  policies in simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05941, 2024b.
Xuechen Li, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Alpacaeval: An automatic evaluator of instruction-following
  models. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_eval, 5 2023d.
Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating
  object hallucination in large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10355, 2023e.
Bo Liu, Li-Ming Zhan, Li Xu, Lin Ma, Yan Yang, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Slake: A semantically-
  labeled knowledge-enhanced dataset for medical visual question answering. In 2021 IEEE 18th
  International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1650–1654. IEEE, 2021.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
  tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 26296–26306, 2024.
Yuan Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Songyang Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, Yike Yuan,
  Jiaqi Wang, Conghui He, Ziwei Liu, et al. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around
  player? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06281, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to fol-
  low instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt
  optimization with” gradient descent” and beam search. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang,
  Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual
  tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.

Tanik Saikh, Tirthankar Ghosal, Amish Mittal, Asif Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. Scienceqa:
  A novel resource for question answering on scholarly articles. International Journal on Digital
  Libraries, 23(3):289–301, 2022.

Avi Singh, John D Co-Reyes, Rishabh Agarwal, Ankesh Anand, Piyush Patil, Peter J Liu, James
  Harrison, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, Aaron Parisi, et al. Beyond human data: Scaling self-training
  for problem-solving with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06585, 2023.

Zhiqing Sun, Sheng Shen, Shengcao Cao, Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yikang Shen, Chuang Gan,
  Liang-Yan Gui, Yu-Xiong Wang, Yiming Yang, et al. Aligning large multimodal models with
  factually augmented rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14525, 2023.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model, 2023.

Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep
  Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot
  policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024.

Aman Singh Thakur, Kartik Choudhary, Venkat Srinik Ramayapally, Sankaran Vaidyanathan, and
 Dieuwke Hupkes. Judging the judges: Evaluating alignment and vulnerabilities in llms-as-judges.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12624, 2024.

Haibo Tong, Zhaoyang Wang, Zhaorun Chen, Haonian Ji, Shi Qiu, Siwei Han, Kexin Geng,
  Zhongkai Xue, Yiyang Zhou, Peng Xia, et al. Mj-video: Fine-grained benchmarking and re-
  warding video preferences in video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01719, 2025.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.

Homer Walke, Kevin Black, Abraham Lee, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, Chongyi Zheng, Tony Zhao,
  Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Quan Vuong, Andre He, Vivek Myers, Kuan Fang, Chelsea Finn, and
  Sergey Levine. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference on Robot
  Learning (CoRL), 2023.

Chaoqi Wang, Zhuokai Zhao, Chen Zhu, Karthik Abinav Sankararaman, Michal Valko, Xuefei Cao,
  Zhaorun Chen, Madian Khabsa, Yuxin Chen, Hao Ma, et al. Preference optimization with multi-
  sample comparisons. 2024a.

Junyang Wang, Yiyang Zhou, Guohai Xu, Pengcheng Shi, Chenlin Zhao, Haiyang Xu, Qinghao Ye,
  Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Jihua Zhu, et al. Evaluation and analysis of hallucination in large vision-
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15126, 2023.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Xiyao Wang, Jiuhai Chen, Zhaoyang Wang, Yuhang Zhou, Yiyang Zhou, Huaxiu Yao, Tianyi
  Zhou, Tom Goldstein, Parminder Bhatia, Furong Huang, et al. Enhancing visual-language
  modality alignment in large vision language models via self-improvement. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.15973, 2024b.
Zhaoyang Wang, Weilei He, Zhiyuan Liang, Xuchao Zhang, Chetan Bansal, Ying Wei, Weitong
  Zhang, and Huaxiu Yao. Cream: Consistency regularized self-rewarding language models. In
  The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Vf6RDObyEF.
Tianhao Wu, Weizhe Yuan, Olga Golovneva, Jing Xu, Yuandong Tian, Jiantao Jiao, Jason Weston,
  and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Meta-rewarding language models: Self-improving alignment with
  llm-as-a-meta-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19594, 2024a.
Yue Wu, Zhiqing Sun, Huizhuo Yuan, Kaixuan Ji, Yiming Yang, and Quanquan Gu. Self-play
  preference optimization for language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00675, 2024b.
Peng Xia, Ze Chen, Juanxi Tian, Yangrui Gong, Ruibo Hou, Yue Xu, Zhenbang Wu, Zhiyuan Fan,
  Yiyang Zhou, Kangyu Zhu, et al. Cares: A comprehensive benchmark of trustworthiness in
  medical vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06007, 2024.
Bin Xiao, Haiping Wu, Weijian Xu, Xiyang Dai, Houdong Hu, Yumao Lu, Michael Zeng, Ce Liu,
  and Lu Yuan. Florence-2: Advancing a unified representation for a variety of vision tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2311.06242, 2023.
Wei Xiong, Hanze Dong, Chenlu Ye, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhong, Heng Ji, Nan Jiang, and Tong Zhang.
 Iterative preference learning from human feedback: Bridging theory and practice for rlhf under
 kl-constraint. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Qinghao Ye, Haiyang Xu, Guohai Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Yiyang Zhou, Junyang Wang, Anwen
  Hu, Pengcheng Shi, Yaya Shi, et al. mplug-owl: Modularization empowers large language models
  with multimodality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.
Tianyu Yu, Yuan Yao, Haoye Zhang, Taiwen He, Yifeng Han, Ganqu Cui, Jinyi Hu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  Hai-Tao Zheng, Maosong Sun, et al. Rlhf-v: Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment
  from fine-grained correctional human feedback. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13807–13816, 2024a.
Tianyu Yu, Haoye Zhang, Yuan Yao, Yunkai Dang, Da Chen, Xiaoman Lu, Ganqu Cui, Taiwen He,
  Zhiyuan Liu, Tat-Seng Chua, et al. Rlaif-v: Aligning mllms through open-source ai feedback for
  super gpt-4v trustworthiness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17220, 2024b.
Weihao Yu, Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Zicheng Liu, Xinchao Wang,
 and Lijuan Wang. Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models for integrated capabilities. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2308.02490, 2023.
Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason
 Weston. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020, 2024.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
 James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic” differentiation” via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496,
 2024.
Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ziheng Zhao, Weixiong Lin, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi
  Xie. Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question answering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.10415, 2023.
Zijian Zhang, Kaiyuan Zheng, Zhaorun Chen, Joel Jang, Yi Li, Chaoqi Wang, Mingyu Ding, Dieter
  Fox, and Huaxiu Yao. Grape: Generalizing robot policy via preference alignment. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2411.19309, 2024.
Wenting Zhao, Xiang Ren, Jack Hessel, Claire Cardie, Yejin Choi, and Yuntian Deng. Wildchat:
 1m chatgpt interaction logs in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01470, 2024.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.

Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Jaehong Yoon, Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Chelsea Finn, Mohit
  Bansal, and Huaxiu Yao. Analyzing and mitigating object hallucination in large vision-language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00754, 2023.

Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Rafael Rafailov, Chelsea Finn, and Huaxiu Yao. Aligning modalities
  in vision large language models via preference fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11411,
  2024a.

Yiyang Zhou, Zhiyuan Fan, Dongjie Cheng, Sihan Yang, Zhaorun Chen, Chenhang Cui, Xiyao
  Wang, Yun Li, Linjun Zhang, and Huaxiu Yao. Calibrated self-rewarding vision language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14622, 2024b.



A     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
A.1     T RAINING S ETUP

For the training phase with preference data, after collecting each round of preference data, we use
DPO to train for 3 epochs. The entire training process is conducted on a single A100 80G GPU.
During training, we fine-tune the LoRA parameters for improved efficiency. Detailed training pa-
rameters can be found in Table 3.

                                Table 3: Training hyperparameters.

                                    Hyperparameters
                                    lora r                128
                                    lora alpha            256
                                    lora target            all
                                    mm projector lr       2e-5
                                    Batch size              1
                                    Learning rate         1e-7
                                    model max length      1024


A.2     NATURAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION

A.2.1    DATASET AND BASELINES

To evaluate our method, we use three datasets that target different model capabilities: (1)
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) focuses on primary school-level math problems, requiring 2-8 steps
of basic arithmetic to solve. We evaluate based on exact final answer matching. (2) ARC-
easy/challenge (Clark et al., 2018) contains 7K grade-school science multiple-choice questions, split
into an Easy Set and a Challenge Set (questions hard for both retrieval and word co-occurrence al-
gorithms). We also use exact answer matching for evaluation. (3) AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023d)
tests general instruction-following, where model responses are compared to reference answers us-
ing GPT-4-based auto-annotators, with results reported as length controlled win rate (Dubois et al.,
2024) and win rate.
As baselines, we include the untrained LLaMA2 model, a self-rewarding version of LLaMA2 fol-
lowing the methodology of Yuan et al. (2024), and an improved meta-rewarding Wu et al. (2024a)
version of LLaMA2 with the addition of providing correct answers during the self-rewarding pro-
cess when possible. Additionally, we conduct ablation studies by disabling the tools and feedback
modules to evaluate their individual contributions to Anyprefer.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3     NATURAL V ISION -L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING

A.3.1    DATASET AND BASELINES
Besides the original LLaVA-1.5-7b model, its self-rewarding version and meta rewarding as base-
lines, we also incorporate a wide range of other preference data construct method, including:
Silkie:(Li et al., 2023c) Constructs a VLFeedback dataset by generating responses from 12 LVLMs
based on multimodal instructions. GPT-4V evaluates these responses on helpfulness, visual accu-
racy, and ethical considerations. LLaVA-RLHF: (Sun et al., 2023) Introduces Factually Augmented
RLHF, an algorithm that improves the reward model by incorporating factual data such as image
captions and ground-truth multi-choice answers. POVID: (Zhou et al., 2024a) Aligns VLLMs’ pref-
erences using external data from GPT-4 and the hallucination tendencies observed in noisy images.
RLHF-V: (Yu et al., 2024a) Gathers human corrections on hallucinations at a paragraph level and
applies dense direct preference optimization based on human feedback.

A.3.2    E VALUATION B ENCHMARK
We conducted evaluations on three types of benchmarks: comprehensive benchmarks, general VQA
and hallucination benchmarks. Specifically, this includes:

MME: (Fu et al., 2024) A broad benchmark for assessing LVLMs in multimodal tasks, focusing
      on both perception and cognition. It tests models across 14 subtasks that challenge their
      interpretative and analytical abilities.
LLaVAW : (Liu et al., 2024) A visual reasoning benchmark with 24 diverse images and 60 ques-
      tions, covering a range of scenarios from indoor or outdoor environments to abstract art.
MMBench: (Liu et al., 2023) Expands evaluation scope with a curated dataset and introduces the
     CircularEval strategy, which uses ChatGPT to transform free-form predictions into struc-
     tured multiple-choice answers.
MM-Vet: (Yu et al., 2023) Assesses LVLMs through 16 multimodal tasks built from six core vision-
      language skills, providing detailed insights into model performance across various question
      types and response formats.
ScienceQA: (Saikh et al., 2022) A multimodal benchmark targeting multi-hop reasoning in science,
        containing 21K multiple-choice questions with associated explanations and lectures.
VizWiz: (Bigham et al., 2010) A VQA dataset with over 31,000 goal-oriented visual questions,
       featuring images taken by blind users and their spoken queries, along with crowdsourced
       answers.
GQA: (Hudson & Manning, 2019) A visual reasoning dataset with 22 million semantically-
      generated questions based on scene graphs, designed to evaluate consistency, grounding,
      and plausibility in model responses.
POPE: (Li et al., 2023e) A binary classification task to detect object hallucination in LVLMs, using
      yes or no questions and diverse object sampling strategies to expose hallucination tenden-
      cies.

A.4     M EDICAL I MAGE A NALYSIS

A.4.1    DATASET AND BASELINES
We evaluate the performance of our method on three key datasets targeting medical image analysis
tasks: (1) VQA-RAD (Lau et al., 2018) contains 3,515 question-answer pairs and 315 radiology
images, with questions categorized into types like abnormality, modality, and organ system. An-
swers include both yes/no and open-ended responses. (2) SLAKE (Liu et al., 2021) consists of
642 radiology images and over 7,000 diverse QA pairs, requiring external medical knowledge and
annotated with segmentation masks and bounding boxes. We only consider the English subset. (3)
IU-Xray (Demner-Fushman et al., 2016) focuses on medical report generation, containing chest X-
ray images paired with detailed clinical reports, evaluating the model’s ability to generate accurate
medical text based on images.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As baselines, we include the LLaVA-Med-1.5 model (Li et al., 2023a), a self-rewarding version of
LLaVA-Med v1.5, and a meta-rewarding version of LLaVA-Med-1.5. Additionally, we adapt the
VLFeedback method to LLaVA-Med-1.5 for comparison. Additionally, we perform ablation studies
by disabling the tools and feedback modules to assess their individual contributions to Anyprefer.

A.5     V ISUO -M OTOR C ONTROL

A.5.1    DATASET AND BASELINES
We employ Simpler-Env (Li et al., 2024b) as our experiment environment and dataset. SIMPLER
(Simulated Manipulation Policy Evaluation for Real Robot Setups) is a suite of simulated environ-
ments designed to evaluate real-world robot manipulation policies. SIMPLER utilizes simulated
environments as an effective proxy for real-world testing, addressing the challenges of real robot
evaluations, which are typically expensive, slow, and difficult to reproduce.
To comprehensively assess the performance of our proposed method, we conducted baseline com-
parisons with several state-of-the-art robotic models. RT-1(Brohan et al., 2022) is a sophisticated
robotic control system designed to handle real-world tasks at scale. It utilizes a Transformer-based
architecture trained on approximately 130,000 demonstrations covering over 700 tasks, enabling it
to generalize across a variety of tasks with minimal task-specific data. Octo(Team et al., 2024) is
an open-source, generalist robot policy trained on 800,000 diverse robot episodes from the Open X-
Embodiment dataset. Employing a transformer-based architecture, Octo demonstrates robust adap-
tation to various tasks, robots, and environments; we evaluated both its small (27M parameters)
and base (93M parameters) versions. OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) is a 7B-parameter open-source
vision-language-action model designed for generalist robot manipulation policies, trained on 970k
robot demonstrations from the same dataset. Key features of OpenVLA include its ability to con-
trol multiple robots directly and its adaptability to new robot domains through efficient fine-tuning.
We used the OpenVLA-baseline model, which was fine-tuned on the Simpler-Env dataset through
supervised learning. These models were selected as baselines for comparison in our experiments
to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Because OpenVLA can not generate word,
use LLaVA-1.5-7B for self-rewarding. Regarding the dataset, the Simpler-Env dataset was created
by using the OpenVLA model fine-tuned on the bridge-v2Walke et al. (2023) data to generate 500
successful trajectories within Simpler-EnvLi et al. (2024b).

A.5.2    E VALUATION B ENCHMARKS
All the baseline models were tested on four WidowX robot tasks within the Simpler-Env:

      1. Put the carrot on a plate
      2. Put the spoon on a towel
      3. Stack the green cube on the yellow cube
      4. Put the eggplant in basket

For each task, we executed 50 trials where the positions of the source and target objects were ran-
domly generated. The evaluation was based on whether the objects could be continuously grasped
and whether the tasks were successfully completed. We compared the generated trajectories from
each model with the ground truth trajectories, assessing their performance in terms of task success
rate.

B     S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTS
B.1     NATURAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION

We present detailed results in Tables 4. Anyprefer achieves substantial improvements across all
datasets, particularly when combined with external tools and feedback mechanisms. For natural
language, on GSM8K and ARC datasets, our approach improves the absolute accuracy by 10.92%,
5.81% and 7.00% relative to the Pareto Optimal of untrained and self-rewarding baselines, clearly
showcasing the strength of integrating external assistance. On AlpacaEval, our method outperforms


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Performance on text tasks. For GSM8K and ARC, we report the accuracy of the final
answer. For Alpaca Eval, we report length controlled win rate / win rate (∗ indicates that the chosen
response during the self-rewarding process uses the ground truth).

            Method               GSM8K         ARC-Easy             ARC-Challenge        Alpaca Eval 2.0
            Llama-2               22.44          74.33                  57.68              5.20 / 4.57
            + Self Rewarding      23.20          74.45                  56.31              3.28 / 3.12
            + Self Rewarding∗     27.22          73.53                  56.66                   -
            + Meta Rewarding      25.47          76.22                  59.47                   -
            + Anyprefer           38.14          80.26                  64.68             19.25 / 15.14

                       Table 5: Ablation study of natural language generation.

      Method                            GSM8K        ARC-Easy          ARC-Challenge         Alpaca Eval 2.0
                                        Feedback Mechanism Ablation
      Anyprefer                          30.10          78.16                 62.37             3.99 / 3.75
      Anyprefer (tools)                  37.53          78.70                 63.40            18.96 / 14.40
      Anyprefer (tools + feedback)       38.14          80.26                 64.68            19.25 / 15.14

Table 6: The multi-round preference iteration results of Llama2 and Anyprefer on the GSM8K
dataset. The superscript “l” denotes LLaMA2, and the superscript “a” denotes Anyprefer (tools +
feedback).

                                     Basel    Iter-1a    Iter-2a        Iter-3a
                                     22.44     38.14         39.04      41.32

       Table 7: Comparison of different methods on natural vision-language understanding.

  Method             MMEP       MMEC         LLaVAW      MMB          MMVet       SQAI     VisWiz    GQA       POPE
  LLaVA-1.5-7B       1510.7     348.2         63.4           64.3      30.5       66.8      50.0     62.0      85.90
  + Vfeedback        1432.7     321.8         62.1           64.0      31.2       66.2      52.6     63.2      83.72
  + Human-Prefer     1490.6     335.0         63.7           63.4      31.1       65.8      51.7     61.3      81.50
  + POVID            1452.8     325.3         68.7           64.9      31.8       68.8      53.6     61.7      86.90
  + RLHF-V           1489.2     349.4         65.4           63.6      30.9       67.1      54.2     62.1      86.20
  + Self Rewarding   1505.6     362.5         61.2           64.5      31.4       69.6      53.9     61.7      86.88
  + Meta Rewarding   1498.3     357.4         64.0           64.2      31.3       69.1      53.5     62.0      86.70
  + Anyprefer        1510.1     362.9         69.2           65.1      33.0       70.9      54.0     62.2      86.98



simpler setups with a more than threefold increase in win rates. In contrast, the self-rewarding mech-
anism alone struggles to deliver meaningful improvements, with gains being marginal at best. While
self rewarding and meta rewarding offer some benefits, it alone cannot significantly enhance the per-
formance of smaller models like LLaMA2-7B in complex tasks, indicating the need for additional
support. Ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of each component in our approach. Dis-
abling either the tools or feedback modules leads to notable performance declines, confirming that
both elements are crucial to maximizing the model’s potential.

B.2   NATURAL V ISION -L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING

In this section, we present detailed experiment results on natural vision-language understanding.
Table 7 compares the performance of Anyprefer against other methods. The results demonstrate
that Anyprefer consistently outperforms prior approaches across most benchmarks, highlighting
the effectiveness of our framework and the robustness of the constructed dataset.
To further investigate the impact of key components within Anyprefer, we perform ablation stud-
ies by systematically removing the tool utilization feature and varying the feedback iterations. The
outcomes of these studies are summarized in Table 9. Our findings reveal that integrating tools into


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 8: The multi-round preference iteration results of LLaVA-1.5 on natural vision-language un-
derstanding.

  Method                  MMEP        MMEC     LLaVAW           MMB          MMVet            SQAI          VisWiz      GQA      POPE
  LLaVA-1.5-7B               1510.7   348.2      63.4            64.3          30.5           66.8           50.0       62.0     85.90
  + Anyprefer Iter-1         1502.0   358.0      67.4            64.8          32.3           70.5           53.7       62.1     86.22
  + Anyprefer Iter-2         1506.5   360.3      67.2            64.9          32.4           70.7           53.6       62.0     86.95
  + Anyprefer Iter-3         1510.1   362.9      69.2            65.1          33.0           70.9           54.0       62.2     86.98


Table 9: Ablation study of natural vision-language understanding. For the rank ablation, we default
to using lower-ranked responses as dispreferred data and higher-ranked responses as preferred data.

 Method                               MMEP     MMEC        LLaVAW       MMB           MMVet      SQAI          VisWiz    GQA     POPE
                                                Feedback Mechanism Ablation
 Anyprefer                            1488.5   340.4          64.3          64.7       31.7          69.9       53.4      62.0   86.92
 Anyprefer (tools)                    1498.2   357.5          66.8          64.6       32.1          70.3       53.6      62.1   86.90
 Anyprefer (tools + feedback)         1510.1   362.9          69.2          65.1       33.0          70.9       54.0      62.2   86.98
                                                Optimization Target Ablation
 Optimize Target Model Only           1480.2   350.2          65.2          63.9       31.0          67.2       52.0      61.5   86.10
 Optimize Judge Model Only            1485.6   353.1          66.1          64.1       31.5          68.0       53.2      61.8   86.45
 Independently Optimize Both Models   1495.8   359.0          67.8          64.7       32.5          69.2       53.5      62.0   86.70
                                                       Data Rank Ablation
 Anyprefer (rank3 + rank5)            1501.8   359.4          66.8          64.8       32.2          69.1       53.7      62.0   86.75
 Anyprefer (rank3 + rank1)            1508.3   361.2          68.5          65.0       32.8          70.1       53.8      62.2   86.89


the framework enhances perceptual and cognitive capabilities, while increasing the number of feed-
back iterations yields additional performance gains. These results underscore the critical role that
tools and feedback mechanisms play in our framework.

B.3    M EDICAL I MAGE A NALYSIS

We evaluate the performance of models benefited from Anyprefer across two tasks and three
widely-used datasets. As demonstrated in Figure 2, Anyprefer performs the best overall pre-
formance, with an average improvement of 31.0%. As shown in Table 10, for medical VQA and
report generation, the performance increased by 13.14% and 67.8%, respectively. Interestingly,
we can also observe that model performance is improved significantly on report generation task,
which is attributed to Anyprefer enhancing the open-ended generation capability. Compared
with self-rewarding method, Anyprefer significantly outperforms the baseline method by 28.4%.
By leveraging state-of-the-art medical models as external tools, we constructed an enhanced pref-
erence dataset, which significantly outperformed the self-rewarding approach. This improvement
is attributed to the higher level of expertise and accuracy provided by specialized medical models
in tasks such as VQA and medical report generation. Additionally, the integration of a powerful
central multimodal model (e.g., GPT-4o) for information synthesis and reward judgment further en-
hances the model’s ability to handle complex medical scenarios, resulting in significantly improved
generation quality and accuracy.
Furthermore, the results indicate that increasing the number of external tools and incorporating
feedback mechanisms both lead to notable improvements, particularly in medical report generation
tasks. This suggests that our approach is especially effective for open-ended generation tasks. The
improvement can be attributed to the enhanced capacity of the model to integrate domain-specific
knowledge from multiple tools, while the feedback mechanism allows for iterative refinement, en-
abling the model to better capture the complexity and variability of medical reports, thereby produc-
ing more accurate and contextually appropriate outputs.

B.4    V ISUO -M OTOR C ONTROL

The experimental results are presented in Table 13. Anyprefer , performed notably well compared
to other models. With the integration of tools and feedback mechanisms, the performance across
all tasks was further enhanced. The information provided by the tools improved the accuracy of


                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Performance on medical VQA and report generation tasks. For open-set questions, we
report the recall in column Open. For closed-set questions, we report the accuracy in column Closed.
∗
  indicates that the chosen response during the self-rewarding process uses the ground truth.

                           VQA-RAD               SLAKE                                          IU-Xray
                         Closed Open          Closed Open          BLEU-1      BLEU-2      BLEU-3 BLEU-4                    ROUGE-L     METEOR
 LLaVA-Med                63.57   32.09       61.30     44.26       10.31        0.66           0.07          0.01           10.32       10.95
 + VLFeedback             64.33   32.38       61.52     44.03       10.65        0.67           0.10          0.03           10.78       11.36
 + Self Rewarding         64.17   33.29       61.30     42.63       9.71         0.97           0.10          0.01           10.38       10.52
 + Self Rewarding∗        66.25   32.19       63.28     42.80       9.56         1.03           0.18          0.02           11.14       11.83
 + Meta Rewarding         67.42   33.05       65.10     45.12       12.48        1.23           0.24          0.03           12.56       13.21
 + Anyprefer              72.06   36.10       70.39     49.04       16.85        5.57           2.07          0.56           23.69       29.66


            Table 11: The multi-round preference iteration results of medical image analysis.

                           VQA-RAD           SLAKE                                              IU-Xray
                         Closed Open      Closed Open             BLEU-1       BLEU-2      BLEU-3 BLEU-4                    ROUGE-L     METEOR
 LLaVA-Med                63.57   32.09       61.30     44.26       10.31        0.66           0.07          0.01           10.32       10.95
 + Anyprefer Iter-1       70.96   35.58       67.40     47.69       9.30         2.85           1.12          0.31           19.36       22.24
 + Anyprefer Iter-2       71.47   35.72       69.22     48.17       12.93        4.11           1.58          0.42           21.87       24.93
 + Anyprefer Iter-3       72.06   36.10       70.39     49.04       16.85        5.57           2.07          0.56           23.69       29.66


Table 12: Ablation study of medical image analysis. For the rank ablation, we default to using
lower-ranked responses as dispreferred data and higher-ranked responses as preferred data.

                                        VQA-RAD             SLAKE                                       IU-Xray
                                      Closed Open        Closed Open        BLEU-1      BLEU-2     BLEU-3 BLEU-4              ROUGE-L   METEOR
                                                         Feedback Mechanism Ablation
 Anyprefer                            66.73     32.14    64.66      44.75     9.30       1.19          0.32          0.05      12.42      15.72
 Anyprefer (tools)                    67.65     32.67    65.17      45.72     9.41       1.28          0.36          0.06      12.95      17.13
 Anyprefer (tools + feedback)         72.06     36.10    70.39      49.04    16.85       5.57          2.07          0.56      23.69      29.66
                                                         Optimization Target Ablation
 Optimize Target Model Only           66.20     33.53    65.36      45.79    12.89       3.16          1.20          0.28      14.87      17.99
 Optimize Judge Model Only            68.71     34.39    67.48      46.60    13.37       3.79          1.42          0.36      17.89      19.60
 Independently Optimize Both Models   70.21     34.89    68.37      47.65    14.57       4.18          1.68          0.43      20.66      23.74
                                                                Data Rank Ablation
 Anyprefer (rank3 + rank5)            68.19     34.22    66.74      46.19    12.47       3.12          0.84          0.15      18.92      21.12
 Anyprefer (rank3 + rank1)            70.15     35.41    68.32      47.83    14.58       4.37          1.56          0.32      20.53      25.47


the judge model, enabling the model to generate more accurate prompts and trajectories. From the
comparison, it is evident that Anyprefer with tool and feedback mechanisms achieved the highest
success rates on all tasks, significantly outperforming the other baseline models.
To evaluate the specific contributions of key components in our method to the overall perfor-
mance, we conducted ablation experiments by removing the image segmentation model Grounded
SAM (Ren et al., 2024) and the feedback mechanism. The experimental results are presented in
Table 2 and Table 15
In the first ablation experiment, we assessed the performance of the model without using the im-
age segmentation model Grounded SAM and feedback mechanism. This allowed us to understand
the impact of the image segmentation model on object recognition and scene understanding.The
experimental results showed that without Grounded SAM, the model’s accuracy in locating and
recognizing target objects significantly decreased, leading to an increased failure rate in trajectory
generation. Specifically, the average success rate across the four tasks increased by approximately
15.51%.
In the second ablation experiment, we removed the feedback mechanism to observe how the ab-
sence of detailed feedback affects model training and trajectory generation.The experimental results
indicated that without the feedback mechanism, the model struggled to optimize the generated tra-
jectories, resulting in a lower success rate in task completion. The average success rate across the
four tasks increased by approximately 17.46%, respectively.
As shown in Table 13 the integration of tools and feedback mechanisms led to relative improve-
ments in the success rates of the four tasks by 26.67%, 38.89%, 38.46%, and 38.89%, respectively.


                                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 13: Visuomotor-control: success rates for different tasks and models (∗ indicates that Open-
VLA can not generate word, use LLaVA-1.5-7B as reward model).

                               Put Spoon on Towel          Put Carrot on Plate            Stack Cube         Put Eggplant in Basket
                              Grasp Spoon Success         Grasp Carrot Success        Grasp Cube Success    Grasp Eggplant Success
 RT-1                            0.10           0.06          0.20           0.12        0.22      0.02         0.06         0.00
 Octo-small                      0.42           0.28          0.30           0.16        0.42      0.10         0.48         0.32
 Octo-base                       0.38           0.20          0.22           0.10        0.24      0.04         0.46         0.32
 OpenVLA-SFT (baseline)          0.52           0.28          0.36           0.30        0.56      0.20         0.58         0.32
 +Self Rewarding∗                0.54           0.28          0.38           0.30        0.56      0.22         0.54         0.34
 +Anyprefer                      0.60           0.38          0.72           0.50        0.70      0.36         0.84         0.50


             Table 14: The multi-round preference iteration results of Visuomotor-control.

                       Put Spoon on Towel           Put Carrot on Plate                 Stack Cube          Put Eggplant in Basket
                      Grasp Spoon Success          Grasp Carrot Success             Grasp Cube Success     Grasp Eggplant Success
 OpenVLA                  0.52           0.28             0.36            0.30        0.56       0.20          0.58          0.32
 + Anyprefer Iter-1       0.52           0.30             0.46            0.36        0.52       0.26          0.70          0.36
 + Anyprefer Iter-2       0.58           0.34             0.66            0.46        0.62       0.34          0.80          0.46
 + Anyprefer Iter-3       0.60           0.38             0.72            0.50        0.70       0.36          0.84          0.50


                              Table 15: Ablation study of Visuomotor-control model.

                                Put Spoon on Towel          Put Carrot on Plate           Stack Cube         Put Eggplant in Basket
                               Grasp Spoon Success         Grasp Carrot Success       Grasp Cube Success    Grasp Eggplant Success
                                                       Feedback Mechanism Ablation
 Anyprefer                        0.52          0.30             0.46        0.36        0.52      0.26          0.70        0.36
 Anyprefer (tools)                0.56          0.34             0.60        0.42        0.60      0.30          0.80        0.42
 Anyprefer (tools+feedback)       0.60          0.38             0.72        0.50        0.70      0.36          0.84        0.50


Anyprefer which combines tools and feedback, outperformed models that lacked either tools or
feedback, and those with only tools.


C      D IVERSITY E VALUATION

To further validate the diversity of the data, we selected the largest existing preference dataset,
VLFeedback, as a baseline for comparison. A condition number-based approach was employed to
evaluate the diversity of synthetic data (including VLFeedback and Anyprefer-v1). Specifically, we
randomly sampled 500 examples from each dataset, constructed the covariance matrix of the data
matrix (i.e., a sample-by-feature matrix), and calculated its condition number to quantify data diver-
sity. A smaller condition number indicates a more dispersed distribution in the embedding space,
reflecting higher diversity. As shown in Table 16, the condition number of the Anyprefer dataset
is smaller, further supporting the conclusion that the Anyprefer dataset achieves higher diversity
coverage.


D      E VALUATION C RITERIA AND P ROMPTS

In this section, we list the prompts used in Anyprefer and some of the rewarding criteria manually
annotated during the experimental phase.

D.1     J UDGE M ODEL

      Judge Model Prompts

      [Task] Suppose that you are an expert in {task field}, please rate the answers of some
      given questions.


                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Table 16: Comparison of condition numbers for VLFeedback and Anyprefer-v1 datasets.

                                  Method         Condition Number
                                  VLFeedback           1560.70
                                  Anyprefer-v1         1390.15



      [Guideline] Focus on correctness (whether the information provided in the answer is
      accurate according to the context) and helpfulness (whether the response answers the
      question).

      [Requirement] First provide analyses to all the answers, then assign each an integer
      between 1 and 10, where 1 means the answer is worst and 10 means the answer is perfect.

      {examples}

      {context}

      Query:
      {query}

      Answers:
      {answers}


      Aggregate Function Prompt

      [Requirement] Based on the provided current knowledge base, the input, output, and the
      score from the previous round, reconsider the following:

      1. Which information from the knowledge base is necessary to solve the current problem
      and optimize the output, and which information is redundant.

      2. Are there any errors in the information from the knowledge base?

      After your consideration, reorganize the necessary information you plan to use, and remove
      any incorrect information. Directly output the consolidated result without additional
      instructions.

      {knowledge information}

      {context}

      Answers:
      {answers}


D.2     S URROGATE R EWARD M ODEL

      Reward Model Prompts

      [Task] Suppose that you are an expert in {task field}, please rate an RLHF data pair
      consisting of a query, positive response and negative response.

      [Guideline] Reference criteria:
      1. The positive response should be coherent and correct as possible;



                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      2. The negative response should be worse than the positive one in certain way, but
      not wander off the topic or diverge in too many aspects. For example, if the positive
      response is “The capital of France is Paris”, a good negative response should be something
      like “The capital of France is London”, but not “France is a country in Europe” (diverge
      too much in topic) or “Capital France London is” (diverge both in knowledge and language).

      [Requirement] Please provide an integer score between 1 and 10 indicating the quality of
      the data pair if used in RLHF. The higher the score, the better the data pair. Please first
      analyze the positive response and the negative response, and then give the score in the
      format of “score/10”.

      {examples}

      {context}

      Query: {query}

      Positive Response: {positive}
      Negative Response: {negative}


D.3     D ETAILS OF MANUAL EVALUATION

For the evaluation of the difficulty of preference data pairs: We classified the difficulty of preference
data pairs into four categories: very easy, easy, medium, and hard. The difficulty evaluation is
mainly based on:

       1. The difference between the preferred data and the dispreferred data in the preference pair.
          The smaller the difference, the higher the difficulty.
       2. The difficulty of the question itself.

For the evaluation of the satisfaction level of the dataset: The evaluation is primarily based on the
correctness of the preference data pair. For a preference data pair, if both the preferred data is correct
and the dispreferred data is incorrect, it is marked as “Satisfied”. If one of them is incorrect, it is
marked as “Okay”. Otherwise, it is marked as “Dissatisfied”.


                                                   24
