Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARDS S YNERGISTIC PATH - BASED E XPLANATIONS
FOR K NOWLEDGE G RAPH C OMPLETION : E XPLO -
RATION AND E VALUATION

 Tengfei Ma1 Xiang Song2 Wen Tao1 Mufei Li3 Jiani Zhang2 Xiaoqin Pan1                             Yijun Wang1
 Bosheng Song1 Xiangxiang Zeng1,∗
 1
   College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
 2
   Amazon AWS AI 3 Georgia Institute of Technology
 tfma@hnu.edu.cn xiangsx@amazon.com xzeng@hnu.edu.cn



                                              A BSTRACT

            Knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to alleviate the inherent incomplete-
            ness of knowledge graphs (KGs), a crucial task for numerous applications such
            as recommendation systems and drug repurposing. The success of knowledge
            graph embedding (KGE) models provokes the question about the explainability:
            “Which the patterns of the input KG are most determinant to the prediction?”
            Particularly, path-based explainers prevail in existing methods because of their
            strong capability for human understanding. In this paper, based on the observa-
            tion that a fact is usually determined by the synergy of multiple reasoning chains,
            we propose a novel explainable framework, called KGExplainer, to explore syn-
            ergistic pathways. KGExplainer is a model-agnostic approach that employs a
            perturbation-based greedy search algorithm to identify the most crucial syner-
            gistic paths as explanations within the local structure of target predictions. To
            evaluate the quality of these explanations, KGExplainer distills an evaluator from
            the target KGE model, allowing for the examination of their fidelity. We exper-
            imentally demonstrate that the distilled evaluator has comparable predictive per-
            formance to the target KGE. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demon-
            strate the effectiveness of KGExplainer, achieving a human evaluation accuracy of
            83.3% and showing promising improvements in explainability. Code is available
            at https://github.com/xiaomingaaa/KGExplainer.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to infer missing facts and tackles the incompleteness
of knowledge graphs (KGs) (Akrami et al., 2020), which has been widely used to support various
applications including recommendation (Wang et al., 2019a; Yang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022),
sponsored search (Lin et al., 2022), and drug discovery (Ma et al., 2023; Bang et al., 2023; Pan et al.,
2022). Most KGC models utilize knowledge graph embedding (KGE) methods to map KG elements
into multi-dimensional vectors (Nguyen et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023). These vectors are commonly
used as features for downstream tasks and input into scoring functions for predicting missing links.
KGE methods have been shown to achieve more powerful predictive performance than traditional
models and can be easily scaled to large graphs (Ali et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2020). However,
current KGE methods make black-box predictions without providing explanations, hindering their
deployment in risk-sensitive scenarios (Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023).
To address the aforementioned limitation, the idea of adversarial modifications is adopted to find the
key facts, which identify the facts to include or exclude from the KG and monitor their prediction
score change in the perturbed KG (Pezeshkpour et al., 2018; Rossi et al., 2022; Betz et al., 2022).
These methods can provide discrete evidence, which is insufficient to completely explain why the
model makes such a prediction (Zhang et al., 2023). To capture the coherent reasoning chains for
target predictions, some researchers extract possible logical rules by leveraging the known facts
    ∗
        Corresponding Author


                                                    1
                            Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            within the KG (Zhang et al., 2019; Sadeghian et al., 2019; Arakelyan et al., 2021). The mined rules
                            are usually represented as paths, which can give the basis of decision-making and enhance the trans-
                            parency of the prediction model. Besides, a line of work adopts reinforcement learning to identify
                            the next node step-by-step and form a reasoning chain by designing a reward model (Xian et al.,
                            2019; Bhowmik & de Melo, 2020; Jiang et al., 2023). Apart from them, more recent approaches
                            prefer relying on graph neural networks and introducing pruning mechanisms, learning an edge
3A4                         scorer to search for valid paths as explanations (Zhang et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024).
        de                  Despite the fruitful progress and the popular trend toward path-based explainers, generat-
             cr
                  ea
 BAIT                  se   ing multiple synergistic paths for complex queries has not been discussed. For example,
                            as shown in Figure 1a, Alibaba can be identified as a competitor of JD.com over a com-
                            plex KG1 when given the synergistic facts: both Alibaba and JD.com invest in retail in
P2C9                        China. In addition, for the prediction that the drug Acetaminophen decreases the serum con-
                            centration of drug Warfarin (Figure 1b), the explainers need to provide multiple synergistic
                            paths simultaneously to describe the facts: Acetaminophen inhibits the activity of the enzymes
                      e
 BAIT               as      that metabolize Warfarin, thus bringing a decrease in the serum concentration of Warfarin.
           c   re
        de                  Additionally,      for the
                            identified     explanations, a. Why Alibaba and JD.com are in           b. Why do adverse reactions occur when
2C19                        we cannot directly verify               competition?                     taking Warfarin and Acetaminophen?
                            their rationality due to the            Alibaba
                                                                                                                       te s                 i nh
                                                                                                                   oli
                                                                                   inv
                                                                       _in


                            ground truth is unavailable.                                est                                                      ibi
                                                                                              inve


                                                                                                              ta b
                                                                      ate


                                                                                             _ in                                                    t
                                                                                                          m e                       increase
                                                                                                  sted
                                                                    loc


                            Previous methods focused
                                                                             is_competitor?



                                                                                                  _by


                            more on model faithful-                          DST                           metabolites
                                                             China
                                                                            Global
                                                                                        ... Retail
                            ness (Pezeshkpour et al.,
                            2018; Xian et al., 2019)                                                         me
                                                                                                 in


                                                                                                                  ta b
                                                                                                    t_


                                                                                                  y                                  increase
                                                                     con


                                                                                               _b                     oli                               t
                                                                                                                                                     bi
                                                                                              inves


                            or manual verification of                                       ed
                                                                                          t                                te s                   hi
                                                                      tai


                                                                                       e s
                                                                                     v              Warfarin                                   in
                                                                       n


                                                                                 i n
                            small-scale facts case by                JD.com

                            case (Zhang et al., 2021),                                              Acetaminophen
                                                                      Explainable Path
                            ignoring the quantitative                                               CYP3A4                                    CYP2C19
                                                                      Predicted Fact                                           CYP2C9
                            assessment      of     model
                            explainability.
                                                           Figure 1: (a) Multiple paths (blue) explain the competition relation-
                            Based on the above obser- ship between Alibaba and JD.com; (b) Identifying the adverse reac-
                            vations, we propose KGEx- tions between Warfarin and Acetaminophen needs the synergy of mul-
                            plainer to explore synergis- tiple paths to explain the interaction mechanism.
                            tic path-based explanations
                            for KGC tasks and provide
                            an effective evaluation. KGExplainer is a post-hoc explainable model performed on the trained
                            KGEs, which searches for single or multiple path-based reasoning chains. We first perform a model-
                            agnostic greedy search approach to identify important paths and distill an explanation evaluator from
                            target KGEs to measure the correlation between explanations and predictions. Then we evaluate the
                            fidelity (Wu et al., 2023) of the identified synergistic paths by measuring whether the original pre-
                            diction can be maintained based on the explored explanations.
                            To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to approach the explanations of KGE-based KGC
                            models from a novel perspective by emphasizing and evaluating synergistic paths. Besides, we
                            propose an evaluation strategy to quantitatively assess the effectiveness of synergistic path-based
                            explanations by distilling an evaluator to examine their fidelity. Extensive experiments and human
                            evaluation on benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of KGExplainer.

                            2       R ELATED W ORKS
                            Knowledge Graph Completion. KGC aims to address the invariable incompleteness of knowl-
                            edge graphs (KGs) by identifying missing interactions between entities. Previous rule-based meth-
                            ods (Sadeghian et al., 2019; Arakelyan et al., 2021) mine logical rules iteratively based on pre-
                            trained embeddings of KGEs during the training process. These methods provide reasoning chains
                            for prediction, which enhance the model’s transparency. Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) mod-
                            els map KG elements to multi-dimensional vectors and define a scoring function to infer new
                                1
                                    Alibaba and JD.com are online retail companies in China.


                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


facts, showing superior performance and scalability over rule-based methods for predicting miss-
ing links (Zhang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Gregucci et al., 2023). Specifically, the translational
models, TransE (Bordes et al., 2013a) and its extensions (Wang et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015), rep-
resent relations and entities as embedding vectors and treat the relation as the translation from head
entities to tail entities. In another aspect, the bilinear models, RESCAL (Nickel et al., 2011) and its
variants (Trouillon et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2015), represent relations with matrices and combine the
head and tail entities by sequentially multiplying head embedding, relation matrix, and tail embed-
ding. To effectively infer various relation patterns or properties (e.g., symmetry and inversion) over
complex KGs, RotatE (Sun et al., 2019) represents each relation as a rotation operation from the
source entity to the target entity in the complex vector space. Although these KGE models are suc-
cessful in predicting unknown facts, they are limited in lacking transparency, blocking researchers
from developing trustworthy models. To address the above limitations, we propose KGExplainer to
enhance the explainability of KGE-based KGC models.
Explainability in KGC. To increase the transparency of models in KGC tasks, researchers have
developed various explainable models (Wang et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023;
Yao et al., 2023). Learning rules as the explanations from KGs has been studied extensively in
inductive logic programming (Galárraga et al., 2013; Qu et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2018). To improve
the explainability of KGE methods, CRIAGE (Pezeshkpour et al., 2018), Kelpie (Rossi et al., 2022),
and KE-X (Zhao et al., 2023) search for the isolated key edges to explain the target prediction
by approximately evaluating the impact of removing an existing fact from the KG on prediction
score. However, discrete edges can not form a complete reasoning chain. To explore path-based
explanations, PGPR (Xian et al., 2019) and ELEP (Bhowmik & de Melo, 2020) have adopted a
reinforcement learning approach to predict tail entities and take the reasoning path between the head
and tail entities as the evidence. PaGE-Link (Zhang et al., 2023) proposed a path-based explainable
method for the graph neural network-based KGC tasks, providing valid reasoning chains. To provide
enough evidence for the decision-making complex scenario, we propose KGExplainer to explore
synergistic paths and form a connected subgraph as an explanation.

3   P RELIMINARY
KGE-based KGC. We define a knowledge graph (KG) as a labeled directed graph G = (V, R, E) =
{⟨h, r, t⟩ |h, t ∈ V, r ∈ R, (h, t) ∈ E} where each triple represents a relation r between the head
entity h and tail entity t. Most KGs are incomplete. Knowledge graph completion (KGC) leverages
existing facts in the KG to infer missing ones. Currently, the KGC method adopts deep learning
techniques to learn the embeddings of KG elements. Intuitively, knowledge graph embeddings
(KGEs) contain the semantic information of the original KG and can be used to predict new links.
Generally, the KGE-based models define a score function ϕ to estimate the plausibility of triples and
optimize the vectorized embeddings by maximizing the scores of existing facts. For the incomplete
triple ⟨h, r, ?⟩, the KGE models find the missing tail entity t with best scores as follows:
                                        t = argmax ϕ(h, r, v).                                       (1)
                                               v∈V

The head entity prediction for the unknown links like ⟨?, r, t⟩ can be defined analogously. In the
following sections, we mostly refer to tail entity prediction for simplicity. All our methods can be
applied to head entity prediction.
Enclosing Subgraph. Based on GraIL (Teru et al., 2020), when given a KG G and a link ⟨h, r, t⟩
for tail prediction, we extract an enclosing subgraph surrounding the target link to represent the
relevant patterns for model’s decision. Initially, we obtain the k-hop neighboring entities Nk (h) =
{s|d(h, s) ≤ k} and Nk (t) = {s|d(t, s) ≤ k} for both h and t, where d(·, ·) is the shortest path
distance between the entity pair on G. We then obtain the set of entities V = {s|s ∈ Nk (h)∩Nk (t)}
as vertices of the enclosing subgraph. Finally, we extract the edges E linked by the set of entities V
from G as the k-hop enclosing subgraph g = (V, E).

4   T HE KGE XPLAINER F RAMEWORK
Problem Formulation. Given a fact ⟨h, r, t⟩, KGExplainer investigates the explanation that in-
tuitively consists of the most critical synergistic path patterns featuring h that allow KGE mod-


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                          Path-based Explanation Inference                                                                            KGE Pretraining
                                                                          Trainable         Freeze
                                                                                                                                                          One-hop Search    Two-hop Search
                                                                                                                               Knowledge Graph                                                                    Explainable Paths
      Knowledge Graph                                                                                                                                          0.9



                                            '
                                                             Explanation                                                                                                              0.85
                                     ℎ           !           Exploration
                                                                                                                                        %
               %                                                                                                                    ℎ        '
      ℎ                  '                                                            Synergistic Paths
                                    Knowledge Graph
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.97
                                                     b. Exploring Synergistic Paths                                                                                0.85

                                                                                                                                                                                               arrived!              Subgraph
            KGE
                                                                                                                              Subgraph Extraction                                                                    Evaluator
                                                             Explanation Readout & Score
      ℎ                                                       Evaluator                              S                                                                      Explanation Identification
                  %      "(ℎ, %)


                                                                                                             Soft Labels
                                   Subgraph around <h,r,t>                                                                                                           0.12                                              Rank
              %

                                     ℎ                                                                                     source
                                                                                                                                                 target
          |" ℎ, % − '|                                       Pre-trained One-step Reasoning
                              '      %                                                      S
                                                                KGE
          Objective                  '                                                                                        Enclosing Subgraph
                                                                                                                                                                            Explainable Paths
                                                                                                                                                                                                               d. Evaluating Fidelity
a. Training base KGE                            c. Distilling Explanation Evaluator                                                                         0.25


Figure 2: The KGExplainer framework comprises three modules: (a) Pre-training KGE models on
the target KG ; (b) Exploring synergistic path-based explanations for pre-trained KGE models by
greedy search ; (c) Distilling an evaluator from pre-trained KGE to assess the fidelity of explored
explanations quantitatively.


els to predict tail t. For instance, when explaining why the top ranking tail for the missing fact
⟨Donald T rump, nationality, ?⟩ is U SA, KGExplainer searches for the smallest key paths be-
tween Donald Trump and USA, allowing the model to predict the same ranking of USA. Specifically,
KGExplainer aims to find a connected subgraph (i.e., multiple synergistic paths) gkey that is most
influential to the target prediction ⟨h, r, t⟩, and removing the other irrelevant facts do not affect the
model’s prediction. We can define this process as follows:
                                                                          gkey = argmax D(g, g̃)                                                                                                         (2)
                                                                                              g̃∈gsub

                                                subject to ∆(f (g), f (g̃)) = min ∆(f (g), f ′ (ĝ))                                                                                                     (3)
                                                                                                                 ĝ∈gsub

where g is the original enclosing subgraph , gsub denotes the all possible connected subgraphs from h
to t within g. f (·) and f ′ (·) represent the original and retrained KGE models. D(g, g̃) represents the
structure similarity between g and g̃, and also indicates the sparsity of explanations (see Section 5.4).

4.1         P RE - TRAINING KGE.

In this paper, we developed the KGExplainer as a post-hoc explanation method for KGE-based
KGC models by exploring synergistic paths (i.e., connected subgraph). To effectively learn seman-
tic knowledge within the complex KG, we adopt the state-of-the-art RotatE (Sun et al., 2019) as
the target KGE. Specifically, given a triple ⟨h, r, t⟩, we adopt a score function and expect that the
embedding of head entity h is similar to the embedding of tail entity t by rotating it over the relation
r. By maximizing the scores of positive triples and minimizing the scores of negative ones, we can
obtain the pre-trained entity and relation embeddings (Figure 2a). Theoretically, KGExplainer is
model-agnostic and can be applied to any KGE-based model with a score function. We designed
experiments to verify the effectiveness of KGExplainer on various KGE models, the details can be
found in Section 5.3.

4.2         E XPLANATION E XPLORATION .

Greedy Search for Key Synergistic Paths. As shown in Figure 2b, given a predicted link ⟨h, r, t⟩
for the prediction of tail entity t, we developed a greedy search algorithm based on a perturbation
mechanism to search for crucial paths as the explanations. We first extract the enclosing subgraph g
around the target link, which contains informative interactions for such prediction. To identify the
most important paths influencing the prediction within g, we search all entities in g and measure
their importance to capture key ones. Specifically, we remove each entity and its adjacent from g
and retrain2 the target KGE on the perturbed subgraph g ′ . Then we measure the score change of
    2
      Retraining KGE over the entire KG is way too costly and we discuss an efficient strategy to tackle this
issue in Section 4.2


                                                                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the target link using the original and retrained embedding as the entity importance. The more the
score changes, the more critical an entity is. To ensure that the key entities obtained from the k-
hop enclosing subgraph g lead to a single connected component, we search the key entities from
the head h and tail t hop by hop. We first remove each 1-hop neighbor entity of h and measure
their importance to identify the top important entities. After getting the top-n important entities v1n
from 1-hop neighbor entities, we then search the one-hop neighboring entities of v1n analogously
for important two-hop neighbors v2n . We repeat this one-hop search process until reaching the tail
entity t of the target link. As a result, we capture a set of the k-hop key neighboring entities vn =
{v1n , · · · , vkn } and construct a connected subgraph for multiple synergistic paths as the explanation.
We provide a detailed Algorithm in Appendix A.1.
Retraining Strategy for Importance Assessment. To effectively obtain the score changes of target
facts based on the KGE models, we designed a retraining strategy to capture the new embedding
on the perturbed KG. Since each entity perturbation only makes minor changes over the entire KG,
retraining the embeddings over the revised KG is infeasible when G has millions of entities and
facts. To focus on the relevant patterns and reduce the overhead of the retraining, we introduce a
subgraph-based retraining strategy. We extract the enclosing subgraph g of the target fact ⟨h, r, t⟩
and expand g by including the 1-hop neighbors Nextend of the existing entities, which constructs
a new subgraph gextend . Then we retrain the embeddings of the KG elements on gextend to make
the calculation of score changes effective. To keep the overall entity and relation embeddings of g
within the same representation space of G, we alleviate the following constraints: (1) We initialize
the embeddings of the entities in gextend with the pre-trained embeddings from G; (2) We fix the
relation embeddings in gextend as the same as those in G; (3) We fix the embeddings of entities
v ∈ Nextend . By using the retraining strategy, KGExplainer can effectively capture the target fact’s
score change and efficiently search for key subgraphs. More details can be found in Appendix A.2.

4.3   E VALUATOR D ISTILLATION

Why Subgraph Evaluator? Evaluating the quality of identified synergistic paths is essential. How-
ever, the ground truth explanations are unavailable, making it difficult to achieve that objective. To
evaluate the quality of explanations, we introduce a hypothesis that a perfect explanation should
retain the key context of target prediction and can still maintain the predicted score (Wu et al.,
2023). Thus, an effective idea is to verify that the explored explanations can still obtain the target
prediction. However, the base KGEs implicitly have access to the entire graph and only score one
triple, which can not compute the prediction based on multiple synergistic paths. To address this
limitation, we design a subgraph evaluator by distilling a relational graph neural network (GNN)
from pre-trained KGEs for KGC. Given a pre-trained KGE-based KGC model ϕ(h, r, t), we aim to
train a subgraph evaluator to replicate the predictive performance of the target KGE and evaluate
the subgraph structures of explanations. During training, the GNN is optimized to predict the facts
from their complete enclosing subgraphs. Once trained, the explored explanations as connected sub-
graphs can be fed into the evaluator and evaluate the fidelity of multiple synergistic paths (i.e., the
connected subgraph).
How to get Subgraph Evaluator? Given a link ⟨h, r, t⟩, we develop a score function Z(h, r, t) with
a L-layer relational graph attention neural network (R-GAT) on its enclosing subgraph g to score it
based on the local substructure representation. The update function of the entities in the l-th layer is
defined as:                          X X
                                                                        l−1
                               xli =              α(i,r,j) Wrl Φ(el−1
                                                                  r , xj ),
                                     r∈R j∈Nr (i)                                                   (4)
                                                      l−1       l−1    l−1

                         α(i,r,j) = sigmoid W1 xi ⊕ xj ⊕ er                   ,

where elr and xli represent the l-th layer embeddings of relation r and entity i. α(i,r,j) and Nr (i)
denote the weight and neighbors of entity i under the relation r, respectively. ⊕ is the concatenation
operation. Wrl represents the transformation matrix of relation r, and Φ is the aggregation operation
to fuse the hidden features of entities and relations. Finally, we obtain the global representation
Xsub of the subgraph g as follows:
                                                  1 X
                                        Xsub =        f (xL
                                                          i ),                                        (5)
                                                 |V |
                                                        i∈V


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where V is the entity set of the enclosing subgraph g. After obtaining the global representation
Xsub , we define a linear layer to score the target link as follows:
                                        Z(h, r, t) = WT Xsub ,                               (6)
         T
where W is a transform matrix.
To optimize the subgraph evaluator, inspired by Gou et al. (2021), we adopt the insights of knowl-
edge distillation and consider the predictions of the pre-trained KGE-based KGC model as soft
labels. Meanwhile, to enhance the model’s ability to rank candidate entities, we introduce a regu-
larization term that encourages maximizing the margin between the scores for positive and negative
samples. The objective for the optimization of this evaluator is defined as follows:
                              X
                        min         ∥ϕ(h, r, t) − Z(h, r, t)∥2 + λL(h, r, t),                  (7)
                            (h,r,t)∈G
where the first term is a score alignment objective. The second term is a pair-wise loss , which is
defined by negative sampling:
                                                          N
                                                      1 X
                           L(h, r, t) = −Z(h, r, t) +       Z(h, r, vn ),                       (8)
                                                      N n=1
where N denotes the number of negative samples and vn is uniformly drawn from V. By minimizing
the above optimization objective, we can obtain an effective subgraph scoring function with powerful
predictive performance and evaluation capabilities for synergistic path-based explanations.

4.4   S CALABILITY OF KGE XPLAINER

The computation complexity of finding explanations using KGExplainer is related to two parts: 1)
the size of enclosing subgraph g and 2) the number of entities that require importance evaluation.
Proposition 1 Given G = (V, R, E), a predicted fact ⟨h, r, t⟩, the maximum length of paths L, and
                                               |V|
the number of paths N , the size of g is O( LN
                                             |E| ) and the size of Nextend is O(LN ).

Given h and t, the maximum number of edges within paths is L ∗ N . The probability of an entity
                                                                                      LN |V|
v ∈ V in an edge e ∈ E is 2|V|                                          2|V|
                           |E| . Thus, the size of g is bounded by LN ∗ |E| , i.e., O( |E| ). The
                                     |V|
number of entities in Nextend is 2LN
                                   |E|   ∗ 2|E|
                                           |V| , i.e., O(LN ).

Proposition 2 Given G = (V, R, E), a predicted fact ⟨h, r, t⟩, the maximum length of paths L and
the maximum number of entities per hop in an explanation K. The maximum number of entities to
evaluate is (1 + (L − 2)K)( 2|E|
                            |V| ).

Following Algorithm 1 in Appendix A.1, the average number of entities to evaluate is d in the first
hop, 0 in the last hop, and K ∗ d in the intermediate hops, where d = 2|E|
                                                                      |V| is the average degree of
an entity. Thus, the total number of entities to evaluate is (1 + (L − 2)K)( 2|E|
                                                                             |V| ).

Here, we conclude that the average computation complexity of finding the explanation for a pre-
dicted fact ⟨h, r, t⟩ is only related to the maximum length of paths L, the maximum number of
paths N , and the average degree of an entity in KG, which is not related to the size of G. Thus, in
theory, KGExplainer can balance the computational complexity by adjusting the size of enclosing
subgraphs. Besides, KGExplainer can scale to large KGs with a small average degree. More details
refer to Appendix A.3.

5     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we evaluate the proposed KGExplainer by considering the following key research
questions: Q1 Can KGExplainer perform comparable faithfulness and explore informative expla-
nations? Q2 Can KGExplainer work well with different sizable explainable subgraphs and various
KGE methods? Q3 Is KGExplainer efficient in exploring explanations? We provide more imple-
mentation details of KGExplainer and baselines in Appendix B. More additional experiments are
shown in Appendix C.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Datasets. We conduct experiments on three widely used datasets for the KGC task. Specifically,
OGB-biokg is a large-scale KG from OGB project (Hu et al., 2021), which contains millions of facts
and is created from a large number of biomedical data repositories. The Family-rr (Sadeghian et al.,
2019) is a dataset that contains the bloodline relationships between individuals of various families.
FB15k-237 (Bordes et al., 2013b) is a subset of Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008), which is a large-
scale knowledge graph containing general facts. For every dataset, we split it into training and test
subsets for the following evaluations of faithfulness and explainability. The detailed statistics of all
datasets are shown in Appendix B.1.1.
Faithful Metrics. The evaluation of KGC models is performed by running head and tail predictions
on each triple in the test set. For each prediction, the ground truth is ranked against all the other
entities V. Without loss of generality, for tail prediction, this corresponds to:
                        tailRank(h, r, t) = |{v ∈ V|ϕ(h, r, v) >= ϕ(h, r, t)}|.                                  (9)
Following Kadlec et al. (2017), we adopt Hits@N to quantify the predictive performance of KGE
and distilled models. Hits@N is the fraction of ranks Srank with value ≤ N :
                                                       |{si ∈ Sr : si ≤ N }|
                                      Hits@N =                               ,                                  (10)
                                                               |Sr |
where si is the ranking of i-th candidate entity and Sr is a set of rankings for all candidate entities.
Following the method proposed by Kadlec et al. (2017), we focus on the Hits@1 metric to better
highlight model differences. Based on the designed metrics, we report the mean and variance for
five runs.
Explainable Metrics. As the ground truth explanations of KGC tasks are usually missing, it is not
easy to quantitatively evaluate the quality of explanations. We consider explanations to be suffi-
cient if they allow preserving the KGC performance (Akrami et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Wu
et al., 2023). Thus we define the Recall@N and F 1@N as the metrics to evaluate the effectiveness
of explored explanations. Specifically, Recall@N measures the fidelity of explanatory subgraphs
by feeding them into the distilled model and examining how well they recover the target predic-
tive rankings. Given the rankings of tested facts by forwarding their explanations to the distilled
evaluator, we calculate the Recall@N as follows:
                                       |{si ∈ Sr : si ≤ N } ∩ {sj ∈ Srexp : sj ≤ N }|
                    Recall@N =                                                        ,                         (11)
                                                    |{si ∈ Sr : si ≤ N }|
where Srexp is the ranking set of explanations and Sr denotes the original predictive rankings of
them. We can assess the trustworthiness of explanations by calculating the recovery rate of the
rankings Sr . Meanwhile, the synergistic path-based explanations are critical in the precision of
rankings (i.e., Hits@N ), to comprehensively evaluate the explainability of KGExplainer, we define
F 1@N to balance the recall and precision of the explored explanations:
                           |{sj ∈ Srexp : sj ≤ N }|           2 · Recall@N · Hits@N
            Hits@N =                  exp           , F 1@N =                       .                           (12)
                                    |Sr |                      Recall@N + Hits@N
Finally, we consider N ∈ {1, 3, 10} for the qualitative metrics to emphasize the performance dis-
crepancy.
                                                                   Baselines. To verify the performance of KG-
                                                                   Explainer in exploring explanations, we com-
Table 1: The predictive performance of KGE and                     pare it against subgraph-based (i.e., a batch of
the distilled models on Hits@1(%) metric.                          discrete facts) methods CRIAGE (Pezeshkpour
      Methods     OGB-biokg      Family-rr      FB15k-237          et al., 2018) and Kelpie (Rossi et al., 2022), and
 TransE           11.32 (0.22)   12.63 (0.09)   41.86 (0.43)       path-based DRUM (Sadeghian et al., 2019),
 KGExp-TransE     10.40 (0.25)   15.77 (0.11)   40.99 (0.31)       ELEP (Bhowmik & de Melo, 2020), and
 DistMult         16.11 (0.06)   8.680 (0.27)   10.26 (0.21)       PaGE-Link (Zhang et al., 2023). The sources
 KGExp-DistMult   14.04 (0.11)   9.881 (0.14)   13.09 (0.32)       of subgraph-based models KGEx (Baltatzis &
 RotatE           17.12 (0.19)   39.08 (0.45)   42.10 (0.51)       Costabello, 2024) and KE-X (Zhao et al., 2023)
 KGExp-RotatE     17.33 (0.12)   35.79 (0.06)   39.28 (0.29)       are unavailable now, so we exclude them as our
                                                                   baselines.


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, we design variants of KGExplainer: KGExp-Rand randomly selected some connec-
tive paths between head and tail entities to construct an explainable subgraph, which allows an
ablation study. KGExp-TransE, KGExp-DistMult, and KGExp-RotatE are variants of KGEx-
plainer that consider TransE (Bordes et al., 2013b), DistMult (Yang et al., 2015), and RotatE(Sun
et al., 2019) as the base KGE, respectively. For convenience, we denote KGExplainer as KGExp.

5.2   P ERFORMANCE OF FAITHFULNESS AND E XPLAINABILITY

In response to Q1, we analyze the performance of KGExplainer from faithfulness and explainability.
Besides, we provide a human evaluation on Family-rr dataset.
Faithfulness Evaluation. An important goal
of explainability models is to accurately and
comprehensively represent the local decision- Table 2: The F 1@1(%) performance of explana-
making structure of the target model. Specif- tions over various datasets. The boldface denotes
ically, in the context of KGE models, KGEx- the highest score and the underline indicates the
plainer should strive to replicate their behav- best baseline.
ior as closely as possible (Zhang et al., 2021). Methods          OGB-biokg Family-rr FB15k-237
Thus, to answer Q1, we compare the predic- CRIAGE                 50.03 (0.09) 20.75 (0.32) 40.99 (0.21)
tive performance of KGExplainer and the target Kelpie             49.32 (0.16) 20.33 (0.23) 36.64 (0.13)
KGE models. As shown in Table 1, we observe DRUM                  62.56 (0.23) 21.26 (0.09) 65.53 (0.19)
that KGExplainer achieves nearly the same ELEP    PaGE-Link
                                                                  63.44 (0.21) 22.75 (0.17) 70.11 (0.21)
                                                                  68.29 (0.19) 21.89 (0.13) 66.12 (0.14)
performance on the KGC task compared with
                                                  KGExp-Rand      54.32 (0.43) 19.16 (0.26) 55.17 (0.23)
the target KGE models (e.g., the performance KGExp-TransE         81.97 (0.13) 30.47 (0.25) 82.04 (0.33)
of KGExp-TransE and TransE on FB15k-237 KGExp-DistMult 82.33 (0.03) 30.49 (0.24) 84.29 (0.17)
dataset). Furthermore, we observe that RotatE KGExp-RotatE        85.21 (0.11) 29.52 (0.12) 83.65 (0.14)
overall achieves the best performance for KGC
and similarly KGExp-RotatE shows superior Table 3: The Recall@1(%) performance of expla-
predictive performance and the best recovery nations over various datasets. We mark the best
rate among the distilled models, which brings score with bold font and mark the best baseline
greater credibility than others, supporting that with underline.
KGExplainer is faithful to target KGE and is Methods              OGB-biokg Family-rr FB15k-237
reliable in replicating the target KGE. Thus, we CRIAGE           58.75 (0.07) 28.57 (0.33) 68.23 (0.43)
chose the RotatE as the target KGE model and Kelpie               60.32 (0.22) 27.62 (0.39) 60.01 (0.27)

distilled a powerful evaluator based on the sub- DRUM             69.87 (0.14) 16.20 (0.21) 87.88 (0.22)
                                                  ELEP            76.23 (0.25) 29.84 (0.18) 85.58 (0.29)
graph substructure around the target link to as- PaGE-Link        77.69 (0.15) 27.14 (0.31) 85.13 (0.09)
sess the explainability. In Table 1, we can see KGExp-Rand        54.61 (0.55) 26.98 (0.49) 50.37 (0.19)
that KGExplainer benefits the base model for KGExp-TransE         88.37 (0.21) 34.61 (0.43) 92.07 (0.33)
some datasets. We observe the same behav- KGExp-DistMult 89.77 (0.11) 34.60 (0.13) 91.67 (0.11)
ior in (Deng & Zhang, 2020; Jiao et al., 2019). KGExp-RotatE      88.65 (0.08) 33.02 (0.11) 91.45 (0.09)

From their insights, we think the KGExplainer
distilled from KGEs may remove some noise and irrelevant information to the KGC task, making
KGExplainer more robust and having better generalization ability, which leads to KGExplainer per-
forming better than base KGEs to some extent. Based on these observations, the effectiveness of the
distilled evaluator is demonstrated empirically.
Explainability Evaluation. It is essential to assess objectively how good an explanation is for
KGExplainer. Unfortunately, similar to other explanation methods, evaluating explanations is made
difficult by the impossibility of collecting ground truth explanations. To fairly evaluate explanations
without ground truth and answer Q1, we distill an evaluator and design two metrics F 1@1 and
Recall@1 to quantify how trusty an explanation is. As shown in Table 2 and Table 3, we reported
the F 1@1 and Recall@1 results compared with baselines on three wide-used datasets (F 1@[3, 10]
and Recall@[3, 10] are reported in Appendix C.2). Specifically, KGExplainer improves the F 1@1
and Recall@1 by at least 16.92% and 12.08% respectively on the OGB-biokg dataset and achieves
7.74% and 4.77% absolute increase over the best baseline on the Family-rr dataset. Meanwhile,
the performance of KGExplainer on the FB15k-237 dataset has yielded 13.54% and 4.19% gains in
F 1@1 and Recall@1 compared with the baselines.
Furthermore, we have the following observations: (1) Compared with the subgraph-based meth-
ods CRIAGE and Kelpie, the path-based explainability methods DRUM, ELEP, and PaGE-link that


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


utilize reasonable paths between source and target entities achieve better performance, which in-
dicates that the connecting paths are important for the model explanation. (2) Compared with
the path-based explainability models ELEP and PaGE-Link, synergistic path-based KGExplainer
(e.g., KGExp-RotatE) performs better than them on all datasets, demonstrating that the multi-
ple synergistic path-based patterns are more effective than paths and multiple disconnected facts.
(3) For an ablation study, KGExp-Rand, which
adopts randomly sampled subgraphs connected               Please select the best explanation of “Why the model
to the source and target entities as the ex-              predicts this relationship between source and target nodes?”
planations, yields significantly inferior perfor-      id:2                  isFath                    id:2                    isFath
                                                              isF                  er ?                       isF                    er ?
mance compared with other KGExplainer vari-                      a th
                                                                      er
                                                                                                                   a th
                                                                                              id:5                      er                     id:5
ants. This demonstrates that KGExplainer in-


                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                    isBrother                                        isBrother


                                                                             isSo


                                                                                                                               isSo
                                                                         id:6                                               id:6
deed identifies semantically meaningful con-


                                                                                                          isNephew


                                                                                                                                                           isNephew
nected subgraph explanations for model pre- id:4


                                                                                                  isU
                                                                                                   id:4


                                                                                                                                                   isU
                                                                 isUn                                            isUn


                                                                                                     nc
                                                                         cle


                                                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                                         cle


                                                                                                     le


                                                                                                                                                      le
dictions, which are superior to randomly sam-


                                                                                  isU


                                                                                                                                  isU
                                                                                     nc


                                                                                                                                     nc
pled subgraphs by a large margin. This may                                                  id:29                                            id:29


                                                                                      le


                                                                                                                                       le
                                                                           isBrother                                         isBrother
be because the KGExplainer based on target                id:39                                            id:39
                                                                     a. Kelpie                                         b. DRUM
KGEs can explore synergistic reasonable paths
                                                      id:2                  isFath                      id:2                   isFath
that are crucial to predicting the corresponding             isF
                                                                 a th
                                                                                   er ?                        isF
                                                                                                                   a th
                                                                                                                                      er ?
                                                                      er                      id:5                      e                      id:5
facts, and the randomly sampled subgraph may                                                                              r


                                                                                  n


                                                                                                                                n
                                                                             isSo
                                                                                   isBrother                                         isBrother


                                                                                                                               isSo
contain irrelevant information with missing key                          id:6                                               id:6


                                                                                                          isNephew


                                                                                                                                                           isNephew
patterns to the predicted facts. The overall per- id:4                                             id:4


                                                                                                                                                   isU
                                                                                                  isU
                                                                isUn                                              isUn
                                                                        cle


                                                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                     nc
                                                                                                                          cle
formance compared with the baselines demon-


                                                                                                                                                      le
                                                                                                     le
                                                                                  isU


                                                                                                                                  isU
strates that KGExplainer effectively explores
                                                                                     nc


                                                                                                                                     nc
                                                                                            id:29                                            id:29
                                                                                      le


                                                                                                                                       le
                                                                           isBrother                                         isBrother
and evaluates informative explanations.                   id:39                                            id:39
                                                                                           c. PaGE-Link                                     d. KGExplainer
Human Evaluation Following Zhang et al.
(2023), we conduct a human evaluation by ran- Figure 3: The explanations explored by Kelpie,
domly picking 20 predicted links from the test DRUM, PaGE-Link, and KGExplainer on the fact
set of Family-rr and generating explanations for ⟨id : 2, isF ather, id : 5⟩.
each link using a subgraph-based model (i.e.,            Various Sizable Explanations   Performance on Various KGEs
Kelpie), two path-based methods (i.e., DRUM          0.3                              0.3
                                                                        Metrics


                                                                                                                     Metrics

and PaGE-Link), and KGExplainer. We de-              0.2                              0.2
signed a survey with single-choice questions.        0.1                              0.1
In each question, we represent the predicted         0.0                              0.0
link and those four explanations with both the             n=1       n=2       n=3                 sE          ult
                                                                                         KGExp-Tran KGExp-DistM KGExp-Ro
                                                                                                                         tatE
graph structure and the node/edge type infor-                                 F1@1       Recall@1

mation, similarly as in Figure 3 but excluding
method names. We sent the survey to peo- Figure 4: The explainable performance of KG-
ple across graduate students, PhD students, and Explainer with different hyper-parameters over
professors, including people with and without Family-rr dataset.
background knowledge about KGs. We ask re-
spondents to “please select the best explanation
of Why the model predicts this relationship between source and target nodes?”. At least three
answers from different people are collected for each question. In total 78 evaluations were collected
and 83.3% (65/78) of them selected explanations by KGExplainer as the best. The survey demon-
strates that KGExplainer is more effective in searching for human-understandable explanations than
other methods. More details refer to Appendix B.2.

5.3     ROBUSTNESS OF KGE XPLAINER (Q2)

In this section, to answer Q2, we conduct the robustness analysis on the Family-rr dataset to study
the impact of different sizable explored subgraphs and various KGE-based KGC models.
Size of Synergistic Path-based explanations. To investigate the influence of different sizable path-
based explanations, we conduct experiments based on KGExp-RotatE by varying n to 1, 2, and 3.
The KGExplainer explored synergistic paths with n = 1 is equal to exploring a single explainable
path. As illustrated in the left of Figure 4, we observe the best performance on F 1@1 and Recall@1
metrics when utilizing the explainable paths with n = 2. Meanwhile, the performance across dif-
ferent sizes collapsed into a hunchback shape. The reason could be that the explored synergistic
paths with n = 1 are inefficient in recovering the original predictions and the subgraph patterns


                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with n = 3 may contain many irrelevant facts, which introduce much noise and reduce the perfor-
mance of KGExplainer. This suggests that KGExplainer maintains comparable performance under
different sizable synergistic paths.
KGExplainer over various KGE-based KGC models. We investigate the impact of different tar-
get KGEs, including TransE, DistMult, and RotatE. As shown on the right side of Figure 4, the
results indicate that KGExplainer achieves similar levels of explanation performance across F 1@1
and Recall@1 for different variants. This is because KGExplainer selects key entities by perturbing
neighboring entities and evaluating their influence on the prediction score, which is independent of
the KGE-based KGC models. Our findings show that KGExplainer is effective in searching ex-
planations for embedding-based models and is model-agnostic, as demonstrated by its performance
across various KGEs.


5.4   E FFICIENCY A NALYSIS (Q3)

Inference Time. We trained KGExplainer and baselines using a server with 12 virtual Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Platinum 8255C CPU and one RTX 2080 Ti GPU. To verify the effectiveness of KG-
Explainer in searching for explanations, we designed an experiment to evaluate KGExplainer. As
illustrated in Table 4, we show the average cost time of exploring explanations over the test sets of
all datasets from different methods. We find that KGExplainer has a similar cost to CRIAGE and
is more efficient than PaGE-Link and Kelpie, which indicates that KGExplainer can be effectively
extended to complex KGs in searching synergistic path-based explanations. This is because KGEx-
plainer searches explanations within the enclosing subgraph and the number of calculations for each
hop is only related to the average degree, which reduces the computational complexity of the explor-
ing process. Overall, KGExplainer has superiority in exploring synergistic path-based explanations
with complex patterns, which can scale to large knowledge graphs.
Sparsity of Explanations
We discuss the sparsity of the explanations
                                              Table 4: The average cost time (s) of exploring expla-
from various explainers. For KGExplainer
                                              nations for various methods. Ours shows comparable
and baseline methods, we adopt the aver-
                                              efficiency.
age number of edges (i.e., #edge) as the
size of explanations. For KGExplainer, the                    CRIAGE          Kelpie    PaGE-Link       Ours
users can adjust the sparsity of explana-      Family-rr         1.65          4.84         1.74          1.32
tion subgraphs by selecting different top-     OGB-biokg        121.67        183.24      257.35        157.28
n nodes per hop (Refer to Section 4.2). As     FB15k-237        15.13          28.51       16.93         16.81
shown in Table 5, we observe that the path-
based method (e.g., PaGE-Link) explor-        Table 5: The sparsity and corresponding performance
ing a coherent reasoning chain with fewer     of different explainers. Ours indicates KGExplainer
facts is more efficient than the subgraph-    shows superior sparsity.
based method (e.g., Keplie). Additionally,                      Family-rr        OGB-biokg       FB15k-237
                                                Methods
                                                              #edge F1@1        #edge F1@1      #edge F1@1
KGExplainer exploring multiple synergis-
                                               Keplie         8.297   20.33     37.58   49.32   11.19    36.64
tic paths can achieve superior performance     PaGE-Link      3.085   21.89     12.87   68.29   4.993    66.12
on comparable sparse explanations than
                                               Ours (n = 1)   3.182   28.77     9.751   79.28   5.142    75.67
the path-based method. The phenomenon          Ours (n = 2)   9.782   30.47     45.27   81.97   13.66    82.04
in Table 5 shows that KGExplainer can          Ours (n = 3)   15.13   30.49     112.3   80.33   26.14    83.21
yield better explainability on explanations
with low information density.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we proposed a KGExplainer to identify synergistic paths as explanations over com-
plex KGs and design two quantitative metrics for evaluating them. Specifically, KGExplainer used
a greedy search algorithm and distilled an evaluator to find and assess key paths. Extensive ex-
periments demonstrate that KGExplainer is effective in providing meaningful explanations. In the
future, we will generalize our framework into multiple domains, including but not limited to AI for
chemical and biological applications.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U22A2037,
62272151, 62122025, 62425204, 62450002 and 62432011), the National Science and Technol-
ogy Major Project (2023ZD0120902), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China
(2022JJ20016), The science and technology innovation Program of Hunan Province (2022RC1099),
and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (L248013).

R EFERENCES
Farahnaz Akrami, Mohammed Samiul Saeef, Qingheng Zhang, Wei Hu, and Chengkai Li. Realistic
  re-evaluation of knowledge graph completion methods: An experimental study. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1995–2010,
  2020.
Mehdi Ali, Max Berrendorf, Charles Tapley Hoyt, Laurent Vermue, Mikhail Galkin, Sahand Shar-
 ifzadeh, Asja Fischer, Volker Tresp, and Jens Lehmann. Bringing light into the dark: A large-scale
 evaluation of knowledge graph embedding models under a unified framework. IEEE Transactions
 on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(12):8825–8845, 2021.
Erik Arakelyan, Daniel Daza, Pasquale Minervini, and Michael Cochez. Complex query answering
  with neural link predictors. In International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 1–14,
  2021.
Vasileios Baltatzis and Luca Costabello. Kgex: Explaining knowledge graph embeddings via sub-
  graph sampling and knowledge distillation. In Learning on Graphs Conference, pp. 27–1. PMLR,
  2024.
Dongmin Bang, Sangsoo Lim, Sangseon Lee, and Sun Kim. Biomedical knowledge graph learning
  for drug repurposing by extending guilt-by-association to multiple layers. Nature Communica-
  tions, 14(1):3570, 2023.
Patrick Betz, Christian Meilicke, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Adversarial explanations for knowl-
  edge graph embeddings. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 2820–2826, 2022.
Rajarshi Bhowmik and Gerard de Melo. Explainable link prediction for emerging entities in knowl-
  edge graphs. In The Semantic Web–ISWC 2020: 19th International Semantic Web Conference,
  pp. 39–55, 2020.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. Freebase: A collab-
  oratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008
  ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1247–1250, 2008. ISBN
  9781605581026.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
  Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 26:1–9, 2013a.
Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Durán, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko.
  Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In Proceedings of the 26th Interna-
  tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2787–2795, 2013b.
Heng Chang, Jiangnan Ye, Alejo Lopez Avila, Jinhua Du, and Jia Li. Path-based explanation for
  knowledge graph completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02290, 2024.
Xiang Deng and Zhongfei Zhang. Can students outperform teachers in knowledge distillation based
  model compression? 2020.
Luis Antonio Galárraga, Christina Teflioudi, Katja Hose, and Fabian Suchanek. Amie: association
  rule mining under incomplete evidence in ontological knowledge bases. In Proceedings of the
  22nd international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 413–422, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jianping Gou, Baosheng Yu, Stephen J Maybank, and Dacheng Tao. Knowledge distillation: A
   survey. International Journal of Computer Vision, 129:1789–1819, 2021.
Cosimo Gregucci, Mojtaba Nayyeri, Daniel Hernández, and Steffen Staab. Link prediction with
  attention applied on multiple knowledge graph embedding models. In Proceedings of the ACM
  Web Conference 2023, pp. 2600–2610, 2023.
Zhen Han, Peng Chen, Yunpu Ma, and Volker Tresp. Explainable subgraph reasoning for forecasting
  on temporal knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Vinh Thinh Ho, Daria Stepanova, Mohamed H Gad-Elrab, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Gerhard
  Weikum. Rule learning from knowledge graphs guided by embedding models. In The Semantic
  Web–ISWC 2018: 17th International Semantic Web Conference, pp. 72–90, 2018.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Hongyu Ren, Maho Nakata, Yuxiao Dong, and Jure Leskovec. OGB-
 LSC: A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs. In Neural Information Processing
 Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. URL https://openreview.
 net/forum?id=qkcLxoC52kL.
Jiacheng Huang, Yao Zhao, Wei Hu, Zhen Ning, Qijin Chen, Xiaoxia Qiu, Chengfu Huo, and Weijun
   Ren. Trustworthy knowledge graph completion based on multi-sourced noisy data. In Proceed-
   ings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 956–965, 2022.
Hao Jiang, Chuanzhen Li, Juanjuan Cai, and Jingling Wang. Rcenr: A reinforced and contrastive
  heterogeneous network reasoning model for explainable news recommendation. In Proceedings
  of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
  Retrieval, pp. 1710–1720, 2023.
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun
  Liu. Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language understanding. International Conference on
  Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing, 2019.
Unmesh Joshi and Jacopo Urbani. Searching for embeddings in a haystack: link prediction on
  knowledge graphs with subgraph pruning. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp.
  2817–2823, 2020.
Rudolf Kadlec, Ondrej Bajgar, and Jan Kleindienst. Knowledge base completion: Baselines strike
  back. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP, pp. 69–74,
  August 2017.
Su-Chin Lin, Kai-Hsiang Chou, Yen Chen, Hsu-Chun Hsiao, Darion Cassel, Lujo Bauer, and Limin
  Jia. Investigating advertisers’ domain-changing behaviors and their impacts on ad-blocker filter
  lists. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 576–587, 2022.
Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. Learning entity and relation em-
  beddings for knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 29, pp. 1–7, 2015.
Tengfei Ma, Xuan Lin, Bosheng Song, Philip S. Yu, and Xiangxiang Zeng. Kg-mtl: Knowledge
  graph enhanced multi-task learning for molecular interaction. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
  and Data Engineering, 35(7):7068–7081, 2023.
Trung-Kien Nguyen, Zemin Liu, and Yuan Fang. Link prediction on latent heterogeneous graphs.
  In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 263–273, 2023.
Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, Hans-Peter Kriegel, et al. A three-way model for collective learn-
 ing on multi-relational data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 11, pp.
 3104482–3104584, 2011.
Xiaoqin Pan, Xuan Lin, Dongsheng Cao, Xiangxiang Zeng, Philip S Yu, Lifang He, Ruth Nussinov,
  and Feixiong Cheng. Deep learning for drug repurposing: Methods, databases, and applications.
  Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science, 12(4):e1597, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.
Pouya Pezeshkpour, Yifan Tian, and Sameer Singh. Investigating robustness and interpretability of
  link prediction via adversarial modifications. In North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–12, 2018.
Meng Qu, Junkun Chen, Louis-Pascal Xhonneux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jian Tang. Rnnlogic: Learn-
 ing logic rules for reasoning on knowledge graphs. International Conference on Learning Repre-
 sentations, pp. 1–20, 2021.
Andrea Rossi, Donatella Firmani, Paolo Merialdo, and Tommaso Teofili. Explaining link predic-
  tion systems based on knowledge graph embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2022 International
  Conference on Management of Data, pp. 2062–2075, 2022.
Ali Sadeghian, Mohammadreza Armandpour, Patrick Ding, and Daisy Zhe Wang. Drum: End-to-
  end differentiable rule mining on knowledge graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32:1–13, 2019.
Xiran Song, Jianxun Lian, Hong Huang, Zihan Luo, Wei Zhou, Xue Lin, Mingqi Wu, Chaozhuo Li,
  Xing Xie, and Hai Jin. xgcn: An extreme graph convolutional network for large-scale social link
  prediction. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 349–359, 2023.
Zhiqing Sun, Zhi-Hong Deng, Jian-Yun Nie, and Jian Tang. Rotate: Knowledge graph embedding
  by relational rotation in complex space. In ICLR, pp. 1–18, 2019.
Komal Teru, Etienne Denis, and Will Hamilton. Inductive relation prediction by subgraph reasoning.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, pp. 9448–9457, 2020.
Théo Trouillon, Johannes Welbl, Sebastian Riedel, Éric Gaussier, and Guillaume Bouchard. Com-
  plex embeddings for simple link prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 2071–2080, 2016.
Chenxu Wang, Xin Wang, Zhao Li, Zirui Chen, and Jianxin Li. Hyconve: A novel embedding model
  for knowledge hypergraph link prediction with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of
  the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 188–198, 2023.
Hongwei Wang, Miao Zhao, Xing Xie, Wenjie Li, and Minyi Guo. Knowledge graph convolutional
  networks for recommender systems. In The World Wide Web Conference, pp. 3307–3313, 2019a.
Minjie Wang, Da Zheng, Zihao Ye, Quan Gan, Mufei Li, Xiang Song, Jinjing Zhou, Chao Ma,
 Lingfan Yu, Yu Gai, Tianjun Xiao, Tong He, George Karypis, Jinyang Li, and Zheng Zhang.
 Deep graph library: A graph-centric, highly-performant package for graph neural networks. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1909.01315, 2019b.
Peng Wang, Renqin Cai, and Hongning Wang. Graph-based extractive explainer for recommenda-
  tions. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 2163–2171, 2022.
Xiang Wang, Yingxin Wu, An Zhang, Xiangnan He, and Tat-Seng Chua. Towards multi-grained
  explainability for graph neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:18446–18458, 2021.
Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. Knowledge graph embedding by trans-
  lating on hyperplanes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
  ume 28, pp. 1112–1119, 2014.
Fang Wu, Siyuan Li, Lirong Wu, Dragomir Radev, Yinghui Jiang, Xurui Jin, Zhangming Niu, and
  Stan Z Li. Explaining graph neural networks via non-parametric subgraph matching. Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1–13, 2023.
Yikun Xian, Zuohui Fu, Shan Muthukrishnan, Gerard De Melo, and Yongfeng Zhang. Reinforce-
  ment knowledge graph reasoning for explainable recommendation. In Proceedings of the 42nd
  International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
  pp. 285–294, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng. Embedding entities and
  relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, pp. 1–12, 2015.
Yuhao Yang, Chao Huang, Lianghao Xia, and Chenliang Li. Knowledge graph contrastive learn-
  ing for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
  Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 1434–1443, 2022.
Liuyi Yao, Yaliang Li, Bolin Ding, Jingren Zhou, Jinduo Liu, Mengdi Huai, and Jing Gao. Path-
  specific causal fair prediction via auxiliary graph structure learning. In Proceedings of the ACM
  Web Conference 2023, pp. 3680–3688, 2023.
Shichang Zhang, Jiani Zhang, Xiang Song, Soji Adeshina, Da Zheng, Christos Faloutsos, and
  Yizhou Sun. Page-link: Path-based graph neural network explanation for heterogeneous link
  prediction. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp. 3784–3793, 2023.
Wen Zhang, Bibek Paudel, Liang Wang, Jiaoyan Chen, Hai Zhu, Wei Zhang, Abraham Bernstein,
 and Huajun Chen. Iteratively learning embeddings and rules for knowledge graph reasoning. In
 The World Wide Web Conference, pp. 2366–2377, 2019.
Wen Zhang, Mingyang Chen, Zezhong Xu, Yushan Zhu, and Huajun Chen. Explaining knowledge
 graph embedding via latent rule learning. OpenReview.Net, 26:1–14, 2021.
Zhanqiu Zhang, Jie Wang, Jieping Ye, and Feng Wu. Rethinking graph convolutional networks in
  knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 798–807,
  2022.
Dong Zhao, Guojia Wan, Yibing Zhan, Zengmao Wang, Liang Ding, Zhigao Zheng, and Bo Du.
  Ke-x: Towards subgraph explanations of knowledge graph embedding based on knowledge infor-
  mation gain. Knowledge-Based Systems, 278:110772, 2023.
Da Zheng, Xiang Song, Chao Ma, Zeyuan Tan, Zihao Ye, Jin Dong, Hao Xiong, Zheng Zhang,
  and George Karypis. Dgl-ke: Training knowledge graph embeddings at scale. In Proceedings
  of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
  Retrieval, pp. 739–748, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: Greedy search for subgraph explanation
Input : Target prediction ⟨h, r, t⟩; Enclosing subgraph g; Prediction score s; Subgraph
            extracting function Fsub ; Score function ϕ; Number of entities retrieved per hop n;
Output: A key subgraph gkey that is most critical to the target prediction ⟨h, r, t⟩.
Initialize a set of visited entities Svisit as {h};
Initialize a set of key entities Skey as {h};
Initialize a queue of searching entities Ssearch as {h};
while Ssearch is not empty do
     Initialize H as an empty max-Heap;
     esearching ← Ssearch .pop();
     if t ∈ N (esearching ) then
          Skey ← Skey ∪ {t} ;
          break;
     for v ∈ N (esearching ) do
          if u ∈
               / Svisit then
              Svisit ← Svisit ∪ {u} ;
              Create g ′ by removing u from g and finetune the KG embeddings of g ′ ;
              Get new embeddings of h, r, t as h′ , r′ , t′ ;
              s′ ← ϕ(h′ , r′ , t′ );
              δv ← s − s′ ;
              Put v into H with its corresponding value δv ;
     for i ← 1 to n do
          Pop v with the maximum δv from H and put it into Skey and Ssearch ;
gkey ← Fsub (g, Skey );
return gkey ;



                                  Table 6: The statistics of datasets.
                      Dataset        #entity #relation          #train     #test
                      WN-18           40,943        18          35,354     2,250
                      Family-rr       3,007         12          5,868      2,835
                      FB15k-237       14,541       237          68,028     9,209
                      OGB-biokg       93,773        51        4,762,678    3000


A     KGE XPLAINER

A.1   T HE A LGORITHM OF G REEDY S EARCH

For easier understanding, we show a detailed algorithm to describe how KGExplainer provides key
explanations in Algorithm 1.

A.2   R ETRAINING S TRATEGY

Retraing the embeddings over the entire KG G is infeasible due to removing one entity and its facts
have little impact on the embedding of KG elements. To reduce the overhead of retraining, we de-
veloped a subgraph-based retraining strategy as shown in Figure 5. We extract a 2-hop enclosing
subgraph g around the target fact ⟨h, r, t⟩. We argue that the subgraph g contains the key informa-
tion that leads to the target prediction. Thus the retraining process is only visible to the subgraph.
Figure 5 shows an example of how g is extracted. Meanwhile, to ensure that the retrained entity
representation space is consistent with the original knowledge graph, we expand g by including the
1-hop neighbors Nextend of the existing entities and fixed their embeddings. In Figure 5, we show
the learnable and fixed entities in the fine-tuning process. Specifically, we adopt the following con-
straints: (a) we use the embeddings of the entities in G to initialize the embeddings of g; (b) we
fixed the relation embeddings in g as the same as those in G; and (c) we fixed the embedding of
v ∈ Nextend .


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                     fixed
                                                                                              learnable


                                                                K-hop
                                                               Sampling


                               Pre-trained KG                                               Subgraph


Figure 5: An example of creating a subgraph from G. On the left, two entities (the orange vertices)
were predicted to be connected. A subgraph was created on the right. We first initialized g with all
the entities (the orange and green vertices) within G. Then it was expanded by including the 1-hop
neighbors Nextend of existing entities (the gray vertices).

                                        Family-rr                                              WN-18
                     0.32
                     0.30                                                 0.975
                     0.28                                                 0.970
              F1@1


                                                                   F1@1
                     0.26
                                                                          0.965
                     0.24
                     0.22                                                 0.960
                            1-hop          2-hop           3-hop                  1-hop         2-hop         3-hop
                                        KGExp-TransE            KGExp-DistMult            KGExp-RotatE

Figure 6: The F 1@1 performance of KGExplainer on Family-rr and WN-18 over various sizable
enclosing subgraphs.


A.3   T HE C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY

The computational complexity of KGExplainer primarily arises from two factors: (1) the greedy
search within g, and (2) the re-training cost associated with g. As discussed in Section 4.4, the
complexity of the greedy search is largely determined by local parameters. The re-training cost,
on the other hand, depends on the underlying KGE model The computational complexity of the re-
                                                                                                  |V|
training stage for different base KGEs, which is dominated by the size of subgraph g (i.e., O( LN
                                                                                                |E| )
discussed in Section 4.4), the embedding dimension d, and the size of negative samples n. Thus we
can analyze the efficiency of base KGEs as follows:

      • In TransE, DistMult, and RotatE, the computational efficiency of each fact within g is
                                                                 |V|
        O((n + 1)d). Therefore, the overall complexity is O( LN|E| (n + 1)d), where L is the
        maximum path length, N denotes the path number.

In conclusion, the practical runtime largely depends on the local parameters of the knowledge
graphs. The results in Table 7 show a strong positive correlation between the number of paths and
computation time, which aligns closely with our theoretical analysis. Therefore, we can improve the
scalability of large knowledge graphs by adjusting these local parameters.


Table 7: The distribution of degree, path length, and path number over various KGs. Note that the
analysis is conducted within local subgraphs (2-hop) of test set.
           Datasets      avg. degree avg. path length avg. path number avg. time
          Family-rr                 3.902              2.828                        4.1                      1.32
          FB15k-237                 9.357              4.195                        50.054                   16.81
          OGB-biokg                 101.579            3.982                        457.234                  157.28


                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.4     F ORMALIZING THE C ONCEPT OF PATH S YNERGY

We can formalize the concept of synergistic paths from an information-theoretic perspective.
Let:

        • (G = (V, R, E)) be a KG with entities V , relations R, and edges E.
        • < h, r, t > denote the head entity, relation, and tail entity, respectively, forming the target
          prediction.
        • P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } be a set of paths between h and t, where each pi represents a se-
          quence of edges from h to t.

We aim to quantify the synergy among paths in P by evaluating how much additional information
these paths provide collectively toward the prediction t, compared to the information provided by
each path individually.
1. Mutual Information of Individual Paths: Define I(t; pi ) as the mutual information between
the target prediction t and a path pi from h to t. This quantifies the amount of information that pi
alone contributes to the prediction of t:
                                      I(t; pi ) = H(t) − H(t|pi ),
where H(t) is the entropy of the target prediction t, and H(t|pi ) is the conditional entropy of t given
the information from path pi .
2. Joint Mutual Information of Path Set: Let I(t; Psynergy ) represent the mutual information
between t and the subset of paths Psynergy ⊂ P, which includes multiple paths that contribute to
the prediction. This joint mutual information measures the information provided by the paths in
Psynergy when considered together:
                               I(t; Psynergy ) = H(t) − H(t|Psynergy ).

3. Synergy Condition: The paths in Psynergy are considered synergistic if the joint mutual infor-
mation I(t; Psynergy ) is greater than the sum of individual mutual informations I(t; pi ) for each
pi ∈ Psynergy :
                                                    X
                               I(t; Psynergy ) >            I(t; pi ).
                                                   pi ∈Psynergy

This inequality implies that the paths in Psynergy provide *additional predictive information* about
t when considered together, beyond what each path contributes individually. This excess information
captures the synergy among paths.
4. Interpretation and Optimization:

        • The set Psynergy can be identified as the subset of
                                                           Ppaths P from h to t that maximizes the
          synergistic mutual information I(t; Psynergy ) − pi ∈Psynergy I(t; pi ).
                                                                    ∗
        • Formally, we can define the optimal synergistic path set Psynergy as:
                                                                              
                                                                  X
                              ∗
                            Psynergy   = arg max I(t; P ′ ) −        I(t; pi ) .
                                               P ′ ⊆P
                                                                     pi ∈P ′



B      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

B.1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

B.1.1    DATASETS
We show detailed statistics of all datasets in Table 6. #train and #test are the number of triples on
the training and testing sets.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Table 8: The hyperparameters of KGExplainer during distillation phase.
                                     Family-rr WN-18 FB15k-237 OGB-biokg
          embedding dim                         64          64            64             64
          learning rate                    0.0015       0.001         0.001           0.001
          weight of pair-wise loss             0.5         0.5           0.5             0.5
          Epochs                                50          50           50             100
          R-GAT layers                           2           3             3               3
          Optimizer                         Adam        Adam          Adam            Adam
          Batch size                         1024        4096          4096            4096
          #entity per hop n                      2           2             2               2
          enclosing subgraph size k              2           2             1               2
          target KGE                       TransE      RotatE        RotatE          RotatE


B.1.2    D ETAILS OF KGE XPLAINER
The experiments contain (1) Generating subgraph-based explanations, and (2) Distilling the sub-
graph evaluator for assessment.
In the explanation phase, we extract key subgraphs from the 2-hop enclosing subgraph surrounding
the target prediction. We set n = 2 to determine the number of selected entities per hop during
greedy searching. To achieve the best evaluation capability, we distill an evaluator from RotatE Sun
et al. (2019) to assess explainability (See Section 5.2). More settings of hyperparameters are shown
in Table 8. In the distilling phase, to ensure sufficient expressive power for the model to distill,
we tune the hyperparameters to get the optimal distilled model. The details of hyperparameters are
depicted in Table 8.

B.1.3    D ETAILS OF BASELINES
We implement our KGExplainer and baseline models in Pytorch Paszke et al. (2017) and DGL Wang
et al. (2019b) library on an RTX 2080Ti GPU with 11GB memory. For the implementation of
baselines, we use the source code of Kelpie Rossi et al. (2022) to reproduce the faithful results and
explore explanations of fact-based methods CRIAGE Pezeshkpour et al. (2018) and Kelpie. For
other baselines, we adopt the source code reported by their original paper and use their pre-defined
parameters to produce explanations. In addition to comparing against baselines with no parameter
settings for certain datasets, we also examine the parameters used in a similar scale dataset. We
report the average results and their standard deviation by five runs in Section 5.

B.2     D ETAILS OF H UMAN E VALUATION

For valuable human evaluations, we consider the following guidance for participants:

        • We give two bases for judgment as a guide when asking participants questions. 1. In
          Family-rr, for predicting the kinship between two individuals, the explanation should be
          based on the known family memberships, marital relationships, etc. reasonably derived.
          2. Encourage testers to choose more concise and clear explanations, while maintaining
          completeness. Avoid overly complex explanations so that key information can be presented
          clearly.
        • The results from different models are presented to the participants simultaneously
        • We randomly selected 20 samples from the test set of Family-rr for participants to evaluate.

C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
C.1     P ERFORMANCE ON VARIOUS S IZABLE E NCLOSING S UBGRAPHS

Similar to the experiments in Section 5.3 (i.e., Hyper-parameter Sensitivity Analysis), we conduct
another experiment to study the model’s explainability on various sizable enclosing subgraphs. We


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 9: The F 1@N (%) performance of explanations over various datasets. The boldface denotes
the highest score.
                      Family-rr           WN-18             FB15k-237          OGB-biokg
                    F1@3 F1@10 F1@3 F1@10 F1@3 F1@10 F1@3 F1@10
 CRIAGE                27.22      36.44      72.91        77.78      48.81    53.26      54.27    61.62
 Keplie                27.18      36.25      73.58        79.39      40.77    48.01      52.59    61.21
 DRUM                  25.23      30.73      75.58        77.80      67.34    71.03      65.87    72.54
 ELPE                  75.69      79.27      78.35        83.21      29.71    40.40      67.41    71.65
 PaGE-Link             28.42      38.49      70.99        75.21      70.77    76.51      71.32    77.58
 KGExp-rand            27.55      41.48      37.43        40.46      61.03    66.58      56.47    59.39
 KGExp-TransE          45.89      62.96      98.57        99.58      85.41    89.97      84.22    88.37
 KGExp-DistMult        44.08      57.47      97.89        99.41      86.74    90.17      84.35    89.73
 KGExp-RotatE          39.56      57.25      98.58        99.57      87.41    92.97      86.97    90.04


Table 10: The Recall@N (%) performance of explanations over various datasets. The boldface
denotes the highest score.
                        Family-rr             WN-18                     FB15k-237           OGB-biokg
                  Recall@3 Recall@10   Recall@3 Recall@10         Recall@3 Recall@10   Recall@3 Recall@10
 CRIAGE            32.02       36.95      95.45       99.34        76.87     82.11      65.95     70.44
 Keplie            31.87       36.55      93.69       99.51        66.91     75.52      67.26     75.34
 DRUM              22.09       30.92      93.69       94.93        89.01     91.12      76.23     81.07
 ELPE              35.17       41.34      93.11       95.23        89.76     93.21      80.21     83.15
 PaGE-Link         31.77       38.13      88.32       92.20        87.32     89.04      78.65     83.26
 KGExp-rand        33.44       43.97      92.47       94.61        57.12     64.31      58.37     62.59
 KGExp-TransE      46.85       61.61      99.47       99.84        93.41     94.57      90.48     93.51
 KGExp-DistMult    43.05       56.26      99.31       99.71        92.01     93.89      91.66     93.05
 KGExp-RotatE      41.48       56.26      99.47       99.84        93.01     94.69      90.89     92.31



select top-n = 2 entities per hop and vary the size of k-hop enclosing subgraph to k = 1, 2, 3.
The F 1@1 performance of KGExplainer over various sizable subgraphs is depicted in Figure 6.
Theoretically, the larger the subgraph to be searched, the more sufficient key information it contains,
so that more effective explanatory subgraphs can be retrieved. We can observe that KGExp-RotatE
performs better as the size of subgraphs increases on both Family-rr and WN-18 datasets, which
indicates that KGExplainer based on RotatE has generalization and stability. However, KGExplainer
over TransE and DistMult only fits this phenomenon on one of the datasets, showing they are limited
in generalizing to other data distributions. Thus to achieve a fair comparison, we consider the
KGExp-RotatE as the subgraph evaluator and assess other baseline methods.

C.2   T HE F ULL R ESULTS OF E XPLANATIONS

The full results (i.e., F 1@[3, 10] and Recall@[3, 10]) of the explanations are shown in Table 9 and
Table 10. We can observe that KGExplainer is also the best.

C.3   S PARISITY OF E XPLAINERS

We discuss the sparsity of the explanations from various explainers. For subgraph- and path-based
methods, we directly adopt the edges and paths for further evaluation. Therefore the size of ex-
planations depends on the number of edges and path lengths they explore. For KGExplainer, the
users can adjust the sparsity of multiple synergistic paths by selecting different top-n nodes per hop
(See Section 4.4.1). Once the model is trained, the user can directly adjust the value of n without
retraining. For various explainers, We present the average number of edges (i.e., Avg. #edges) and
corresponding F 1@1 performance on all datasets in Table 11. We see that the path-based method
(e.g., PaGE-Link) with a complete reasoning chain is more effective than the fact-based method
(e.g., Keplie) on fewer visible facts. Moreover, we observe that KGExplainer can dynamically ad-


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Table 11: The sparsity and corresponding performance of different explainers.
                            Family-rr             WN-18              FB15k-237           OGB-biokg
      Methods
                       Avg. #edges F1@1     Avg. #edges F1@1     Avg. #edges F1@1    Avg. #edges F1@1
 Keplie                8.297       20.33    4.794        66.37   11.19       36.64   37.58       49.32
 Page-Link             3.085       21.89    3.64         67.7    4.993       66.12   12.87       68.29
 KGExp-TransE (n=1)    3.182       28.77    2.263        96.4    5.142       75.67   9.75        79.28
 KGExp-TransE (n=2)    9.782       30.47    4.772        97.1    13.661      82.04   45.27       81.97
 KGExp-TransE (n=3)    15.132      30.49    9.223        96.91   26.146      83.21   112.37      80.33



just the size of the explanations and achieve superior performance compared with subgraph- and
path-based methods.

C.4   P ERFORMANCE OF KGE XPLAINER ON VARIOUS A RCHITECTURES

The evaluators built on different architectures demonstrate robustness. The evaluation results of
evaluators distilled from different base KGEs have minor differences. Specifically, we evaluate
KGExplainer’s performance using different evaluator architectures across various KGEs. We use
RotatE as the base KGE to generate explanations for the Family-rr dataset, and then assess these
explanations using evaluators distilled from different teacher KGEs. Table 12 reveals two key find-
ings:

       • The evaluator distilled from RotatE achieves the best performance, with differences among
         evaluators due to variations in their predictive abilities.
       • Evaluators based on R-GAT and GraiL Teru et al. (2020) (which applies R-GCN on sub-
         graphs) show similar performance across different KGEs. This may be because that the
         architectural differences between R-GAT and R-GCN are minor.

These results highlight that an evaluator with strong predictive capability is essential for high-quality
evaluations. Accordingly, we primarily select RotatE as the teacher KGE for distilling evaluators.


       Table 12: The explainable performance of various evaluators on the Family-rr dataset.
                 teacher KGEs KGExplainer (R-GAT) KGExplainer (GraiL)
                   TransE           27.39                        28.51
                   DistMult         23.43                        21.15
                   RotatE           30.47                        28.26


C.5   C OMPUTATIONAL T IME OF KGE XPLAINER ON D IFFERENT L OCAL PARAMETERS

To improve scalability for larger KGs, we can adjust the local enclosing subgraph size (e.g., reduc-
ing from a 2-hop to a 1-hop subgraph) to decrease path length and path count. Table 13 presents the
distribution of node degree, path length, path number, and computation time across different sub-
graph scales over OGB-biokg, revealing a strong positive correlation between them, consistent with
our theoretical analysis. In conclusion, the complexity of KGExplainer is driven primarily by local
parameters—such as path length L, path number N , and average degree—rather than the overall
size of the knowledge graph (KG).


Table 13: The distribution of average degree, path length, path number, and computation time over
various subgraph scales.
             Scale avg. degree avg. path length avg. path number avg. time
               1-hop    97.265        2.573                 346.331              103.245
               2-hop    101.579       3.982                 457.234              157.28



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     D ISCUSSION
D.1   N OVELTY

Some related works Han et al. (2020); Joshi & Urbani (2020) mainly focus on pruning subgraphs
to eliminate irrelevant facts and to improve the performance of link prediction on either temporal or
static KGs. To some extent, the pruned subgraphs can be considered key information for predicted
links. However, the pruned subgraphs are not connected but rather a collection of facts, which
are fact-based explainable methods. Similarly, KE-X Zhao et al. (2023) and KGEx Baltatzis &
Costabello (2024) are post-hoc explainable methods that identify key triples as explanations. The
identified key triples are discrete facts and can not form a reasoning chain. Additionally, PaGE-
Link Zhang et al. (2023) and Power-Link Chang et al. (2024) are path-based explainable methods
that focus on exploring a single path and rely on selecting multiple discrete paths manually for
complex scenes. In contrast, KGExplainer emphasizes exploring multiple synergistic paths globally
to form connected subgraphs, which is novel and more expressive than previous models.

D.2   D ISCUSSION OF D ISTILLED R ESULTS

In Table 1, we can see that KGExplainer benefits the base model for some datasets. We observe
the same behavior in Deng & Zhang (2020); Jiao et al. (2019). From their insights, we think the
KGExplainer distilled from KGEs may remove some noise and irrelevant information to the KGC
task, making KGExplainer more robust and having better generalization ability, which leads to KG-
Explainer performing better than base KGEs to some extent.


                                                 21
