Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D EEP S IGNATURE : C HARACTERIZATION OF L ARGE -
S CALE M OLECULAR DYNAMICS
 Tiexin Qin1 , Mengxu Zhu1 , Chunyang Li2 , Terry Lyons3 , Hong Yan1 , Haoliang Li1,∗
 City University of Hong Kong1 & Chengdu Institute of Biological Products co. Ltd2
 & University of Oxford3
 {tiexinqin,mengxuzhu}2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,lichunyang@sinopharm.com
 tlyons@maths.ox.ac.uk, {ityan,haoliang.li}@cityu.edu.hk



                                               A BSTRACT
             Understanding protein dynamics are essential for deciphering protein functional
             mechanisms and developing molecular therapies. However, the complex high-
             dimensional dynamics and interatomic interactions of biological processes pose
             significant challenge for existing computational techniques. In this paper, we ap-
             proach this problem for the first time by introducing Deep Signature, a novel com-
             putationally tractable framework that characterizes complex dynamics and inter-
             atomic interactions based on their evolving trajectories. Specifically, our approach
             incorporates soft spectral clustering that locally aggregates cooperative dynamics
             to reduce the size of the system, as well as signature transform that collects iter-
             ated integrals to provide a global characterization of the non-smooth interactive
             dynamics. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that Deep Signature exhibits sev-
             eral desirable properties, including invariance to translation, near invariance to
             rotation, equivariance to permutation of atomic coordinates, and invariance under
             time reparameterization. Furthermore, experimental results on three benchmarks
             of biological processes verify that our approach can achieve superior performance
             compared to baseline methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Biological processes are fundamentally driven by the dynamical changes of macromolecules, par-
ticularly proteins and enzymes, within their respective functional conformation spaces. Typical
examples of such processes include protein–ligand binding, molecule transport and enzymatic reac-
tions, and modern computational biologists investigate their underlying functional mechanisms by
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Dror et al., 2012; Lewandowski et al., 2015). Built upon
density functional theory (Car & Parrinello, 1985), MD has demonstrated remarkable capability in
providing accurate atomic trajectories in three-dimensional (3D) conformational space and consist
agreement with experimental observations (Frenkel & Smit, 2023).
The computational analysis of MD data has been a subject of extensive research for decades, with
the goal of characterizing systems from trajectory information. However, due to the main challenge
posed by intricate interatomic interactions over large-scale systems across inconsistent timescales,
many existing works resort to oversimplified setups that incorporate biophysical priors to analyze
certain aspects of dynamics such as protein fluctuations, relaxation time, stability, and state tran-
sitions (Law et al., 2017; Qiu et al., 2023). More recently, empowered by the parallel processing
ability of GPUs, machine learning especially deep learning sheds new light on this field as it can
discretize macromolecules as particles distributed in a 3D voxel grid and automatically learn their
relations in a data-driven fashion (Li et al., 2020a; Rogers et al., 2023). Parallel to this, surface
modeling-based approaches have emerged, firstly utilizing mathematical models to restore protein
surfaces and then applying deep learning to analyze the chemical and geometrical features of sur-
face regions around binding sites (Gainza et al., 2020b; Zhu et al., 2021). Despite the great potential
of these approaches in automatic drug discovery, their computational complexity would increase
linearly with the number of time stamps when processing MD data, struggling with application to
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


long-time simulations. Besides, these methods commonly build upon coarse grained dynamics for
accelerating computation. Nevertheless, selecting an optimal coarse graining mapping strategy that
effectively simplifies the representation of the system while preserving essential features remains an
open research problem (Jin et al., 2022; Majewski et al., 2023).
Another limitation of current MD analysis methods is the deficient utilization of structural bioin-
formatics for the largely increased difficulty in handling high-order interatomic interactions during
dynamic processes. However, such structural bioinformatics, manifested in various covalent and
non-covalent bonds, plays a pivotal role in molecular design for its capability of propagating local
perturbations to facilitate conformational dynamics and alter biological function (Tsai et al., 2009;
Otten et al., 2018). An illustrative example would be dihydrofolate reductase, which has been widely
studied as important antitumor and antibacterial targets for treating tuberculosis and malaria. There
exist four common mutations that confer drug resistance to antibiotics, proceeding in a stepwise
fashion. Among them, the P21L mutation acts in a dynamical loop region associated with long
range structural vibrations of the protein backbone, rather than directly on the active sites as other
mutations (Toprak et al., 2012). Therefore, ignoring such interatomic interactive dynamics facili-
tated by molecular structure for a critical protein and counting the effects of active sites solely can
result in biased assessments of designed drugs. Nonetheless, since the integration of structural bioin-
formatics into MD analysis would further introduce at least quadratic complexity with system size,
existing works have not yet investigated this crucial aspect, highlighting a critical gap in our ability
to comprehensively analyze and predict molecular behavior in drug design and resistance studies.
To this end, we aim to develop a computationally efficient framework that incorporates the structural
bioinformatics with coarse graining mapping for automatically analyzing protein trajectory dynam-
ics. In particular, we first introduce a graph clustering module that learns to extract coarse grained
dynamics by approximating soft spectral clustering. With the clustering assignment function imple-
mented by a graph neural network and parameters learned automatically, we circumvent the need
for manual selection of coarse graining mapping. Subsequently, we introduce a path signature trans-
form module served as a feature extractor to characterize the interatomic interactive dynamics after
coarse graining. Path signature is a mathematically principled concept that utilizes iterated integrals
to describe geometric rough paths in a compact yet rich manner (Lyons, 2014), thus suitable for
our tasks where molecular trajectories are highly sampled and non-smooth. After attaching with a
task-specific differentiable classifier or regressor, we devise an end-to-end framework, named Deep
Signature, for efficiently characterizing the complex protein dynamics. Notably, due to the exis-
tence of considerable random fluctuation in simulated trajectories, ideal features ought to maintain
symmetry respecting certain geometric transformations. We provide theoretical analysis that our
extracted features exhibit invariance to translation, near invariance to rotation, equivariance to per-
mutation of atomic coordinates, and invariance under time reparametrization of paths. Finally, we
target our task on predicting functional properties of proteins from MD data, a fundamental task for
developing novel drug therapies. We consider three benchmarks including gene regulatory dynam-
ics, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation dynamics, and G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCR) dynamics for performance evaluation. The contributions of our paper are as follows:
• We develop Deep signature, the first computationally efficient framework that characterizes the
     complex interatomic interactive dynamics of large-scale molecules.
• We theoretically demonstrate that our approach preserves symmetry under several geometrical
     transforms of atomic coordinates in 3D conformational space. Additionally, our method remains
     invariant under time reparameterization.
• We provide empirical results to show that our Deep Signature model achieves superior per-
     formance compared to other baseline methods on gene regulatory dynamics, EGFR mutation
     dynamics and GPCR dynamics.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Molecular Representation. Encoding essential structural characteristics and biochemical proper-
ties into molecular representations is a long-standing research field in molecular biology, with wide
applications in various drug discovery processes including virtual screening, similarity-based com-
pound searches, target molecule ranking, drug toxicity prediction, and etc. (Li et al., 2024). One
of the most widely used categories of molecular representation is two-dimensional fingerprints that
extract the substructure, topological routes and circles solely from molecular connection tables. Ow-
ing to their ease of generation and usage, these 2D fingerprints are still extensively utilized as input


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for machine learning algorithms in modern drug discovery applications (Gao et al., 2020). In recent
years, there has been a surge in the development of 3D structure-based molecular representations for
their much more fine-grained characterization of interatomic interplay in 3D conformational space.
Surface modeling-based approaches leverage mathematical models to restore protein surfaces and
encode geometrical and chemical features of surface regions around binding sites into representa-
tions, exhibiting great potential in automatic drug discovery (Gainza et al., 2020a; Zhu et al., 2021).
In addition to surface-based representations, significant efforts have been devoted to learning accu-
rate deep learning force fields for accelerating MD simulation (Schütt et al., 2017a; Batatia et al.,
2022; Batzner et al., 2022). While these methods can be adapted for molecular property prediction,
they are limited to generating representation for a static frame, thus not suitable for our tasks where
interframe interactions along timescales are crucial for understanding protein function.
The current investigation into characterizing molecular dynamics, especially interatomic interaction
dynamics, remains limited, with only a few studies close to ours. Among them, Endo et al. (2019),
Yasuda et al. (2022) and Mustali et al. (2023) are unsupervised methods that build local dynamics en-
sembles for pre-specified atoms and inspect each atom’s contribution independently. Li et al. (2022)
converts MD conformations into images and applies convolutional neural networks to identify di-
verse active states. Sun et al. (2023) models protein dynamics by representing protein surfaces using
implicit neural networks without requiring explicit surface representations. Nevertheless, these ap-
proaches cannot capture subtle interatomic interactions along atomic pathways for dissecting protein
function, nor is the complexity of their representations independent of time stamps.
Coarse Graining (CG). CG is a widely adopted technique with the objective of preserving the
crucial characteristics and dynamics inherent to a molecular system. This is achieved by grouping
sets of atoms into CG beads, thereby enabling high-throughput MD simulations over larger time
and length scales. Existing CG methods can be broadly categorized into two types: chemical and
physical intuition-based approaches and machine learning-based approaches. The methods of first
type construct the CG mapping by incorporating various biochemical properties derived from expert
knowledge, for example, mapping each elaborately constructed cluster of four heavy (nonhydrogen)
atoms into a single CG bead (Marrink & Tieleman, 2013) or simply assigning one CG bead centered
at the α-carbon for each amino acid (Ingólfsson et al., 2014). Machine learning-based methods
can rapidly learn accurate potential energy functions for reduced structures of MD by training on
large databases. Recent advancements in this area include multiscale coarse graining that optimizes
to maximize a variational force matching score (Wang & Gómez-Bombarelli, 2019), relative en-
tropy minimization (Thaler et al., 2022), and spectral graph approaches that account for structural
typologies of proteins (Webb et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020b). However, their transferability to un-
seen molecules remains suspicious, and the representation capability for complex macromolecular
systems without increasing dimension and complexity is still underexplored (Khot et al., 2019).


3     M ETHODOLOGY
3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Consider various molecular systems S (k) that are distinct in their molecular behaviors. An MD sim-
ulation trajectory on S (k) provides the trajectories for all Nk atoms constituting the molecules, and
can be represented as a sequence of snapshots X(k)                  (k)   (k)          (k)
                                                       1:Tk = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XTk }. Here, Xt
                                                                                                      (k)
                                                                                                          ∈ RNk ×3
indicates the atomic positions in 3D conformational space at time step t for t ∈ {1, . . . , Tk } and Tk
is the total number of frames. To describe the structure of molecules within S (k) , we define a molec-
ular graph G (k) = {E (k) , V (k) }, |V (k) | = Nk , where V (k) is the node set corresponding to the atoms
and E (k) is the edge set corresponding to chemical bonds. The adjacency matrix of G (k) is repre-
sented by A(k) ∈ RNk ×Nk , with A(k)      i,j = 1 if vi , vj ∈ V
                                                                  (k)
                                                                       and (vi , vj ) ∈ E (k) . For the molecular
property prediction task, we have access to MD trajectories from K molecular systems, each en-
dowed with property labels denoted as {(X(k)       1:Tk , y
                                                            (k) K
                                                               )}k=1 . The objective is to train algorithms to
accurately predict the property label when provided with an previously unseen MD trajectory X1:Tk .

3.2   D EEP S IGNATURE

Our proposed method, referred to as Deep Signature, consists of a deep spectral clustering module
that uses GNNs to extract coarse grained dynamics from raw MD trajectories, a path signature trans-


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                        Path signature features


                                 Path Signature Transform Module
                                                                                 Classifier


                                                                  CG conformational space

                                 Deep Spectral Clustering Module


                                                          ...

                                                                  3D conformational space
                  Figure 1: An overview of our proposed Deep Signature method.

form module that collects iterated integrals to characterize interatomic interactions along pathways,
and a classifier to enable property prediction. The overall architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Deep spectral clustering with GNNs. Given the MD trajectory X1:T and molecular graph G for a
molecular system S, we start with extracting the reduced trajectory X̃1:T by coarse gaining X1:T
using deep spectral clustering. Specifically, we first obtain node representations via GNN layers as
                               Hl = σ(D̃−1/2 ÃD̃−1/2 Hl−1 WGNN    l−1
                                                                        ),                          (1)
         l                                                     0
where H denotes the node feature matrix at the l-th layer, H = X1:T , Ã = A + I is the adjacency
                                                                       l−1
matrix A plus the identity matrix I, D̃ is the degree matrix of Ã, WGNN   are the learnable parameters
of GNNs, and σ is a nonlinear activation function. After then, we compute the cluster assignment
matrix Q for the nodes using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with softmax on the output layer
                                   Q = Softmax(WMLP Hl + b),                                        (2)
                                                                                                 N ×M
where WMLP and b are trainable parameters of the MLP. For the assignment matrix Q ∈ R                 ,
where M ≪ N specifies the number of clusters, each row of it represents the node’s probability of
belonging to a particular cluster. We employ the normalized-cut relaxation (Bianchi et al., 2020) as
our clustering objective for minimization
                                   T r(QT ÃQ)          QT Q          IM
                          Lu = −                  +      T
                                                                  −√         ,                      (3)
                                          T
                                   T r(Q D̃Q)         ||Q Q||F          M F
where the first term promotes strongly connected components to be clustered together, while the
second term encourages the cluster assignments to be orthogonal and have similar sizes.
Upon leveraging Q from Eq. (2) for clustering, the corresponding reduced feature embedding matrix
H′ and adjacency matrix A′ can be derived as follows
                                    H′ = QT H; A′ = QT ÃQ.                                      (4)
Since our model takes the sequence X1:T as input, H′ inherently maintains the temporal order in the
form of H′1:T . We utilize another MLP with the parameters WMLP  ′
                                                                     and b to map H′1:T back into a
reduced conformational space with the resulting dynamics and ground truth dynamics expressed as
                                      ′
                           X̃1:T = WMLP    H′1:T + b′ ; X̃pool     T
                                                           1:T = Q X1:T .                        (5)
To ensure the fidelity of the coarse grained dynamics towards the original high-dimensional system,
we further introduce a temporal consistency constraint, defined through a mean absolute error loss
function with the form                          T
                                            1X
                                      Lt =         X̃i − X̃pool
                                                           i    .                                (6)
                                            T i=1


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Path signature transform. We now adopt the path signature method to characterize the interatomic
temporal interactions among the coarse grained dynamics X̃1:T ∈ RT ×3M . The basic idea of
path signature is that, for a multidimensional continuous path, we can construct an ordered set
consisting of all possible path integrals and combinations involving the path integrals among various
individual dimensions as a comprehensive representation for this path (Lyons, 2014). Striving for a
more precise definition, consider our coarse grained trajectory X̃1:T with (X̃1t , X̃2t , . . . , X̃3M
                                                                                                    t ) for
t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, let us define Xb : [1, T ] → R3M as a piecewise linear interpolation of X̃1:T such
that Xb t = X̃t for any t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, and a sub-time interval [ri , ri+1 ] corresponding to a time
partition of [1, T ] with 1 = r1 < r2 < · · · < rτ = T . The depth-D signature transform of X̃ over
the interval [ri , ri+1 ] is the vector
                                     ndefined as o
                                                     3M           n                o3M
                   D                            j                       j1 ,...,jd
                Sigri ,ri+1 (X̃) = 1, S(X̃)ri ,ri+1      , . . . , S(X̃)ri ,ri+1            ,           (7)
                                                             j=1                              j1 ,...,jd =1
                                                     D
where for any (j1 , . . . , jd ) ∈ {1, . . . , 3M } ,
                                                         Z         Z
                               S(X̃)jr1i ,r
                                         ,...,jd
                                                 =           ···         b j1 . . . dX
                                                                        dX           b jd .                   (8)
                                           i+1                             t1          td
                                                     1<t1 <...<td <T
After that, we take the logarithm of the signature transform features presented in Eq. (7) to eliminate
redundant elements according to the shuffle product identity (Lyons et al., 2007) and acquire some
minimal collection of the stream over a time interval. Specifically, given the vector space described
by depth-D signature in formal power series form as
                                       D
                                       X        X
                    SigD
                       ri ,ri+1 (X̃) =                     S(X̃)j1,T
                                                                  1 ,...,jd
                                                                            ej1 . . . ejd ,         (9)
                                          d=0 j1 ,...,jd ∈{1,...,3M }
The depth-D log-signature transform corresponds to taking the formal logarithm of Eq. (9), which
can be expressed as
                       3M
                       X                       X     1
LogSigDri ,ri+1 (X̃) =     S(X̃)nri ,ri+1 en +         (S(X̃)n,m             m,n
                                                             ri ,ri+1 − S(X̃)ri ,ri+1 )[en , em ] + . . .
                       n=1
                                                     2
                                                     1≤n<m≤3M
                                                                                                          (10)
where [en , em ] is the Lie bracket (Reizenstein, 2017) defined by [en , em ] = en ×em −em ×en . Gen-
erally, log-signature possesses a lower dimension compared to the original signature feature while
carrying exactly the same information. Through this transform, the interatomic dynamic correla-
tions in 3D space are embedded as geometric areas into features. The resulting signature sequence,
denoted as (LogSigD                      D
                      r1 ,r2 (X̃), LogSigr2 ,r3 (X̃), . . . ), can be regarded as a discretization of dynamic
data. In this work, we further utilize LSTM to tackle the nonlinear interactions between them.
Classifier. Finally, we introduce a classifier f implemented as a two-layer MLP which outputs the
predicted label ŷ = f (LogSigd1,T (X̃)) for molecular property prediction. To establish the classifi-
cation objective function, we leverage cross-entropy loss defined as follows
                               Lc = −y log(ŷ) − (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ),                             (11)
where y is the ground truth label for the system and ŷ is the predicted label generated by our model.
By combining the loss terms from Eqs. (3), (6) and (11), we arrive at the overall loss function for
training our Deep Signature model as
                                    L = λ1 Lu + λ2 Lt + λ3 Lc .                                  (12)
Here, λ1 , λ2 and λ3 are scaling parameters to balance the contributions of these three loss terms.
It is worth noting that, recent research has delved into the integration of path signatures with GNNs
for spatial-temporal modeling, and marked significant strides in traffic forecasting scenarios (Choi
& Park, 2023; Wang & Zang, 2024). These approaches utilize path signatures to process temporal
information for each node individually at a low level, while employing GNNs empowered neural
differential equation at a higher level to ensure the preservation of spatial topological consistency
during dynamic forecasting. Nonetheless, they fall short in characterizing the temporal interactions
among different nodes, making them unsuitable for molecular property prediction tasks where the
interactions among dominant kinetic pathways play an essential role in protein function (Araki et al.,
2021; Mustali et al., 2023).


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.3     E QUIVARIANCE & INVARIANCE OF LOG - SIGNATURE

Physical properties often exhibit well-defined symmetry characteristics, and integrating such equiv-
ariance into our learned feature space can enhance interpretability and mitigate learning difficulty. In
the subsequent analysis, we rigorously examine the equivariance of our deep signature in relation to
various geometric transformations including translation, rotation, and permutation on atomic coor-
dinates, as well as reparameterization over time. The complete proofs are provided in Appendix A.
Translation invariance. The coarse-grained dynamics acquired by a linear mapping in Eq. (5)
demonstrate that X̃1:T maintain equivariance with respect to translations on input trajectory X1:T .
Besides, since the path signature is composed of iterated integrals, it inherits the property of trans-
lation invariance. As a result, log-signature features are translation-invariant for the input trajectory.
Rotation invariance. When a rotation is applied to the 3D conformational space, an equivalent rota-
tion exists in the coarse grained conformational space, indicating the equivariance of coarse grained
dynamics X̃1:T to rotations of the input trajectory X1:T . Furthermore, while research on rotation
invariance of path signatures for higher depth and multi-dimensional paths is still limited (Diehl,
2013), we demonstrate that the majority of elements constituting our Deep Signature features are
rotation-invariant, particularly in large-scale systems like the molecular systems studied in this work.
Permutation equivariance. GCNs that aggregate contributions from neighboring atoms are invari-
ant to permutations of those atoms, which implies that our coarse-grained dynamics are equivariant
to permutations of atom indices. Additionally, the multi-indices used to index the iterated integrals in
a signature are sorted in ascending order during implementation, ensuring that our signature features
remain equivariant to permutations. This property is essential for facilitating the interpretability of
our method, as it allows us to trace the dominant kinetic pathways that contribute to protein function.
Time-reparametrization invariance. Path signature possesses a powerful property that it remains
invariant under time-reparameterization of the underlying stream (Lyons, 2014). This property sub-
stantially decreases the complexity of certain challenges by eliminating dependence on the sampling
rate while preserving all other relevant information within the stream. Furthermore, it enhances the
robustness of our method against deviations in molecular dynamics occurring over time scales.

3.4     I MPLEMENTATION

Architecture. Our introduced framework
consists of three fundamental modules: a                         ...
deep spectral clustering module, a path                          ...
signature transform module and a classi-
                                                              ReLU


                                                                                           ReLU
                                                        GCN


                                                                                     GCN


                                                                                                                          GCN
                                                                                                                                  MLP
                                                                           Softmax


                                                                                                          Softmax
                                                                     MLP


                                                                                                    MLP


fier. We adopt a hierarchical pooling ar-                        ...
chitecture to implement the deep spectral                        ...
clustering module, which is schematically
                                                   Layer 1              Layer L
depicted in Fig. 2. As shown, it contains a
stack of L graph pooling layers with each   Figure 2:  The architecture of deep spectral clustering
layer consisting of a GCN layer for obtain- module.
ing node embeddings and an MLP layer for cluster assignment, such that it would gradually coarsen
the dynamics from the atomic level. The last GCN layer and MLP take the node feature matrix
and adjacency matrix processed by the L-th graph pooling layer as input and output the final coarse
grained dynamics X̃1:T .
The implementation of the path signature transform mod-
                                                                    LogSig(·)
ule is illustrated in Fig. 3. It takes X̃1:T as input, which
                                                                                                                                        Layer Norm


is first partitioned into equally spaced intervals. The re-
                                                                                              ...



                                                                                                                    ...


                                                                                                                                LSTM


sulting segments are subsequently processed through the
LogSig(·) function to extract log-signature features. This          LogSig(·)
is implemented based on Signatory1 , a Python pack-
age that facilitates differentiable computations of the sig-        LogSig(·)
nature and log-signature transforms on both CPU and Figure 3: The architecture of path sig-
GPU. The resulting signature sequence is then fed into nature transform module.
   1
       https://github.com/patrick-kidger/signatory


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 1: Comparisons of classifica-
tion performance on gene regulatory
dynamics. Results are averaged over
5 runs.

    Method           Accuracy Recall
    Head             55.28±10.56 30.65±16.23
    Tail             55.36±10.72 30.71±16.36
    Head & Tail      67.92±15.17 35.80±9.27       (a) Different timescales   (b) Different scales of system
    GraphLSTM        96.40±0.89 93.14±1.20
                                               Figure 4: The validation of scalability of our approach to-
    GraphTrans       86.00±6.67 79.36±16.37
                                               wards systems with various timescales (in a) and different
    Deep Signature   99.12±0.82 98.65±0.23
                                               number of atoms (in b).

an LSTM layer to capture their interactions and followed by layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016)
to standardize the feature values. For the classifier, we utilize a two-layer MLP together with a sig-
moid activation function to enable property prediction. It is noteworthy that the overall architecture
is fully differentiable, thus we can leverage off-the-shelf optimization techniques to train our model
in an end-to-end fashion.
Cross validation and independent test. We employ a five-fold cross-validation strategy for training
our model. In contrast to conventional random division, we take the temporal nature of the trajectory
data into consideration for data partition. Specifically, each trajectory is divided into 5 groups with
the same time interval according to its temporal order. Subsequently, we further partition the data
within each group into five folds. The validation set is constructed by selecting one fold from
each group and is employed for model selection, while the remaining four folds within each group
are gathered to form the training set. This process is repeated five times sequentially, resulting in
the creation of the five-fold cross-validation dataset. Moreover, for each running, we evaluate the
prediction accuracy of our method on an independent unseen test set and report the averaged results.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments on representative molecular dynamic systems to evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed method. We begin with a synthetic dataset that reports gene regulatory
dynamics (Gao et al., 2016). We then assess the performance on two large-scale MD simulation
datasets, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant dynamics (Zhu et al., 2021)
and G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) dynamics (Rodrı́guez-Espigares et al., 2020). More details
on dataset construction can be found in Appendix B.

4.1     E XPERIMENTS ON G ENE REGULATORY DYNAMICS

For gene regulatory dynamics, we generate 100 trajectories that describe the interactive dynamics
between genes and transcription factors. These dynamics are categorized into degradation type or
dimerization type, with an equal number of trajectories for each type. The systems are simulated
over a period of 2s and with a time interval of 0.004s, resulting in 500 frames per trajectory. Be-
sides, each system encompasses 100 nodes with randomly generated Power-law network structure
to describe their relationships. We implement the deep spectral clustering module in our approach
using two graph pooling layers that first coarsen the dynamics into 60 nodes and then into 30 nodes.
The coefficients of loss terms are set as λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.01, and λ3 = 10. We optimize our model
using Adam with an initial learning rate of 5e-4 and a weight decay of 1e-4. For comparison, we
consider several baseline approaches which aggregate nodes’ dynamics by averaging without taking
into account their interactions. These methods incorporate a deep spectral clustering model with an
MLP to process the first frame only (Head), the last frame only (Tail), the first and last frame (Head
& Tail), and all frames with an additional LSTM layer (GraphLSTM) or Transformer (GraphTrans)
to aggregate nodes’ temporal dynamics. The overall comparison results with baseline methods are
presented in Table 1.
From the table, we observe that our Deep Signature method achieves the best performance with a
clear margin over baseline approaches. Besides, compared to GraphLSTM which aggregates atomic
dynamics by averaging them directly, our Deep Signature exhibits a substantial performance boost


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 2: Comparison of different methods for the classification results on the EGFR dynamics.
                                                         e
                              e                    ngl                                                                                   re
                       la  ngl            dr   al a                                  Tai
                                                                                         l              M              ns            atu
                                      ihe                                                           LST            Tra           ign
     t hod         dra
                   e                 -d                  d           l          d&              aph            aph             pS
  Me           Dih                Cα                  Hea        Tai         Hea              Gr             Gr             Dee
  Accuracy    67.47±0.98         63.73±5.54       61.47±9.43    59.73±11.11 59.47±10.85      64.93±3.64     64.40±6.55      69.33±4.78
  Recall      2.40±2.94          1.20±2.40        2.40±4.80     2.80±5.60   6.00±7.38        11.60±8.52     20.80±10.47     21.27±8.26

                                                               Ca-dihedral angle              Head                 Deep Signature
Table 3: Ablation study on different
loss items for Deep Signature. We
report accuracy and recall for perfor-
mance evaluation.
  Lu     Lt   Lc    Accuracy           Recall
  ×      ×    ✓     67.60±6.02        19.60±6.38
  ×      ✓    ✓     67.97±1.15        17.60±4.45
                                                             Figure 5: Visualization of the extracted features via t-
  ✓      ×    ✓     66.00±2.23        23.20±4.99
  ✓      ✓    ✓     69.33±4.78        21.27±8.26
                                                             SNE. Positive samples are presented in red circles and
                                                             negative samples are in blue triangles.

by incorporating the log-signature transform into our method design, demonstrating the importance
of capturing interatomic interaction dynamics for property prediction. Moreover, we validate the
scalability of our approach to dynamical system across various time scales and different system
sizes. As shown in Fig. 4(a), when extending the time duration of dynamics from 1s to 5s, our Deep
Signature consistently obtains the best performance across these settings. Furthermore, when we
change the system size via increasing the number of nodes that would enhance the complexity of
dynamics, the results in Fig. 4(b) show that our method can still perform well under these conditions.
These results showcase the good scalability of our method for dealing with dynamical systems of
different timescales and sizes. In contrast, while GraphLSTM yields competitive results for systems
with fewer than 250 nodes, a notable performance degradation appears as the number of nodes keeps
increasing. We conjecture that this is because the averaged dynamics become less representative of
the global dynamics as the system scale grows.

4.2    E XPERIMENTS ON EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR MUTATION DYNAMICS

In this study, we investigate the binding process between EGFR mutations and EGFR-receptor ty-
rosine kinases (RTK) during which their interactions can contribute to drug resistance mechanisms.
The combinations between four RTK partners and five mutation types together with wild type as a
reference are considered. To acquire the dynamic data, we follow the pipeline presented in (Zhu
et al., 2021) that each system first undergoes energy minimization prior to simulation, then it is
heated for 100 ps, followed by density equilibration for 100 ps and constant pressure equilibration
for 5 ns, and finally runs simulation on the equilibrated structures for 50 ns. This results in 24 tra-
jectories, each comprising 1,000 frames describing the temporal interactions among approximately
5,000 atoms. Each trajectory is labeled according to its sensitivity towards the drug. Here, our deep
spectral clustering model consists of three layers that progressively coarsen the dynamics into 400,
200, 50 nodes. We set the scaling parameters as λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.01, and λ3 = 10. The model is
trained for 200 epochs with an initial learning rate 5e-5 and a weight decay of 1e-5. In addition to
the deep learning-based baselines introduced above, we further consider two baselines that extract
dihedral angles as geometrical descriptors, followed by PCA to reduce the dimension of features
and SVM for classification. The overall comparison results are summarized in Table 2.
As can be seen, our Deep Signature method consistently obtains the best classification results on
EGFR dynamics, achieving an accuracy of 69.33% and a recall of 21.27%. This validates the prac-
tical applicability of our method for its capability to tackle complex dynamics inherent in large-scale
molecular systems. In addition, in contrast to baseline methods that achieve high accuracy but low
recall which often due to their reliance on bypasses caused by the varying sample sizes for differ-
ent classes, our method demonstrates a substantial improvement in recall, indicating its robustness
under class imbalance issues. Furthermore, when compared to conventional geometrical descrip-
tor methods, deep learning-based approaches, with the exception of ours, tend to underperform on
this dataset. This discrepancy can be attributed to the intricate non-linearity and atomic fluctuations


                                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C797S EGFR-c-Met dimer
G719S EGFR-c-Met dimer


                         (a)   (b)                                      (c)
Figure 6: The effect of the deep spectral clustering module for C797S and G719S mutated EGFR
dimers. (a) are origianl 3D conformations, (b) are coarse grained graphs, (c) are the RMSD curves
of raw trajectories and coarse grained trajectories.


characteristic of EGFR dynamics, which pose significant challenges for deep learning techniques to
extract meaningful patterns from a limited amount of data.
Ablation study. We conduct an ablation study to assess the necessity of each loss term used in our
model, with the results for EGFR dynamics presented in Table 3. We begin by training our Deep
Signature model using only the classification loss Lc , which yields an accuracy of 67.60%. Upon in-
corporating the temporal consistency loss Lt , the accuracy increases to 67.97%. However, when we
replace Lt with the spectral clustering loss Lu , performance slightly degrades to 66.00%. This de-
crease may be attributed to the tendency of Lu to guide the spectral clustering module towards hard
assignments, thereby impairing the representation ability of the coarse grained dynamics. Training
with all three loss terms produces the best results, demonstrating the validity of our method design.
Analysis on deep spectral clustering module. To understand the impact of our spectral clustering
module on the graph structures and trajectories for EGFR dynamics, we investigate two cases: a
drug-resistant C797S mutant and a drug-sensitive G719S mutant respectively dimerized with EGFR
partners, with their results visualized in Fig. 6. By comparing (a) and (b), we observe that coarse
grained graphs produced by our module can maintain the overall structure of original conformations,
and the nodes mainly distribute in the middle region, which is valid since interatomic interactions
that facilitate protein function commonly occur in this area. Besides, as shown in (c), the root mean
square deviation (RMSD) curves for both the raw and coarse grained trajectories generally follow
the same trend, indicating a high fidelity of the coarse grained dynamics to the original dynamics.
Analysis on path signature transform module. We visualize the feature space via t-SNE to explore
the discriminability of learned features after path signature transform. The results of all data samples
with colors indicating their classes are presented in Fig. 5. As seen, both the non-learnable features,
which compute dihedral angles for all Cα atoms, and the learned features derived solely from the
first frame tend to gather tightly in feature space, making it difficult to establish a decision boundary
to distinguish samples belonging to different classes. In contrast, features extracted via our Deep
Signature method are more uniformly distributed, and we can find such a decision boundary easily,
verifying the good discriminability of these features. We further use green circles to indicate training
samples and orange dashed circles to denote test samples in Fig. 5. These two circles typically
exhibit limited overlap due to distribution shift between the training and test samples, which arises
from heterogeneity in the number of atoms and molecular topological structures. Nevertheless, Deep
Signature exhibits an ability to learn generalizable features for unseen samples. This is because
learning features that respect symmetry enhances generalization capability (Schütt et al., 2017b),
and incorporating layer normalization helps mitigate the distribution discrepancy (Ba et al., 2016).
Analysis on interpretability. Our approach also exhibits notable interpretability for its ability to
identify every possible type of interaction among atoms that are essential for protein functioning.
This capability stems from the deep spectral clustering module which only involves linear mapping
for cluster assignment, and log-signature features that maintain permutation equivariance as dis-


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              t=1                           t = 10                    t = 20                   t = 30                  t = 40
Figure 7: The visualization of critical pathways and interatomic interactions that contribute to drug
sensitiveness on the EGFR dynamics.
    Table 4: Comparison of different methods for the classification results on the GPCR dynamics.

                                                         gle
                                   ngle
                                                   ral an                                   ail                        s            atu
                                                                                                                                        re
          d                   al a             hed                                       &T             STM        ran          ign
      tho               edr                 -di              d           l             d            phL         phT           pS
    Me               Dih                 Cα              Hea         Tai           He a         Gra         Gra            Dee
    Accuracy        52.67±0.94          44.00±1.12      53.07±6.47 47.20±5.86     47.20±5.86 53.47±14.86 44.80±6.97        58.00±4.17
    Recall          31.73±1.77          35.47±3.73      26.40±13.21 37.60±15.72   37.60±15.72 38.13±13.19 33.33±21.08      43.30±7.85



cussed in Section 3.3. In practice, we apply the Gradient ⊙ Input method (Shrikumar et al., 2017)
to quantify the contribution of each element in log-signature feature to the final prediction output
and then identify three key atoms whose interactive dynamics play a pivotal role in the progres-
sion of EGFR. The identified atoms, along with their interatomic distances, are illustrated in Fig. 7.
Notably, these identified atoms fall within the hinge region that comprises all ATP binding sites,
demonstrating strong consistency with the experimental observation (Kaufman et al., 2021).

4.3    E XPERIMENTS ON G PROTEIN - COUPLED RECEPTORS DYNAMICS

The GPCR superfamily is a major therapeutic target as its functioning regulates nearly every physi-
ological process in the human body. To create a dataset for its analysis, we select 26 structures with
their MD simulations from the Molecular Dynamics Database for GPCRs (GPCRmd) (Rodrı́guez-
Espigares et al., 2020), including 13 active state structures and 13 inactive state structures. The
task is to identify these distinct active states. Each simulation is conducted for 500 ns with a time
interval of 200 ps, therefore each trajectory consists of 2,500 frames that describe the conforma-
tional dynamics. Here, we only consider atoms in backbones. Experimental results are provided in
Table 4.
It is evident that Deep Signature achieves the highest performance on the GPCR dynamics, with an
accuracy of 58.00% and a recall ratio of 43.30%. The results are significantly better than the com-
pared baselines. Traditional geometrical descriptor methods, such as the dihedral angles and Cα-
dihedral angles, exhibit relatively lower classification accuracy and recall compared to our method.
This again verifies that geometrical descriptors are inadequate for capturing dynamic patterns when
the dynamics are highly nonlinear due to the existence of atomic fluctuations in GPCR dynamics.
Moreover, relying solely on the first or last frame fails to account for the dynamic nature of interac-
tions, thereby limiting the ability to discern useful patterns for predicting structural states. Although
the GraphLSTM method outperforms the geometric descriptor methods, achieving a moderate ac-
curacy of 53.47% and a recall ratio of 38.13%, it still falls short of the superior classification capa-
bilities exhibited by the Deep Signature method, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in
characterizing the complex dynamics of GPCR systems.

5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a novel deep learning framework, Deep Signature, to deal with the long-
standing challenge of understanding protein dynamics in large-scale biological systems. It com-
prises soft spectral clustering to aggregate cooperative dynamics and log-signature transformation
to characterize global interactive dynamics. Theoretically, our method exhibits desirable properties
such as invariance to translation, near-invariance to rotation, and equivariance to atomic coordinate
permutation. Experimental results on three biological process benchmarks verify the effectiveness
of Deep Signature in capturing the complex interactive dynamics of large-scale molecular systems.
We hope our work can offer a promising new direction for the analysis of protein dynamics.


                                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission
(ITC) (InnoHK Project CIMDA), in part by the Institute of Digital Medicine of City University of
Hong Kong (Project 9229503), in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council under Projects
21200522, 11200323 and 11203220, in part by Chow Sang Sang Donation and Matching Fund
(Project 9229161), and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (Project
GHP/044/21SZ).

R EFERENCES
Mitsugu Araki, Shigeyuki Matsumoto, Gert-Jan Bekker, Yuta Isaka, Yukari Sagae, Narutoshi
 Kamiya, and Yasushi Okuno. Exploring ligand binding pathways on proteins using hypersound-
 accelerated molecular dynamics. Nature communications, 12(1):2793, 2021.

Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Layer normalization, 2016. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450.

Ilyes Batatia, David P Kovacs, Gregor Simm, Christoph Ortner, and Gábor Csányi. Mace: Higher
   order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:11423–11436, 2022.

Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Ko-
  rnbluth, Nicola Molinari, Tess E Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E (3)-equivariant graph neural
  networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications, 13(1):
  2453, 2022.

Filippo Maria Bianchi, Daniele Grattarola, and Cesare Alippi. Spectral clustering with graph neural
   networks for graph pooling. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 874–883.
   PMLR, 2020.

Richard Car and Mark Parrinello. Unified approach for molecular dynamics and density-functional
  theory. Physical review letters, 55(22):2471, 1985.

Jeongwhan Choi and Noseong Park. Graph neural rough differential equations for traffic forecasting.
  ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 14(4):1–27, 2023.

Joscha Diehl. Rotation invariants of two dimensional curves based on iterated integrals. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1305.6883, 2013.

Ron O Dror, Robert M Dirks, JP Grossman, Huafeng Xu, and David E Shaw. Biomolecular sim-
  ulation: a computational microscope for molecular biology. Annual review of biophysics, 41:
  429–452, 2012.

Katsuhiro Endo, Daisuke Yuhara, Katsufumi Tomobe, and Kenji Yasuoka. Detection of molecular
  behavior that characterizes systems using a deep learning approach. Nanoscale, 11(20):10064–
  10071, 2019.

Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit. Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to applica-
  tions. Elsevier, 2023.

Pablo Gainza, Freyr Sverrisson, Frederico Monti, Emanuele Rodola, Davide Boscaini, Michael M
  Bronstein, and Bruno E Correia. Deciphering interaction fingerprints from protein molecular
  surfaces using geometric deep learning. Nature Methods, 17(2):184–192, 2020a.

Pablo Gainza, Freyr Sverrisson, Frederico Monti, Emanuele Rodola, Davide Boscaini, Michael M
  Bronstein, and Bruno E Correia. Deciphering interaction fingerprints from protein molecular
  surfaces using geometric deep learning. Nature Methods, 17(2):184–192, 2020b.

Jianxi Gao, Baruch Barzel, and Albert-László Barabási. Universal resilience patterns in complex
   networks. Nature, 530(7590):307–312, 2016.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Kaifu Gao, Duc Duy Nguyen, Vishnu Sresht, Alan M Mathiowetz, Meihua Tu, and Guo-Wei Wei.
  Are 2d fingerprints still valuable for drug discovery? Physical chemistry chemical physics, 22
  (16):8373–8390, 2020.
Helgi I Ingólfsson, Cesar A Lopez, Jaakko J Uusitalo, Djurre H de Jong, Srinivasa M Gopal, Xavier
  Periole, and Siewert J Marrink. The power of coarse graining in biomolecular simulations. Wiley
  Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science, 4(3):225–248, 2014.
Jaehyeok Jin, Alexander J Pak, Aleksander EP Durumeric, Timothy D Loose, and Gregory A Voth.
  Bottom-up coarse-graining: Principles and perspectives. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
  putation, 18(10):5759–5791, 2022.
Nichole EM Kaufman, Simran Dhingra, Seetharama D Jois, and Maria da Graca H Vicente. Molec-
  ular targeting of epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) and vascular endothelial growth factor
  receptor (vegfr). Molecules, 26(4):1076, 2021.
Aditi Khot, Stephen B Shiring, and Brett M Savoie. Evidence of information limitations in coarse-
  grained models. The Journal of chemical physics, 151(24), 2019.
Patrick Kidger and Terry Lyons. Signatory: differentiable computations of the signature and logsig-
  nature transforms, on both {cpu} and {gpu}. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lqU2cs3Zca.
Anthony B Law, Paul J Sapienza, Jun Zhang, Xiaobing Zuo, and Chad M Petit. Native state volume
  fluctuations in proteins as a mechanism for dynamic allostery. Journal of the American Chemical
  Society, 139(10):3599–3602, 2017.
Józef R Lewandowski, Meghan E Halse, Martin Blackledge, and Lyndon Emsley. Direct observation
   of hierarchical protein dynamics. Science, 348(6234):578–581, 2015.
Bian Li, Yucheng T Yang, John A Capra, and Mark B Gerstein. Predicting changes in protein
  thermodynamic stability upon point mutation with deep 3d convolutional neural networks. PLoS
  computational biology, 16(11):e1008291, 2020a.
Chuan Li, Jiangting Liu, Jianfang Chen, Yuan Yuan, Jin Yu, Qiaolin Gou, Yanzhi Guo, and Xuemei
  Pu. An interpretable convolutional neural network framework for analyzing molecular dynam-
  ics trajectories: A case study on functional states for g-protein-coupled receptors. Journal of
  Chemical Information and Modeling, 62(6):1399–1410, 2022.
Zhiheng Li, Geemi P Wellawatte, Maghesree Chakraborty, Heta A Gandhi, Chenliang Xu, and
  Andrew D White. Graph neural network based coarse-grained mapping prediction. Chemical
  science, 11(35):9524–9531, 2020b.
Zoe Li, Ruili Huang, Menghang Xia, Tucker A Patterson, and Huixiao Hong. Fingerprinting
  interactions between proteins and ligands for facilitating machine learning in drug discovery.
  Biomolecules, 14(1):72, 2024.
Terry Lyons. Rough paths, signatures and the modelling of functions on streams. International
  Congress of Mathematicians-Seoul, IV, 2014.
Terry J Lyons, Michael Caruana, and Thierry Lévy. Differential equations driven by rough paths.
  Springer, 2007.
Maciej Majewski, Adrià Pérez, Philipp Thölke, Stefan Doerr, Nicholas E Charron, Toni Giorgino,
 Brooke E Husic, Cecilia Clementi, Frank Noé, and Gianni De Fabritiis. Machine learning coarse-
 grained potentials of protein thermodynamics. Nature Communications, 14(1):5739, 2023.
Siewert J Marrink and D Peter Tieleman. Perspective on the martini model. Chemical Society
  Reviews, 42(16):6801–6822, 2013.
Jessica Mustali, Ikki Yasuda, Yoshinori Hirano, Kenji Yasuoka, Alfonso Gautieri, and Noriyoshi
  Arai. Unsupervised deep learning for molecular dynamics simulations: a novel analysis of
  protein–ligand interactions in sars-cov-2 m pro. RSC advances, 13(48):34249–34261, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Renee Otten, Lin Liu, Lillian R Kenner, Michael W Clarkson, David Mavor, Dan S Tawfik, Dorothee
  Kern, and James S Fraser. Rescue of conformational dynamics in enzyme catalysis by directed
  evolution. Nature communications, 9(1):1314, 2018.
Yunrui Qiu, Michael S O’Connor, Mingyi Xue, Bojun Liu, and Xuhui Huang. An efficient path
  classification algorithm based on variational autoencoder to identify metastable path channels for
  complex conformational changes. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 19(14):4728–
  4742, 2023.
Jeremy Reizenstein. Calculation of iterated-integral signatures and log signatures. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1712.02757, 2017.
Ismael Rodrı́guez-Espigares, Mariona Torrens-Fontanals, Johanna KS Tiemann, David Aranda-
  Garcı́a, Juan Manuel Ramı́rez-Anguita, Tomasz Maciej Stepniewski, Nathalie Worp, Alejandro
  Varela-Rial, Adrián Morales-Pastor, Brian Medel-Lacruz, et al. Gpcrmd uncovers the dynamics
  of the 3d-gpcrome. Nature Methods, 17(8):777–787, 2020.
Julia R Rogers, Gergő Nikolényi, and Mohammed AlQuraishi. Growing ecosystem of deep learning
  methods for modeling protein–protein interactions. Protein Engineering, Design and Selection,
  36:gzad023, 2023.
Kristof Schütt, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Huziel Enoc Sauceda Felix, Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre
  Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Schnet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural net-
  work for modeling quantum interactions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017a.
Kristof T Schütt, Farhad Arbabzadah, Stefan Chmiela, Klaus R Müller, and Alexandre Tkatchenko.
  Quantum-chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature communications, 8(1):
  13890, 2017b.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMlR, 2017.
Daiwen Sun, He Huang, Yao Li, Xinqi Gong, and Qiwei Ye. Dsr: Dynamical surface representation
  as implicit neural networks for protein. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 36, pp. 13873–13886, 2023.
Stephan Thaler, Maximilian Stupp, and Julija Zavadlav. Deep coarse-grained potentials via relative
  entropy minimization. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 157(24), 2022.
Erdal Toprak, Adrian Veres, Jean-Baptiste Michel, Remy Chait, Daniel L Hartl, and Roy Kishony.
  Evolutionary paths to antibiotic resistance under dynamically sustained drug selection. Nature
  genetics, 44(1):101–105, 2012.
Chung-Jung Tsai, Antonio Del Sol, and Ruth Nussinov. Protein allostery, signal transmission and
  dynamics: a classification scheme of allosteric mechanisms. Molecular Biosystems, 5(3):207–
  216, 2009.
Wujie Wang and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli. Coarse-graining auto-encoders for molecular dynam-
 ics. npj Computational Materials, 5(1):125, 2019.
Zengqiang Wang and Di Zang. Multi-frequency graph neural rough differential equations for traffic
  forecasting. 2024.
Michael A Webb, Jean-Yves Delannoy, and Juan J De Pablo. Graph-based approach to systematic
 molecular coarse-graining. Journal of chemical theory and computation, 15(2):1199–1208, 2018.
Ikki Yasuda, Katsuhiro Endo, Eiji Yamamoto, Yoshinori Hirano, and Kenji Yasuoka. Differences in
  ligand-induced protein dynamics extracted from an unsupervised deep learning approach correlate
  with protein–ligand binding affinities. Communications biology, 5(1):481, 2022.
Mengxu Zhu, Debby D Wang, and Hong Yan. Genotype-determined egfr-rtk heterodimerization
 and its effects on drug resistance in lung cancer treatment revealed by molecular dynamics simu-
 lations. BMC Molecular and Cell Biology, 22(1):34, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table of Contents
         Appendix A: Proof for Properties
         Appendix B: Experimental Settings
         Appendix C: Further Results and Analysis



A     P ROOF FOR P ROPERTIES

In the beginning of our proof, we would first decompose our feature extracting process into two
operations gGNN (·) and LogSig(·) as presented in Section 3.2 such that the overall feature transform
is their composition gGNN ◦ LogSig. This decomposition offers us the opportunity to analyze the
properties of component separately. Besides, since the logarithm map is bijective, which implies
there is one-to-one correspondence between the signature and the log-signature (Lyons et al., 2007),
thus we can turn to analyze signature transform for intuitive demonstration.

A.1    T RANSLATION I NVARIANCE

Given trajectory data X1:T ∈ RT ×N ×3 , let TB represent a translation matrix B ∈ RN ×3 on the
trajectory data such that at a certain time stamp t we have TB (Xt ) = Xt + B. For the coarse
grained dynamics acquired by X̃pool  t    = QT Xt as presented by Eq. (5), as QT is a linear matrix,
we can get that Q TB (Xt ) = Q Xt + QT B = TQT B (QT Xt ), thus X̃1:T maintain equivariance
                    T               T

with respect to translation TB on input trajectory X1:T . Besides, as presented in Eq. (8) that the path
signature is composed of iterated path integrals, it inherits the properties of translation invariance
that SigD                 D                                                      D
        a,b (X̃ + c) = Siga,b (X̃). In the whole, our path signature features Siga,b (X̃) are translation-
invariant with respect to input trajectory data Xa,b .

A.2    ROTATION I NVARIANCE

Given the coarse grained dynamics acquired by X̃t = QT Xt , where Xt ∈ RN ×3 and X̃t ∈ RM ×3 .
The cluster assignment matrix Q ∈ RN ×M holds that Q1M = 1N and QT Q = IM . For any
orthogonal matrix Rθ ∈ R3×3 performed on Xt termed as Rθ Xt = (Rθ X1t , . . . , Rθ XN  t ), we proof
below that rotating the input results in an equivalent rotation of the output Rϕ X̃t = QT Rθ Xt ,
where Rϕ ∈ RM ×3 is an orthogonal matrix performed on X̃t . Let we start with the right-hand
side QT Rθ Xt . Here, QT has the form QT = (QT1 , . . . , QTM ), where the assignment function
for m-th cluster is QTm ∈ RN , m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, and the corresponding aggregated coordinate
is QTm Xt which is a linear combination in each dimension. Due to the fact that QTm Rθ Xt can
always be represented by Rϕ QTm Xt , which implies that for a rotation transform Rθ on the original
conformational space, there always exists an equivalent rotation transformation Rϕ in coarse grained
conformational space. We then accomplish our proof that Rϕ X̃t = QT Rθ Xt .
After that, we turn to analyze the effect of rotation on features acquired by signature transform.
Unfortunately, not all elements of a path signature feature exhibit rotation invariance. As demon-
strated by Diehl (2013), rotation invariants only exist on levels of even order. For a 2-dimensional
continuous path X : [a, b] → R2 as presented in Fig. 8, the depth-1 terms corresponding to the
variations for each channel over the interval are represented by ∆X1 and ∆X2 , while the depth-2
term corresponding to the signed area between the chord connecting the endpoints and the real path
is denoted as A. The calculation of depth-2 term corresponds to the coefficient of the polynomial
[en , em ] in Eq. (10)
                                                1   1,2           2,1

                            A = A+ − A− =           Sa,b (X) − Sa,b   (X) .
                                                2
Here, the sign of area exactly indicates the orientation of acceleration, while an increase in the
absolute value of surrounding accelerations would increase the proportion of the represented area
accordingly. Obliviously, the area A is rotation invariant, while ∆X1 , ∆X2 do not hold this property.
As suggested by Diehl (2013), a depth-2 term in Eq. (10) is rotation invariant only if it involves the
iterated integrals over different channels. Although further investigation into rotation invariants


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                  Log-signature


                                                                                  Depth 1


                                                                                  Depth 2


                                                                   ...
                                                                   ...
                                                                                  Higher Depth


Figure 8: Geometric intuition for the first two levels of the log-signature on a 2-dimensional path.
We can observe that the depth-1 terms represent the change in each of the coordinates over the
interval, and the depth-2 term corresponds to the Lévy area of the path, shown as the signed area
enclosed by the curve and the chord connecting its start and endpoints.


for path signature with higher depth over beyond two dimensional paths is still lacking, current
conclusion on rotation invariance acquired for depth-2 log-signauture can readily extend to higher
dimensional paths.
In our experimental setup, given the coarse grained dynamics X̃a,b ∈ RT ×3M , the dimension of
depth-D log-signature is
                                                D
                                     D
                                               X   1X       d
                         dim(LogSiga,b (X̃)) =          µ       (3M )i ,
                                                   d        i
                                                  d=1     i|d
where µ is the Möbius function defined as
                      
                              0     if n has one or more repeated prime factors
              µ(n) =           1     if n = 1
                       (−1)k if n is the product of k distinct prime numbers
When we specify d = 2, the ratio of rotation-invariant elements over the whole log-signature feature
can then be calculated as
                                                 3M − 1
                                           γ=            ,
                                                 3M + 1
which indicates the majority of features are rotation-invariant for a large-scale molecular system as
we focus on in this paper.

A.3   P ERMUTATION E QUIVARIANCE

For the deep clustering module implemented by GNNs gGNN (·) with the formula presented in Eq. (1)
as follows
                               Hl = σ(D̃−1/2 ÃD̃−1/2 Hl−1 WGNN
                                                              l−1
                                                                   ).
For one layer, the calculation of node embeddings per node involves sum over contributions from
different atoms. As a result, node embedding matrix Hl naturally exhibit equivariance with respect
to the permutation symmetries of graphs. In addition, the linear mapping shown in Eq. (5) only
works for dimension alignment, making no influence on the permutation equivariance. So the coarse
grained dynamics X̃1:T is permutation equivariant with respect to an input set of atoms.
We then delve into log-signature transform by examining Eq. (10). Notably, the monomials such
as en and [en , em ] constitute the basis vectors of the vector space, and their coefficients are calcu-
lated using iterate integrals over paths indexed by these monomials. Ideally speaking, log-signature
features hold permutation invariance since we can arbitrarily select and order the monomials. Such
phenomenon becomes even clearer when we revisit the signature transform in Eq. (7). In the sig-
nature transform, the superscripts indicating the paths traverse the set of all multi-indexes denoted
as
                        W = {(j1 , . . . , jd )|d ≥ 1, j1 , . . . , jd ∈ {1, . . . , 3M }}.
Hence, the order of the multi-indexes has no impact on the captured dynamic information. In prac-
tical implementations, we organize the multi-indexes in ascending order to collect these iterated


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


integral terms (Kidger & Lyons, 2021). Consequently, a permutation on the indices of input atoms
would yield a predictable permutation transform on the indices of log-signature terms. As a re-
sult, we drive the conclusion that our Deep signature method exhibits permutation equivariance with
respect to input atom indices.


A.4    T IME - REPARAMETRIZATION INVARIANCE

Since coarse graining will maintain temporal consistency, we only need to analyze the invariance
under time-reparametrization for coarse grained dynamics. A reparametrization of a coarse grained
pathway X : [a, b] → R3M is a path X̆ : [a, b] → R3M where X̆t = Xψt where ψ is a subjective,
continuous, non-decreasing function ψ : [a, b] → [a, b]. We have the following theorem

Theorem 1 Let X̆t be a reparametrization of X, then we have Sig(X̆) = Sig(X).

Consider two real-valued paths X, Y : [a, b] → R and a surjective, continuous, non-decreasing
reparametrization function over time ψ : [a, b] → [a, b]. Then we have reparametrized paths X̆, Y̆ :
[a, b] → R by X̆t = Xψt and Y̆t = Yψt
               Z T             Z T              Z T                   Z T
                    Y̆t dX̆t =     Yψt dXψt =       Yψt Ẋψt ψ̇t dt =     Yψt Ẋψt dψt
                  1               1                  1                      1
                                      RT           RT
After replacing u = ψt , we have 1 Y̆t dX̆t =        1
                                                         Yu dXu , which means path integrals are invariant
under a time reparametrization of both paths.
Since every term of the signature S(X)ja,b  1 ,...,jd
                                                      is defined as an iterated path integral of X, it follows
from the above that
                S(X̆)ja,b
                       1 ,...,jd
                                 = S(X)ja,b
                                         1 ,...,jd
                                                   , ∀k ≥ 0, j1 , . . . , jd ∈ {1, . . . , 3M }
This complements the proof.


B     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

B.1    G ENE REGULATORY DYNAMICS

The dynamics for gene regulatory networks are governed by Michaelis-Menten equation as follows,
                                                   n
                        dxt (vi )                 X          xh (vj )
                                  = −bi x(vi )f +     A(i,j) h          ,                  (13)
                           dt                     j=1
                                                            x (vj ) + 1
where the first term models the degradation when f = 1 or dimerization when f = 2, and the second
term represents genetic activation, with the Hill coefficient h determining the level of cooperation in
the regulation of the gene.
Data generation. For the gene regulatory dynamics, we curate a dataset consisting of 100 trajecto-
ries that delineate the intricate interactive dynamics between genes and transcription factors. These
trajectories are divided into two distinct categories: degradation type (f = 1) and dimerization type
(f = 2), each encompassing an equal number of trajectories. To commence a simulation, we first
initialize a graph network featuring 100 nodes using a Power-law network generator to elucidate
the structural interconnections between these nodes. Subsequently, we employ the Dormand-Prince
method to numerically solve the gene regulatory system described by Eq. (13), with a simulation
duration of 2 seconds and a time interval of 0.004 seconds. This computation simulation yields
trajectories comprising 500 frames each, laying the foundation for our subsequent experiments.
Model architecture. We implement the deep spectral clustering module in our approach using two
graph pooling layers, which first coarsen the dynamics into 60 nodes and subsequently into 30 nodes.
The dimension of hidden states for the stacked GCN layers is kept as 10. For a tiny implementation,
we simply extract the log-signature features for the coarse grained dynamics and then employ a
two-layer MLP for property prediction.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Training details. We train our model with mini-batches of size 48 for 100 epochs using Adam with
the initial learning rate of 5e-4 and a weight decay 1e-4. The coefficients of loss terms are set as
λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.01, and λ3 = 10.


B.2   E PIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR MUTATION DYNAMICS


Data generation. In this investigation, we delve into the intricate binding dynamics between EGFR
mutations and RTK, exploring how their interactions can trigger mechanisms of drug resistance.
The study encompasses the amalgamation of four RTK partners and five distinct mutation types,
alongside the wild type serving as a reference point. To capture the dynamic essence of these in-
teractions, we adhere to the methodological framework outlined in (Zhu et al., 2021), wherein each
system undergoes a meticulous pre-simulation process. This involves an initial energy minimiza-
tion phase, followed by a 100 picosecond heating stage, subsequent density equilibration spanning
100 picoseconds, and a further 5 nanoseconds of constant pressure equilibration. The equilibrated
structures then undergo a simulation period of 50 nanoseconds, resulting in the generation of 24
trajectories. Each trajectory comprises 1000 frames, detailing the temporal interplay among ap-
proximately 5,000 atoms. Notably, these trajectories are categorized based on their sensitivity or
resistance to the administered drug. For the MD simulations, we leverage the explicit-solvent model
integrated within the Amber software suite, utilizing the Ff99SB and gaff force fields to drive the
simulations.
Model architecture. For the deep spectral clustering module, we utilize three graph pooling layers
that progressively coarsen the dynamics into 400, 200, 50 nodes. The dimension of hidden states
for the stacked GCN layers is kept as 20. For the path signature transform module, we partition the
input coarse grained dynamics into four segments for the subsequent application of the log-signature
transform.
Training details. The model is trained with mini-batches of size 16 for a total of 200 epochs. We
employ the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5e-5 and a weight decay 1e-5 to optimize
the model parameters. Additionally, the scaling parameters are specified as λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.01, and
λ3 = 10.


B.3   G PROTEIN - COUPLED RECEPTORS DYNAMICS


Data generation. We download our data from the GPCRmd (http://gpcrmd.org/) (Rodrı́guez-
Espigares et al., 2020) database, which is an online platform that incorporates web-based visual-
ization capabilities and shares data. This database includes at least one representative structure from
each of the four structurally characterized GPCR classes, and holds more than 600 GPCR MD sim-
ulations from GPCRmd community and individual contributions. To create our dataset, we select
26 trajectories of the β2AR-rh1 GPCR inactive (2RH1) and active (3P0G) receptor state with a full
agonist. The receptor consists of 282 and 285 amino acids for inactive and active state respectively.
Each simulation is conducted for 500 ns with a time interval of 200 ps, therefore every trajectory
consists of 2,500 frames that describe the atomic 3D positions over time.
Model architecture. We implement the deep spectral clustering module in our approach using two
graph pooling layers, which first coarsen the dynamics into 100 nodes and subsequently into 50
nodes. The dimension of hidden states for the stacked GCN layers is kept as 20. In the path signature
transform module, the input coarse grained dynamics are partitioned into four segments to facilitate
the subsequent application of the log-signature transform.
Training details. The model is trained with mini-batches of size 16 for a total of 200 epochs. We
employ the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5e-5 and a weight decay 1e-5 to optimize
the model parameters. Furthermore, the scaling parameters are specified as λ1 = 1, λ2 = 0.01, and
λ3 = 10.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     F URTHER R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
C.1   PARAMETER S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

The sensitivity of coarsening level. To further validate the robustness of our method for different
coarsening levels, we conducted additional experiments by varying the coarsening levels for the
EGFR and GPCR datasets. The results are summarized in Table 5.
        Table 5: Comparison of EGFR and GPCR Accuracy at Different Coarsening Levels
          Coarsening Level           100            50           30           10            5
         EGFR Accuracy (%)        66.93±4.62     69.33±4.78   66.40±5.06   63.20±7.56   57.33±4.73
         GPCR Accuracy (%)        50.67±5.58     58.00±4.17   58.00±6.01   57.73±8.92   55.07±6.32


From these results, we observe that coarsening levels of 30 and 50 beads yield the best accuracy
for both datasets, demonstrating the robustness of our method across different levels of coarsening.
While extreme levels, such as 100 or 5 beads, result in reduced performance, the method is flexible
and performs consistently well within a broad range of coarsening levels.
The value of λ1 , λ2 and λ3 . In the objective of Deep Signature presented in Eq. (12), there exist
three hyper-parameters λ1 , λ2 and λ3 reweighting the loss terms. We now conduct the parameter
sensitivity test by varying their value in {10.0, 1.0, 0.1, 0.01}. The results are summarized in Table 6,
7 and 8, respectively.

                    Table 6: Sensitivity analysis for λ1 and its effect on accuracy.
                      λ1              10.0            1.0           0.1          0.01
                 Accuracy (%)       59.60±8.34     69.33±4.78    67.87±1.95    67.33±2.77


                    Table 7: Sensitivity analysis for λ2 and its effect on accuracy.
                      λ2              10.0            1.0           0.1          0.01
                 Accuracy (%)       65.27±2.48     67.67±1.63    67.80±1.15    69.33±4.78


                    Table 8: Sensitivity analysis for λ3 and its effect on accuracy.
                      λ3              10.0            1.0           0.1          0.01
                 Accuracy (%)       69.33±4.78     66.53±2.65    62.00±4.22    58.93±1.71

As shown, our model is generally robust to moderate variations in the hyperparameters. For instance,
λ1 = 1.0, λ2 = 0.01, and λ3 = 10.0 consistently deliver strong performance. However, extreme
values for these parameters (e.g., λ3 = 0.01 or λ1 = 10.0) can lead to a noticeable drop in accuracy,
highlighting the importance of choosing balanced values.


                                                     18
