Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A S INGLE G OAL IS A LL YOU N EED :
S KILLS AND E XPLORATION E MERGE FROM C ONTRASTIVE RL
WITHOUT R EWARDS , D EMONSTRATIONS , OR S UBGOALS

 Grace Liu∗     Michael Tang                           Benjamin Eysenbach
 Princeton University



                                                                A BSTRACT
           In this paper, we present empirical evidence of skills and directed exploration
           emerging from a simple RL algorithm long before any successful trials are observed.
           For example, in a manipulation task, the agent is given a single observation of the
           goal state (see Fig. 1) and learns skills, first for moving its end-effector, then for
           pushing the block, and finally for picking up and placing the block. These skills
           emerge before the agent has ever successfully placed the block at the goal location
           and without the aid of any reward functions, demonstrations, or manually-specified
           distance metrics. Once the agent has learned to reach the goal state reliably,
           exploration is reduced. Implementing our method involves a simple modification
           of prior work and does not require density estimates, ensembles, or any additional
           hyperparameters. Intuitively, the proposed method seems like it should be terrible
           at exploration, and we lack a clear theoretical understanding of why it works so
           effectively, though our experiments provide some hints.
              Sawyer
                   Videosbin
                           and code: https://graliuce.github.io/sgcrl/


                     move hand front/back         Move hand left/right          Knock object out of bin           Pick up the object



              Training
              progress


                             Open/close gripper               Push object              Roll object between bins            Pick and place



Figure 1: Skills and Directed Exploration Emerge. In this task, we provide the agent with a single goal
observation where the green block is in the left bin. The agent never receives any rewards (not even sparse
rewards). Throughout training, the agent learns skills that increase in complexity. Easier skills seem to enable
the agent to unlock more complex skills: moving the hand is a prerequisite for pushing the object; closing the
gripper is a prerequisite for picking up the object, which is a prerequisite for moving the object to the left bin.


1 I NTRODUCTION
Exploration is one of the grand challenges in reinforcement learning (RL) (Thrun, 1992). Effective
exploration algorithms would enable RL agents to solve long-horizon, sparse reward problems with
minimal human supervision: no need for dense reward functions, demonstrations, or hierarchical RL.
While there is a long history of exploration methods, even today’s best methods fail to explore in
settings with sufficiently sparse rewards, and the complexity of sophisticated exploration techniques
means that most researchers today employ limited exploration methods (e.g., adding random noise to
actions (Heess et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2013; Fujimoto et al., 2018)).
In this paper, we focus on a specific type of RL problem (Kaelbling, 1993; Chane-Sane et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022): the agent is given an observation of the single desired goal state, which
   ∗
       Correspondence to: Grace Liu <gliu2@andrew.cmu.edu>


                                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


it tries to reach. This problem setting captures many practical problems, from cell biology (grow
a certain cell type) to chemical engineering (create a specific molecule) to video games (navigate
to the final room). However, this problem setting is exceedingly challenging for standard RL
methods, as the agent does not receive any reward feedback about how it should solve the task. In
continuous settings, the agent will never reach the goal exactly, so no reward signal is ever observed.
Because of the difficulty of this exploration problem, prior work typically assumes that a human
user can provide a dense reward function (Yu et al., 2020; Hansen-Estruch et al., 2022) (or distance
metric/threshold (Venkattaramanujam et al., 2019; Plappert et al., 2018a; Chane-Sane et al., 2021)) or
a set of easier training goals1 (Eysenbach et al., 2022). However, constructing these reward functions
or easier goals is challenging (Liu et al., 2022; Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017) and stymies potential
applications of RL: a chemist who wants to synthesize one particular molecule would have to write
down several “easier” molecules for the RL agent to reach. Our paper lifts the assumptions of prior
work by considering a setting that is easier for human users but significantly more challenging for
RL agents: a single goal state is provided and is used for both training and evaluation.
We present a simple RL algorithm where skills and directed exploration emerge long before any
successful trials are ever observed. For example, in a manipulation task where the agent is given
a single observation of the goal state (see Fig. 1), the agent ends up learning skills for moving its
end-effector, then for pushing the block, then for lifting the block, and finally for picking up the block.
These skills are learned before the agent has ever succeeded at placing the block in the correct location
and without any reward functions, demonstrations, or manually-specified distance metrics. Once the
agent has learned to reliably reach the goal state, it slows exploration. Implementing this method
involves a simple modification of prior work and does not require density estimates, ensembles, or
any additional hyperparameters.
Our method works by learning a goal-conditioned value function via contrastive RL (CRL) (Eysen-
bach et al., 2022) and using that value function to train a goal-conditioned policy. The key ingredient
is embarrassingly simple: when doing exploration, always condition the goal-conditioned policy on
the single target goal. There are several intuitive reasons why we initially thought this method should
work poorly:
      (i) Before the single target goal is reached, the value function will predict bogus values for that
          goal, so it should be unable to train the policy.
     (ii) There is no mechanism to drive exploration. Sampling a curriculum of goals that includes
          easy goals and leads to the target goal should perform much better.
This intuition turned out to be fallacious.
Empirically, we evaluate our approach on tasks ranging from bin picking to peg insertion to maze
navigation, finding that it significantly outperforms prior methods that use a manually-designed
curricula of subgoals (Eysenbach et al., 2022), methods that automatically propose subgoals for
training (Chane-Sane et al., 2021), and even methods that use dense rewards (Haarnoja et al.,
2018). While we do not claim that this is the best exploration method, it outperforms all alternative
exploration strategies we have tried. Not only do we observe emergent skills during training, we find
that different random seed initializations learn divergent strategies for solving the problem. While we
still lack a theoretical understanding of why this approach is so effective, experiments highlight that
(1) the contrastive representations used to express the value function are important, and that (2) the
gains are not caused by “overfitting” the policy or the value function to the single target goal.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Our work builds on a long line of prior work in exploration methods for reinforcement learning (Jin
et al., 2020; Thrun, 1992; Tokic, 2010; Stadie et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2017; Asmuth et al., 2009;
Kearns & Singh, 2002; McGovern & Barto, 2001), and will study this problem in the specific setting
of goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015; Andrychowicz et al., 2017;
Lin et al., 2019; Eysenbach et al., 2021; Rudner et al., 2021; Savinov et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2019;
Sun et al., 2019; Ghosh et al., 2020; Lynch et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2016; Schmeckpeper
    1
      Some prior methods automatically propose training goals (Florensa et al., 2017; 2018; Sukhbaatar et al.,
2018; OpenAI et al., 2021), yet these methods require additional machinery and are primarily evaluated on
settings where subgoals lie on a 2-dimensional manifold.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2020; Nachum et al., 2018; Savinov et al., 2018; Srinivas et al., 2018; Nasiriany et al., 2019;
Eysenbach et al., 2019). This section reviews three types of strategies for exploration. Our proposed
method aims to lift the limitations associated with these prior methods.
Rewards and demonstrations. One of the key challenges with GCRL is the sparsity of the
learning problem, so many prior GCRL methods assume access to a dense, hand-crafted reward
function (Plappert et al., 2018a; Schaul et al., 2015) or a distance metric Trott et al. (2019); Tian
et al. (2021); Hartikainen et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2019). Other methods attempt to make GCRL
more tractable by using expert demonstrations Paul et al. (2019); Ding et al. (2019) to guide learning
and planning. Although well-designed reward functions and expert demonstrations are useful for
training, these components add complexity, and collecting demonstrations can be challenging. Our
method builds upon a growing collection of GCRL algorithms that require neither a reward function
nor demonstrations (Lin et al., 2019; Eysenbach et al., 2022; 2021; Zheng et al., 2024; Sun et al.,
2019; Ghosh et al., 2020) – specifically, we consider a variant of GCRL where only a single goal is
provided for training and evaluation. As such, we could treat it as a single-task problem, but we find
that treating it as a multi-task problem is crucial to achieving good performance.
Exploration and subgoal sampling. Without a dense reward function or expert demonstrations,
the primary challenge of GCRL is effective exploration. One class of exploration strategies adds
noise to the actions (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Heess et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al.,
2018) or policies (Plappert et al., 2018b; Fortunato et al., 2018). While these methods are simple to
implement, they typically fail to perform directed exploration (Osband et al., 2016a). A second class
of methods formulates an intrinsic exploration reward (Machado et al., 2020; Pathak et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Conti et al., 2018; Bougie & Ichise, 2020), which the agent
aims to optimize in addition to the rewards provided by the environment. While these methods can
work effectively, they can be challenging to scale to high-dimensional and long-horizon tasks. A
third class of methods use probabilistic techniques, including ensembles (Osband et al., 2016a; Chen
et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2018; Pearce et al., 2018), posterior sampling (Osband
et al., 2016b; 2018; Dann et al., 2021; Fan & Ming, 2021), and uncertainty propagation (O’Donoghue
et al., 2018; Tosatto et al., 2019) – these methods can excel at directed exploration, though challenges
include tuning the prior and dealing with large ensembles. A fourth class of methods modifies the
goals that are used in training. For example, some methods automatically propose subgoals, breaking
down a hard task into a sequence of easier tasks (Chane-Sane et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Savinov
et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). We compare against one prototypical subgoal
sampling method (RIS (Chane-Sane et al., 2021)). Other methods automatically adjust the goal
distribution (Pong et al., 2020; Florensa et al., 2018; Venkattaramanujam et al., 2019) or initial state
distribution (Florensa et al., 2017), so that the difficulty of learning increases throughout training.
Despite excellent results in certain settings, scaling these methods beyond 2D navigation remains
challenging, and the algorithms remain complex.
Multi-task learning for single-task problems The last strategy for exploration is so ubiquitous
it is easy to forget: training on multiple related tasks, even when we only care about performance
on a single difficult task. For example, many prior GCRL methods command a range of goals during
exploration. Intuitively, the easy tasks can be learned with little exploration, and learning those tasks
should enable the agent to solve more challenging tasks (similar to curriculum learning (Bengio et al.,
2009; Matiisen et al., 2019; Campero et al., 2021)). However, actually constructing these multiple
training tasks or goals requires additional human supervision: the human often lays out a “trail of
breadcrumbs”, and the agent learns how to navigate to each (Eysenbach et al., 2022). Our paper will
study the setting where only a single goal is provided for training, yet our experiments will compare
against baselines that have access to training goals with a range of difficulties.

3     S INGLE -G OAL E XPLORATION WITH C ONTRASTIVE RL

3.1   P RELIMINARIES
Notation. We consider a controlled Markov process (i.e., an MDP without a reward function)
defined by time-indexed states st and actions at . Our experiments will use continuous states and
actions. The initial state is sampled s0 ∼ p0 (s0 ) and subsequent states are sampled from the
Markovian dynamics st+1 ∼ p(st+1 | st , at ). Without loss of generality, we assume that episodes
have an infinite horizon; finite horizon problems can be handled by augmenting the dynamics with an


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


absorbing state. We assume that the algorithm is given as input the single target goal state s∗ and
aims to learn a policy π(at | st ) by interacting with the environment. Unlike prior work, we do not
assume that a distribution of goals for exploration is given; we do not assume that either a dense or
sparse reward function is given.
Following prior work (Eysenbach et al., 2021; Schroecker & Isbell, 2020), we define the objective as
maximizing the probability of reaching the goal. Formally, define the γ-discounted state occupancy
measure (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Syed et al., 2008; Dayan, 1993) as
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                 ρπ (sf ) ≜ (1 − γ)         γ t pπt (st = sf ),                             (1)
                                                      t=0

where pπt (st = sf ) is the probability of being at state sf at time step t. In continuous settings, pπt (sf )
is a probability density. The objective is to find a policy that maximizes the likelihood of the single
target goal under this occupancy measure:
                                            max ρπ (sf = s∗ ).                                              (2)
                                              π

In discrete settings, this objective is equivalent to the standard discounted reward objective with a
reward function r(st , at ) = 1(st = s∗ ); in continuous settings, it is equivalent to using a reward
function r(st , at ) = p(s′ = s+ | st , at ). Intuitively, this corresponds to maximizing the time spent at
the goal. The hyperparameter γ ∈ [0, 1) is part of the problem description.

Contrastive RL. Our method builds on contrastive RL (Eysenbach et al., 2022), prior work that
uses temporal contrastive learning to solve goal-conditioned RL problems. This method was designed
for a slightly different setting, where the input is a distribution over goals p(g), and the aim was
to learn a goal-conditioned policy π(a | s, g) for reaching each of these goals. Contrastive RL is
an actor-critic method. The critic C(s, a, sf ) is learned so that it outputs the (relative) likelihood
that an agent starting at state s and taking action a will visit state sf . Following prior work, we
parameterize the critic as the dot product between two learned representations, ϕ(s, a)T ψ(sf )). The
representations are not normalized. We will write the loss function in terms of these representations,
which will turn out to be key for achieving good exploration.
To define the learning objective, we introduce a few distributions. Define p(s, a) as the marginal
distribution over state-action pairs in the replay buffer, and define ρ(sf | s, a) as the empirical
discounted state occupancy measure, conditioned on a state s and action a. Define ρ(sf ) as the
corresponding marginal distribution over future states. Contrastive RL uses these distributions to train
the critic with a contrastive learning objective. Following prior work, we learn these representations
using the infoNCE contrastive objective (Oord et al., 2018) together with a LogSumExp regularization
that prior analysis (Eysenbach et al., 2022) has shown is necessary when using the infoNCE objective
for control:
                                          "                T    (1)                     N                    2 #
                                                    eϕ(s,a) ψ(sf )
                                                                                       X
                                                                                                        (j)
                                                                                             ϕ(s,a)T ψ(sf )
   max E                      (1)           log P                         −0.01 · log      e                     .
ϕ(s,a),ψ(sf ) (s,a)∼p(s,a),sf ∼ρ(sf |s,a)
                                                                    (j)
                                                   N     ϕ(s,a)T ψ(sf )
                      (2:N )                       j=1 e                               j=1
                     sf      ∼ρ(sf )                                              |           {z             }
                                            |           {z              }
                                                          infoNCE                        LogSumExp regularization
                                                                                                            (3)

In practice, this loss is implemented by sampling a random (st , at ) pair from the replay buffer and
then sampling a future state sf = st+∆ by looking ∆ ∼ G EOM(1 − γ) steps ahead. The negative
examples are obtained by shuffling the future states (i.e., sampling from the product of two marginal
distributions).
Once learned, the representations encode a Q-value (Eysenbach et al., 2022): ϕ(s, a)T ψ(sf ) =
log Q(s, a, sf )−log ρ(sf ), where the Q value is defined with respect to the reward function introduced
above. The policy is learned to maximize this (log) Q-value:
                    max Ep(s)p(sf )π(a|s,sf ) ϕ(s, a)T ψ(sf ) + αH(π(·|s, sf )) ,

                                                                                                      (4)
                       π

where α is an adaptive entropy coefficient. Intuitively, the actor loss chooses the action a that
maximizes the alignment between ϕ(s, a) and ψ(s∗ ).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Algorithm 1 Single-goal Exploration with Contrastive RL. The difference from most prior methods is
that exploration is done by commanding a single difficult goal s∗ , rather than sampling goals with a range of
difficulties.
 1: Initialize policy πθ (a | s, g), replay buffer B, classifier with logits ϕ(s, a)T ψ(sf ).
 2: while not converged do
 3:     Collect one trajectory of experience using π(a | s, sf = s∗ ), add to buffer B.
 4:     Update representations ϕ(s, a), ψ(sf ) and policy π(a | s, sf ) using contrastive RL.
 5: Return policy π(a | s, g = s∗ ).


3.2   O UR A PPROACH
We now describe our approach to tackling the
problem of learning to reach a single goal state. Our
approach is a simple modification of contrastive RL:
rather than asking the human user to provide many
training goals for exploration, we always command
the policy to collect data with the single hard goal
s∗ (see Fig. 2). No other modifications are made to
the algorithm. We use the same single goal state and
success criteria as prior work (Yu et al., 2020); in
each environment, the single goal corresponds to
a state representative of successful task completion
(e.g. closing a box or inserting a peg). The critic         Figure 2: Single-goal exploration. (Left) Our
                                                            method uses a single difficult goal for both data col-
loss is the same as contrastive RL (Eq. 3). The actor       lection and evaluation. It is exceedingly unlikely
loss is the same (Eq. 4). We will call this method          that a random policy would ever reach this goal.
“single [hard] goal CRL.” Note that the single-goal         (Right) Typical methods for goal-conditioned RL
in the algorithm name refers to the goal used for           use a range of different goals for data collection,
data-collection, not the goals used for policy updates.     even if the user only cares about success at reach-
For training the actor, we use goals sampled from           ing a single difficult goal. These different goals can
future states in the replay buffer. (Eq. 4 Ablation         be provided by the user (Eysenbach et al., 2022)
experiments (Fig. 10) show that only training the           or generated with a GAN (Florensa et al., 2018),
actor on the single goal decreases performance. We          VAE (Nasiriany et al., 2019), or planning (Chane-
summarize the approach in Alg. 1.                           Sane et al., 2021; Savinov et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
                                                            2022).

4     E XPERIMENTS
The main aim of our experiments is to evaluate the performance of single-goal contrastive RL
compared to its multi-goal counterpart as well as prior baselines. We do so on four exploration-heavy,
goal-reaching tasks, involving robotic manipulation and maze navigation. All experiments were run
with five random seeds, and error bars in the plots depict the standard error. Hyperparameters can
be found in Appendix B and code to reproduce our results is available online: https://github.
com/graliuce/sgcrl/tree/main
Tasks. We measure the efficacy of our method on four goal-reaching tasks taken from prior
work (Eysenbach et al., 2024), which are chosen to measure long horizon exploration. The tasks
include three robotic manipulation environments (Yu et al., 2020) and one maze navigation environ-
ment (Eysenbach et al., 2019). The robotic manipulation tasks require controlling a sawyer robot to
grasp an object (e.g., a block, lid, or peg) and accurately place it in a predetermined location (e.g.,
in a bin, on top of a box, or inside a hole). The point spiral task is a 2D maze navigation task. We
quantify success in each episode by whether the agent reached sufficiently close to the goal in at least
one state in an episode. This 0/1 sparse reward signal is used by a few of our baselines but is not
needed by contrastive RL. Note that while (Eysenbach et al., 2019) measured success by evaluating
on goals with a range of difficulties, we evaluate only on the single, hard goal, which corresponds to
successful task completion in the Metaworld benchmark (Yu et al., 2020).
These tasks present exceedingly difficult exploration challenges. To quantify the difficulty, we
measured the success rate under a uniform random policy: for each of the sawyer environments, we
did not see a single success state in 75,000,000 environment steps (600,000 episodes); for the point
spiral environment, we did not see a single success state in 40,000,000 environment steps (400,000
episodes). Previous methods solve these tasks with the aid of dense rewards (Yu et al., 2020), or


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  1.0
                                                         Sawyer Bin                                                  Sawyer Box


             (Single Hard Goal)
                  Success
                                  0.5



                                  0.0
                                     0.0           0.5                1.0              1.5 0.0                     0.5                      1.0             1.5
                                                                                     1e7                                                                  1e7
                                  1.0
                                                     Sawyer Peg                                                      Point Spiral
             (Single Hard Goal)
                  Success


                                  0.5



                                  0.0
                                     0.0           0.5                1.0              1.5   0                                          5
                                                         Actor Steps             1e7                             Actor Steps                              1e6
                                                             CRL (Single Hard Goal)                  CRL (Range of Difficulties)

Figure 3: Single goal Exploration is Highly Effective. We compare single hard goal exploration (command the
single hard goal in every trial) to “range of difficulties” exploration (sampling uniformly from a human-provided
set of easy/medium/hard goals). In each of the four environments, single-goal exploration yields considerably
higher success rates, all while being easier for the human user.


with a rich curriculum of subgoals (Eysenbach et al., 2019), but the single-goal CRL agents must
accomplish these tasks with no hand-crafted rewards, demonstrations, or subgoals.

4.1
          Sawyer box
          S INGLE - GOAL E XPLORATION IS E XCEEDINGLY E FFECTIVE .


                                        Reaching                 Push lid away                       Pick up lid                   Nudge lid into place


                Training
                progress


                                                   Touch lid                 Punch lid to ﬂip over                 Pick and place lid



Figure 4: Skills and Directed Exploration for Putting a Lid on a Box: This manipulation task contains an
open box and a lid. The single fixed goal has the lid placed neatly on top of the center of the box. The images
above show skills acquired throughout the course of learning. Note that some skills unlock subsequent skills
(e.g., reaching is a prerequisite for picking, which is a prerequisite for placing) while others look like open-ended
“play” (flipping the lid over, pushing the lid away from the box).


A single goal works well. We find that Contrastive RL effectively solves these four tasks: equipped
only with a single target goal, the agent automatically explores the environments and learns complex
manipulation skills (see Fig. 3). We compare this method to an “oracle” variant that is trained
on human-designed goals that vary in difficulty, ranging from easy goals to the single hard goal.
Surprisingly, our proposed method significantly outperforms this “range of difficulties” method.
While we have never seen a random policy solve any of these tasks, our method achieves its first
success within thousands of trials: 3,197 trials for sawyer box, 9,329 trials for sawyer bin,
15,895 trials for sawyer peg, and 11,724 trials for the spiral task.2
    2
        These numbers are averaged across the random seeds.


                                                                                      6
        Sawyer
  Published         peg paper at ICLR 2025
            as a conference


                                                 reaching                      Grasp peg                 Knock peg against box          Recover from mistakes


                                      Training
                                      progress


                                                               Push peg away                Slide peg to box             Insert peg into hole



  Figure 5: Skills and Directed Exploration for Peg Insertion: This manipulation task contains a peg and
  box with a narrow hole; the single fixed goal is a state where the peg is inside the hole. The agent acquires a
  sequence of increasingly complex skills throughout training, some of which are important for solving the task
  (e.g., reaching, grasping) while others are more “playful” (e.g., knocking the peg against the box). The agent
  also learns to recover from mistakes (see Fig. 8).

                          90000
Total Grid Bins Visited


                          60000


                          30000


                             0
                              0.0                   0.5                  1.0
                                                          Actor Steps                      1e7
                                    Sawyer Bin              Sawyer Box          Sawyer Peg

Figure 6: Quantifying Exploration. We analyze                                                         (a) “Push and flick”                 (b) “gently pick”
“single hard goal” exploration by discretizing the                                                    (seed = 3)                           (seed = 4)
object’s XY position and counting the cumulative
number of unique positions visited throughout                                                         Figure 7: Different random seeds learn different
training. Exploration starts to plateau after the agent                                               strategies. Other seeds learn a policy whose strategy
can successfully reach the goal (compare with Fig. 3).                                                depends on the initial position of the block.


  Early training: agent develops an emergent curriculum of skills. Not only does single-goal
  CRL consistently achieve high success rates on manipulation tasks, but it also demonstrates complex
  and directed exploration techniques during early training. To observe the agent’s behavior throughout
  training, we saved learning checkpoints at fixed intervals and visualized the agent’s behavior at each
  checkpoint (see Figures 1, 4 and 5). We found that the agent learns simple skills before complex
  ones. For example, in all three environments, the agent (1) first learns how to move its end-effector to
  varying locations, (2) then learns how to nudge and slide the object, and (3) finally learns to pick up
  and direct the object. We observe a wide array of exploratory behavior in early training that is not
  directly connected to the goal: from punching the box lid to flip it over (Fig. 4) to pushing the block
  far away in a random direction (Fig. 1).

  First successes: agent trades off exploration for exploitation. As the agent learns to reach the
  goal more consistently, the agent’s behavior becomes less exploratory, qualitatively similar to UCB
  exploration (Guo et al., 2020; Osband et al., 2016b; 2018; Dann et al., 2021; Fan & Ming, 2021). To
  quantify exploration, we discretized the state space of the robotic manipulation environments and
  recorded the cumulative number of unique positions visited throughout training. Fig. 6 shows that the
  growth rate of this exploration metric decreases as the success rate increases (compare with Fig. 3).
  For the sawyer box and sawyer peg environments, the agent achieves a high success rate earlier
  in training, which corresponds to the earlier plateau of the unique grid cells curve. For the sawyer
  bin environment, the agent takes longer to reach high success, and the exploration metric does not
  start leveling out until the end of training. This trend highlights how single-goal CRL develops a
  self-directed exploration strategy that automatically trades off between exploration and exploitation.

  Consistent successes: agent finds diverse paths to the goal. Not only is the performance of
  single-goal CRL reproducible (all random seeds solve the manipulation tasks), but policies trained


                                                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with different random seeds learn qualitatively different goal-reaching strategies. For example,
Fig. 7 shows the strategies learned by different random seeds on the sawyer bin task. One seed
consistently moves the block flush against the wall of the red bin and flicks it into the blue bin.
Another seed tends to grasp the block, lift it, and gently drop it in the blue bin. A third seed chooses
between these strategies depending on whether the block starts near the wall or away from the wall.
Without explicit human guidance in the form of rewards, demonstrations, or subgoals, we see multiple
creative and divergent strategies emerge for solving the same problem.

Further training: agent develops robustness and
self-recovery. During later stages of training, we
observe that the agent demonstrates robustness and          0.75


                                                                               (Single Hard Goal)
learns to recover from mistakes. For example, in


                                                                                    Success
the sawyer peg environment, when the agent                  0.50

drops the peg, it is able to recover by bending down
and grasping the peg again. To quantify robustness,         0.25

we ran perturbation experiments in the sawyer
                                                            0.00
peg and sawyer box environments, in which                            Sawyer Peg
                                                                        (Static
                                                                                          Sawyer Peg
                                                                                           (Dynamic
                                                                                                         Sawyer Box
                                                                                                           (Static
                                                                                                                               Sawyer Box
                                                                                                                                (Dynamic
                                                                    Perturbations)       Perturbations) Perturbations)        Perturbations)
we randomly perturbed the target object’s location
                                                                 CRL (Single Hard Goal, Not Perturbed)    CRL (Range of Difficulties, Not Perturbed)
between 0 and 0.05 meters along each of the three                CRL (Single Hard Goal, Perturbed)        CRL (Range of Difficulties, Perturbed)
axes. We tested two settings: (1) perturbation at the
start of the episode (“static perturbations”) and (2) in Figure 8: Robustness to perturbations: Single
the middle of an episode (“dynamic perturbations”: (Hard) Goal exploration results in policies that are
t = 20 for sawyer box and t = 50 for sawyer more robust to environment perturbations, as com-
peg). As shown in Fig. 8, single goal exploration is pared to policies trained with goals ranging in dif-
robust to static perturbations and somewhat robust ficulty. The success rate remains high even when
to dynamic perturbations, notably outperforming the object is perturbed at the start (“static”) or in the
                                                         middle (“dynamic”) of an episode, likely because its
multi-goal CRL in three out of four scenarios. We effective exploration means that it has seen a wide
hypothesize that this is also the result of better range of states during training.
exploration, which leads to learned representations
that generalize better across unusual or unseen states.

4.2      T HE RL A LGORITHM IS K EY

We compare against a number of algorithms to investigate the importance of the underlying RL
algorithm: is single goal exploration useful for other goal-conditioned RL algorithms?

Baselines. We compare single-goal CRL against prior methods that aim to address the sparse
reward problem by making additional assumptions or employing additional machinery for exploration.
Reinforcement learning with imagined subgoals (RIS) (Chane-Sane et al., 2021)maintains a high-level
policy that predicts subgoals halfway to the end goal and learns the behavioral policy to reach both the
subgoal and the end goal. We also employ a few variants of Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) with additional
assumptions: SAC with sparse rewards, SAC+HER with sparse rewards, and SAC with dense rewards.
In the sparse rewards setting, the agent receives a reward of 1 near the goal and 0 otherwise. In the
dense reward setting, the agent receives a continuous reward tailored to the environment, using the
distance to the goal for the spiral task and the Metaworld (Yu et al., 2020) reward function for sawyer
tasks. Table 1 summarizes the assumptions for each method.

Results. As shown in Fig. 9 single-goal contrastive RL significantly outperforms these alternative
methods, showing that the underlying RL algorithm is important for single goal exploration. Notably,
prior methods rarely reach the goal at all, with the exception of RIS on the simplest task (point
spiral). To verify that our implementation of SAC was correct, we also plotted the reward function
throughout training (recall that SAC has access to a reward function, while other methods do not) and
observed that it increases throughout the course of learning.

4.3      W HY DOES S INGLE -G OAL E XPLORATION W ORK ?

In this section, we present ablation experiments that provide insight into the workings of single-goal
CRL. We find that using single-goal data collection and an inner product critic are both key to the


                                                                        8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                     Table 1: Baselines: Assumptions for methods used in the experiments below.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Requirements
Algorithm                                                                        Exploration                              Exploration Goals                                            Dense Rewards                               Distance Threshold
                                                                                 single goal (ours)                                                   %                                            %                                                 %
Contrastive RL
                                                                                 multiple goals                                                       !                                            %                                                 %
SAC (sparse rewards)                                                             single goal                                                          %                                            %                                                 !
SAC (dense rewards)                                                              single goal                                                          %                                            !                                                 !
SAC (sparse rewards) + HER                                                       single goal                                                          %                                            %                                                 !
RIS                                                                              single goal                                                          %                                            %                                                 !


                                                     1.0
                                                                                     Sawyer Bin                                                                                     Sawyer Box
                                (Single Hard Goal)
                                     Success


                                                     0.5



                                                     0.0
                                                        0.0                    0.5                    1.0                    1.5 0.0                                             0.5                          1.0                         1.5
                                                                                                                           1e7                                                                                                          1e7
                                                     1.0
                                                                                 Sawyer Peg                                                                                          Point Spiral
                                (Single Hard Goal)
                                     Success


                                                     0.5



                                                     0.0
                                                        0.0                    0.5                    1.0                    1.5                     0                                                   5
                                                                                     Actor Steps                           1e7                                                       Actor Steps                                        1e6

                                                                                         CRL                   SAC+HER                                                             RIS
                                                                                         SAC                   SAC (dense rewards)

 Figure 9: The RL Algorithm Matters. We compare several underlying RL algorithms all using single-goal
 exploration, with Table 1 highlighting the assumptions of each method. CRL outperforms these prior methods,
 showing that (i) single-goal exploration is only effective with the right underlying RL algorithm and that (ii) with
 this algorithm, we can achieve considerably higher performance while making fewer assumptions (no rewards).
                       1.0
                                                                 Sawyer Bin                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                            Sawyer Bin                                                Sawyer Box
  (Single Hard Goal)


                                                                                                                                (Single Hard Goal)
       Success


                                                                                                                                     Success


                       0.5                                                                                                                           0.5


                       0.0                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                           0                              5                         0                                5
                          0.0                              0.5                   1.0                     1.5                                                                  Actor Steps               1e6                             Actor Steps                1e6
                                                                 Actor Steps                           1e7
                                                                                                                                                               Monolithic Critic CRL (Single Hard Goal)                 Monolithic Critic CRL (Range of Difficulties)
                single goal data collection + policy training                        single-goal policy training
                multi-goal data collection + policy training                         single-goal data collection (ours)
                                                                                                                                 Figure 11: The importance of representations.
 Figure 10: Ablation experiments. While our                                                                                      Single goal exploration is less effective with using
 method uses an actor loss that uses many goals (Eq. 4),                                                                         a monolithic critic architecture (as opposed to an inner
 alternatives that train the policy with a single goal per-                                                                      product architecture), suggesting that the contrastive
 form no better.                                                                                                                 representations may drive exploration.

 effectiveness of the method. Additionally, the performance boost of single-goal data collection does
 not seem to be due to overfitting of the policy parameters on the task.

 The effectiveness of single-goal exploration is not explained by overfitting. One possible
 explanation for the method’s success is that the algorithm overfits its policy parameters on the single-
 goal task. That is, if the agent only collects data conditioned on the single goal, the algorithm does
 not just overfit the policy parameters to reach the single goal, but also learns useful representations
 for states along the path from the starting point to the goal. To test this hypothesis, we compared
 our method (which randomly samples different goals (see Eq. 4)) with a variant that always uses the
 single hard goal in the actor loss. Note that this single hard goal is the one that is used for evaluation.
 If overfitting were occurring, we would expect that modifying the actor loss to only train on the
 single goal would boost performance. However, the results in Fig. 10 show that this is not the case.


                                                                                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


When data are collected with a single goal, using a single goal in the actor loss degrades performance
(purple vs. blue (ours)). When data are collected with multiple goals, using a single goal in the actor
loss gives only a slight boost performance (red vs. black). In short, the performance of single goal
exploration is not explained by overfitting.

Representations are important. Our next set of experiments study how the representations might
drive exploration. To do this, we replaced the inner product critic function (ϕ(s, a)T ψ(sf )) with
a monolithic critic function (Q(s, a, sf )), which takes as input a concatenated array of the state,
action, and goal.3 The results, shown in Fig. 11, show that single-goal exploration is not effective
with using a monolithic critic network. We found that using this modified critic function resulted no
performance boost for the single-goal strategy, and in fact the single-goal method performed worse
than the multi-goal method. This experiment suggests that the contrastive representations ϕ(s, a)T
and ψ(sf ) could be important in driving single-goal exploration, though the precise mechanism for
how they drive exploration remains unclear. In summary, single-goal exploration is only effective
when combining the right algorithm (CRL) with the right critic architecture. In Appendix A, we show
that environment dynamics are reflected in the contrastive representations early in training.

5    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we showed that skills and directed exploration emerges from a straightforward RL
algorithm: contrastive RL where every trajectory is collected by trying to reach a single fixed goal.
The resulting method has many appealing properties of prior exploration methods: in each episode
the agent seems to try to visit some new state or attempt some new behavior. We do not see the
random dithering that is common with naïve exploration methods like ϵ-greedy. Moreover, this
method does not require any additional hyperparameters: this is in contrast to even the simplest
exploration algorithms today, which require a scale parameter (e.g., Gaussian noise in TD3 (Fujimoto
et al., 2018)). And, while prior exploration algorithms include a schedule (more hyperparameters!)
for gradually decreasing the degree of exploration throughout the course of learning, such behavior
emerges automatically from our proposed method.
There remain two important outstanding questions raised by our experiments. First, we lack a clear
understanding of why skills and directed exploration emerge. Our experiments provide some hints
(representations are important; it is not explained by overfitting), yet much theoretical work remains
to be done to understand exactly what is driving the exploration. A rich theoretical understanding of
the mechanisms driving the exploration here is important not only for explaining the success of this
method, but it may also provide insights into how to adapt the method here to other settings. Second,
how can we leverage the success of the proposed method to address exploration in other problem
settings (e.g., if a reward function were given or if not even a single fixed goal were available). The
“impossible goal” experiment in Appendix C provides one simple approach, but there likely exist
significantly better methods of exploiting the emergent exploration properties that we have observed
in the single-goal setting.
The emergence of divergent strategies for solving the bin picking task points towards broader research
questions about autonomous capabilities. The RL research community has built much scaffolding
to help agents succeed. However, we have shown that without this scaffolding, agents develop
unexpected and unique methods for problem-solving. Perhaps this seemingly creative behavior
emerges not in spite of but because of the lack of human guidance. We encourage future research to
explore what RL can accomplish in the absence of human intervention.

Limitations. The primary limitation of our work is a lack of theoretical analysis explaining why
skills and directed exploration emerge. Empirically, our experiments are focused primarily on
manipulation tasks; we encourage future work to study applications to other settings.

Reproducibility Statement. We provide the source code (https://github.com/
graliuce/sgcrl/tree/main) for reproducing the primary results of the paper, shown in
Figure 3. The codebase supports experiments on all four environments, for both the single-goal and
   3
     In this experiment only, we decreased the batch size from 256 to 32 for both methods, as otherwise we
encountered out-of-memory errors for the monolithic method.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


multi-goal versions of the CRL algorithm. The hyperparameters used for the CRL algorithm and
baselines are given in Appendix B.

Acknowledgments. Thanks to the members of the Princeton RL lab for feedback on preliminary
versions of the work. We are also grateful to Elliot Chane-Sane for corresponding with us on the
strengths and limitations of the RIS algorithm. The experiments in this paper were substantially
performed using the Princeton Research Computing resources at Princeton University, which is a
consortium of groups led by the Princeton Institute for Computational Science and Engineering
(PICSciE) and Office of Information Technology’s Research Computing.


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew,
 Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
John Asmuth, Lihong Li, Michael L Littman, Ali Nouri, and David Wingate. A bayesian sampling approach to
  exploration in reinforcement learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 19–26,
  2009.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 41–48, 2009.
Nicolas Bougie and Ryutaro Ichise. Skill-based curiosity for intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning.
  Machine Learning, 109:493–512, 2020.
Andres Campero, Roberta Raileanu, Heinrich Kuttler, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward
  Grefenstette. Learning with AMIGo: Adversarially motivated intrinsic goals. 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=ETBc_MIMgoX.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with imagined
   subgoals. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1430–1440. PMLR, 2021.
Gang Chen, Yiming Peng, and Mengjie Zhang. Effective exploration for deep reinforcement learning via
  bootstrapped q-ensembles under tsallis entropy regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00403, 2018.
Richard Y Chen, Szymon Sidor, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. UCB exploration via q-ensembles. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1706.01502, 2017.
Edoardo Conti, Vashisht Madhavan, Felipe Petroski Such, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune.
  Improving exploration in evolution strategies for deep reinforcement learning via a population of novelty-
  seeking agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Christoph Dann, Mehryar Mohri, Tong Zhang, and Julian Zimmert. A provably efficient model-free posterior
  sampling method for episodic reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:12040–12051, 2021.
Peter Dayan. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representation. Neural
  Computation, 5(4):613–624, 1993.
Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-conditioned imitation learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy and Vladlen Koltun. Learning to act by predicting the future. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2016.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging planning and
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need: Learning
  skills without a reward function. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. C-learning: Learning to achieve goals via
  recursive classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=tc5qisoB-C.


                                                    11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Contrastive learning as goal-
  conditioned reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:35603–35620,
  2022.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Vivek Myers, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Inference via interpolation:
  Contrastive representations provably enable planning and inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04082, 2024.
Ying Fan and Yifei Ming. Model-based reinforcement learning for continuous control with posterior sampling.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3078–3087. PMLR, 2021.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse curriculum
  generation for reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 482–495. PMLR, 2017.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for reinforcement
  learning agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1515–1528. PMLR, 2018.
Meire Fortunato, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Jacob Menick, Matteo Hessel, Ian Osband, Alex
 Graves, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Demis Hassabis, Olivier Pietquin, Charles Blundell, and Shane
 Legg. Noisy networks for exploration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=rywHCPkAW.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.
Dibya Ghosh, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Justin Fu, Coline Manon Devin, Benjamin Eysenbach, and
  Sergey Levine. Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised learning. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bernardo Avila Pires, Bilal Piot, Jean-Bastien Grill, Florent Altché, Rémi Munos, and
  Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar. Bootstrap latent-predictive representations for multitask reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3875–3886. PMLR, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
  entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Smitha Milli, Pieter Abbeel, Stuart J Russell, and Anca Dragan. Inverse reward design.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Amy Zhang, Ashvin Nair, Patrick Yin, and Sergey Levine. Bisimulation makes
  analogies in goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8407–8426. PMLR, 2022.
Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance learning for
  semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1lmhaVtvr.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Learning continuous
  control policies by stochastic value gradients. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration for reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4870–4879. PMLR, 2020.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IJCAI, volume 2, pp. 1094–8. Citeseer, 1993.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time. Machine Learning,
  49:209–232, 2002.
Jing Li, Xinxin Shi, Jiehao Li, Xin Zhang, and Junzheng Wang. Random curiosity-driven exploration in deep
   reinforcement learning. Neurocomputing, 418:139–147, 2020.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver,
  and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971,
  2015.
Xingyu Lin, Harjatin Singh Baweja, and David Held. Reinforcement learning without ground-truth state. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.07866, 2019.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Problems and
  solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299, 2022.

Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and Pierre Sermanet.
  Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1113–1132. PMLR, 2020.

Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. Count-based exploration with the successor
 representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 5125–5133,
 2020.

Tambet Matiisen, Avital Oliver, Taco Cohen, and John Schulman. Teacher–student curriculum learning. IEEE
  Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 31(9):3732–3740, 2019.

Amy McGovern and Andrew G Barto. Automatic discovery of subgoals in reinforcement learning using diverse
  density. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 361–368, 2001.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and
  Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr Pong, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Planning with goal-conditioned policies.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

OpenAI OpenAI, Matthias Plappert, Raul Sampedro, Tao Xu, Ilge Akkaya, Vineet Kosaraju, Peter Welinder,
  Ruben D’Sa, Arthur Petron, Henrique P d O Pinto, et al. Asymmetric self-play for automatic goal discovery
  in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04882, 2021.

Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via bootstrapped
   DQN. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016a.

Ian Osband, Benjamin Van Roy, and Zheng Wen. Generalization and exploration via randomized value functions.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2377–2386. PMLR, 2016b.

Ian Osband, John Aslanides, and Albin Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep reinforcement learning.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Brendan O’Donoghue, Ian Osband, Remi Munos, and Volodymyir Mnih. The uncertainty bellman equation and
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3836–3845, 2018.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-
  supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2778–2787. PMLR, 2017.

Sujoy Paul, Jeroen Vanbaar, and Amit Roy-Chowdhury. Learning from trajectories via subgoal discovery.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Tim Pearce, Nicolas Anastassacos, Mohamed Zaki, and Andy Neely. Bayesian inference with anchored
  ensembles of neural networks, and application to exploration in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.11324, 2018.

Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell, Jonas Schneider,
  Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics
  environments and request for research. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09464, 2018a.

Matthias Plappert, Rein Houthooft, Prafulla Dhariwal, Szymon Sidor, Richard Y Chen, Xi Chen, Tamim Asfour,
  Pieter Abbeel, and Marcin Andrychowicz. Parameter space noise for exploration. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2018b.

Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-fit: State-
   covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  7783–7792. PMLR, 2020.

Tim GJ Rudner, Vitchyr Pong, Rowan McAllister, Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Outcome-driven reinforcement
  learning via variational inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nikolay Savinov, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric topological memory for navigation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00653, 2018.

Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1312–1320. PMLR, 2015.

Karl Schmeckpeper, Annie Xie, Oleh Rybkin, Stephen Tian, Kostas Daniilidis, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Learning predictive models from observation and interaction. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 708–725. Springer, 2020.

Yannick Schroecker and Charles Isbell. Universal value density estimation for imitation learning and goal-
  conditioned reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06473, 2020.

Dhruv Shah, Benjamin Eysenbach, Nicholas Rhinehart, and Sergey Levine. Rapid exploration for open-world
  navigation with latent goal models. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 674–684. PMLR, 2022.

Aravind Srinivas, Allan Jabri, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Universal planning networks:
  Learning generalizable representations for visuomotor control. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4732–4741. PMLR, 2018.

Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement learning with
  deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814, 2015.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Intrinsic
  motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.

Hao Sun, Zhizhong Li, Xiaotong Liu, Bolei Zhou, and Dahua Lin. Policy continuation with hindsight inverse
  dynamics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:10265–10275, 2019.

Umar Syed, Michael Bowling, and Robert E Schapire. Apprenticeship learning using linear programming. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1032–1039, 2008.

Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip
  DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Sebastian B Thrun. Efficient exploration in reinforcement learning. Carnegie Mellon University, 1992.

Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Frederik Ebert, Sudeep Dasari, Benjamin Eysenbach, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
   Levine. Model-based visual planning with self-supervised functional distances. In International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UcoXdfrORC.

Michel Tokic. Adaptive ε-greedy exploration in reinforcement learning based on value differences. In Annual
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 203–210. Springer, 2010.

Samuele Tosatto, Carlo D’Eramo, Joni Pajarinen, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Exploration driven by an
  optimistic bellman equation. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE,
  2019.

Alexander Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Keeping your distance: Solving sparse
  reward tasks using self-balancing shaped rewards. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.

Srinivas Venkattaramanujam, Eric Crawford, Thang Doan, and Doina Precup. Self-supervised learning of
   distance functions for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02998, 2019.

Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. The laplacian in RL: Learning representations with effi-
  cient approximations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=HJlNpoA5YQ.

Yao Yao, Li Xiao, Zhicheng An, Wanpeng Zhang, and Dijun Luo. Sample efficient reinforcement learning
  via model-ensemble exploration and exploitation. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 4202–4208, 2021.

Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
   Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on
   robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Tianjun Zhang, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Sergey Levine, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. C-
   planning: An automatic curriculum for learning goal-reaching tasks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=K2JfSnLBD9.
Zichen Zhang, Yunshuang Li, Osbert Bastani, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Yecheng Jason Ma, and Luca
  Weihs. Universal visual decomposer: Long-horizon manipulation made easy. In 2024 IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6973–6980. IEEE, 2024.
Chongyi Zheng, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Benjamin Eysenbach. Contrastive difference predictive coding.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=0akLDTFR9x.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    E NVIRONMENT DYNAMICS ARE VISIBLE IN THE NORMS OF CONTRASTIVE
     REPRESENTATIONS


To further investigate our predictions about targeted exploration and robustness arising from the
building of rich representations early in training, we visualized the norms of the contrastive goal
encoder ||ψ(sg )||22 at an early checkpoint, shown in Figure 12. We target goal encoder norms since
we observe that mean goal encoder norms over the training distribution rollout positions closely
correlate with training loss, and hypothesize that these norms reflect environment-learning.
Specifically, we fix the end-effector distance to the target distance for gripping, uniformly randomly
sample many states xi corresponding to both the agent end-effector and object being at xi , and
plot the corresponding values ||ψ(xi )||22 from an early (pre-first-success) encoder checkpoint on the
sawyer bin task.
As shown in Figure 12, we find interpretable patterns corresponding to a map of environment
dynamics, such as high goal encoder norms at the location of the impassable bin walls and bin bottom.
We hypothesize that these strongly-represented environment features contribute to the development
of higher-level skills and ultimately behaviors such as perturbation robustness.


Figure 12: Contrastive representations capture environment dynamics (impassable bin walls
and floor) in an interpretable way. We plot the log of the goal encoder norms, log(||ψ(sg )||22 ), for
various observations where the end effector and block are at the same location. We show a top-down
view at box-height (left) and side view (right). We find that the impassable bin wall is visible both
from the top view (thin strip of lighter blue) and side view (vertical spike of red), represented by
relatively higher norms. Example policy rollouts (colored lines) from checkpoints at the same stage
in training are overlaid for reference, with their starting positions marked as red diamonds and the
goal marked as a gold star.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

                            Table 2: Hyperparameters for our method and the baselines.

 hyperparameter                                                                    value
 Contrastive RL (CRL) (Eysenbach et al., 2022)
 batch size                                                                        256
 learning rate                                                                     3e-4
 discount                                                                          0.99
 actor target entropy                                                              0
 hidden layers sizes (policy, critic, representations)                             (256, 256)
 initial random data collection                                                    10,000 transitions
 replay buffer size                                                                1e6
 samples per insert1                                                               256
 representation dimension (dim(ϕ(s, a)), dim(ψ(sg )))                              64
 actor minimum std dev                                                             1e-6
 SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018)
 batch size                                                                        256
 learning rate                                                                     3e-4
 discount                                                                          0.99
 hidden layers sizes (policy, critic)                                              (256, 256)
 target EMA term                                                                   5e-3
 initial random data collection                                                    10,000 transitions
 replay buffer size                                                                1e6
 samples per insert1                                                               256
 actor minimum std dev                                                             1e-6
 RIS (Chane-Sane et al., 2021)
 batch size                                                                        256
 learning rate                                                                     1e-3 (critic), 1e-4 (policy)
 high-level policy learning rate                                                   1e-4
 discount                                                                          0.99
 hidden layers sizes (policy, high-level policy, critic)                           (256, 256)
 initial random data collection                                                    10,000 transitions
 replay buffer size                                                                1e5
 Polyak coefficient for target networks                                            5e-3
 valid state KL constraint (ϵ)                                                     1e-4
 subgoal KL penalty (α)                                                            0.1
 high-level policy weight regularization (λ)                                       0.1
 1
     How many times is each transition used for training before being discarded.
 2
     We collect N transitions, add them to the buffer, and then do N gradient steps using the experience sampled randomly from the buffer.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     I MPOSSIBLE G OALS


                      Figure 13: Single-goal exploration with an impossible goal.


C.1   I MPOSSIBLE GOALS .
To further probe single goal exploration, we tried commanding a goal that was impossible to reach in
a maze navigation task. One might expect to see completely random behavior, or see no behavior at
all. Visualizing the trajectories visited throughout training (Fig. 13), we observe that the agent seems
to try to navigate to that impossible goal but then gets stuck. This pattern suggests that commanding
an impossible goal is a plausible strategy for improving exploration. However, it fails to explore a
fair number of states, suggesting that there are likely more effective ways of inducing exploration in
settings without a single fixed goal.


                                                  18
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   D                     V ISUALIZING EMERGENT EXPLORATION IN POLICY ROLLOUTS

                                     PCA of Action Rollouts                10
                                                                                                                                      t-SNE of Action Rollouts                    10
                        1.5                                                                                            40
                                                                           9                                                                                                      9
                        1.0                                                                                            30
Principal Component 2


                                                                           8                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                   t-SNE Component 2
                        0.5                                                                                            20
                                                                           7                                                                                                      7


                                                                               Checkpoint Number


                                                                                                                                                                                      Checkpoint Number
                                                                                                                       10
                        0.0                                                6                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                           5                                                                                                      5
                        0.5                                                                                            10
                                                                           4                                                                                                      4
                        1.0                                                                                            20
                                                                           3                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                       30
                        1.5                                                2                                                                                                      2
                                                                           1                                           40                                                         1
                              1.5   1.0   0.5    0.0     0.5   1.0   1.5                                                         40         20       0        20        40
                                    Principal Component 1                                                                              t-SNE Component 1
                                     PCA of State Rollouts                 10
                                                                                                                                      t-SNE of State Rollouts                     10
                                                                                                                       40
                        0.4                                                9                                                                                                      9
Principal Component 2


                                                                           8                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                   t-SNE Component 2
                                                                                                                       20
                        0.2                                                7                                                                                                      7
                                                                               Checkpoint Number


                                                                                                                                                                                      Checkpoint Number
                                                                           6                                           0                                                          6
                        0.0
                                                                           5                                                                                                      5
                        0.2                                                4                                           20                                                         4
                                                                           3                                                                                                      3
                        0.4                                                                                            40
                                                                           2                                                                                                      2
                                                                           1                                                                                                      1
                                    0.2    0.0         0.2     0.4                                                          40         20        0       20        40        60
                                    Principal Component 1                                                                              t-SNE Component 1
  Figure 14: Rollouts at early checkpoints indicate distinct exploratory behavior. Here we plot action and
  state rollouts after PCA and t-SNE dimensionality reduction for the first 10 checkpoints of the model on the
  Sawyer Peg environment.

  To further analyze the progression of exploration and skill learning, we apply dimensionality reduction
  on the states encountered and the actions taken for one episode at the first 10 checkpoints of the
  single-goal CRL model on the sawyer peg environment. The checkpoints were saved at fixed time
  intervals (e.g. every 15 minutes), which corresponded to 3,300 trials in the environment. We observe
  that the action and state rollouts for early checkpoints (2,3,4) tend to be more spatially separated in
  the PCA and T-SNE plots (Fig. 14), indicating unique exploratory behavior, whereas the rollouts
  for later checkpoints (8,9,10) have more overlap, indicating the algorithm has converged to similar
  behavior patterns once the single-goal has been reached.


                                                                                           19
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 E          E VALUATION OF S INGLE - GOAL M ETHOD ON M ULTIPLE G OALS


(Single Hard Goal)   0.75



                     0.50
     Success


                     0.25



                     0.00
                            Sawyer Box                  Sawyer Bin                  Sawyer Peg
                                 CRL (Single Hard Goal) evaluated on Single Hard Goal
                                 CRL (Single Hard Goal) evaluated on Range of Goal Difficulties
                                 CRL (Range of Difficulties) evaluated on Single Hard Goal
                                 CRL (Range of Difficulties) evaluated on Range of Goal Difficulties

 Figure 15: Generalization to multiple goals. Single-goal CRL can still reach goals along the path from the
 starting point to the goal.

 We evaluate single-goal CRL and multi-goal CRL on the distribution of goals used for data collection
 in the multi-goal algorithm in addition to the single, hard goal used for evaluation in the main text.
 Figure 15 shows that single-goal CRL retains the ability to reach these goals (i.e. accomplish multiple
 tasks) without being explicitly guided to learn those tasks. The finding is most prominent in the
 Sawyer Box and Sawyer Peg tasks. This evaluation, in combination with the ablation experiment
 (see Fig. 10), suggests that single-goal CRL is not overfitting its policy parameters on a single task.
 Instead it performs multi-task learning, which surprisingly improves performance on the single task
 as well compared to prior methods.


                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    S ENSITIVITY OF R EPRESENTATIONS TO S TATE D IMENSIONS


                 Representation sensitivity
                                              400

                                              300

                                              200

                                              100

                                               0
                                                    0                  10                   20
                                                                    Training checkpoint
                                                Hand Y Pos (easy)      Obj Y Pos (medium)    Obj Z Pos (hard)

Figure 16: Representation sensitivity to state dimensions evolves throughout training. We probe single-goal
CRL representations trained on the Sawyer Box environment for sensitivity to three state dimensions - the
hand y position, the object y position, and the object z position (height). For each checkpoint, we measure the
representation sensitivity by the l2 distance between the initial state representation before (s10 ) and after (s20 ) a
small perturbation of 0.1 to the given state dimension: ||ϕ(s10 , a0 ) − ϕ(s20 , a0 )||2 .

We further probe the single-goal CRL representation for sensitivity to three state dimensions in the
sawyer box environment: The y position of the hand (end-effector), the y position of the object (box
lid position on table), and the z position of the object (box lid height). These dimensions were chosen
because changing these dimensions requires increasing levels of skill; moving the end-effector y
position is easy, moving the object y position is medium difficulty, and changing the object height
is hard. For each training checkpoint, we measure the representation sensitivity by the l2 distance
between the initial state representation before (s10 ) and after (s20 ) a small perturbation of 0.1 to the
given state dimension: ||ϕ(s10 , a0 ) − ϕ(s20 , a0 )||2 . We find that the representations are more sensitive
to the object y position during earlier stages of training and more sensitive to the object z position
during later stages of training. This shift in sensitivity to the difficulty of the state dimension suggests
that the method automatically develops a reasonable curriculum for exploration.


                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    T RANSFERRING R EPRESENTATIONS BETWEEN TASKS


Figure 17: Transferring representations between tasks may improve sample efficiency. After training
the single-goal CRL representation for 15M environment steps to place a block in a box, we then use these
representations to initialize an agent for solving the Sawyer Bin task.

In this experiment, we evaluate whether transferring single-goal CRL representations between tasks
can improve training sample efficiency. Because single-goal CRL representations learn interpretable
environment dynamics (see Fig. 12), one could expect these learned properties to transfer between
tasks. Over three random seeds, we train CRL representations for 15M environment interactions on a
task that involves placing a block in a box. We then use these representations to initialize an agent for
solving the Sawyer Bin task. We find that this process leads to better sample efficiency (compare
Fig. 17 and Fig. 3 top left), though the difference is not drastic. Overall, this experiment provides
some preliminary indication that single-goal CRL representations are transferrable between tasks.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H     S INGLE - GOAL AND MULTI - GOAL CRL SHOW SIMILAR PERFORMANCE ON
      AN EASY GOAL

                         1.0
    (Single Easy Goal)
         Success


                         0.5


                         0.0
                               0                   200000               400000
                                                     Actor Steps
                                   CRL (Single Hard Goal)      CRL (Range of Difficulties)

Figure 18: Single-goal and multi-goal CRL show similar performance on an easy goal. We train
multi-goal CRL and single-goal CRL on the Point Spiral environment but set the single goal for
single-goal CRL to be an easy goal close to the starting state. The starting position is marked as the
red diamond and the single, easy goal is marked as a gold star.

To verify our implementation of multi-goal CRL, run an experiment where we use a single, easy
goal instead of a single, hard goal in the Point Spiral environment. We observe that single-goal
and multi-goal CRL show similar training progress and both are able to completely solve the
environment (always reach the easy goal) within 500,000 actor steps. This experiment suggests that
the performance difference that we observe between single-goal CRL and the other methods is due to
the difficulty of the given task.


                                                                   23
