Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C OMPETITION DYNAMICS S HAPE                                                 A LGORITHMIC
P HASES OF I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING
 Core Francisco Park1,2,3,∗ , Ekdeep Singh Lubana1,3,∗, Itamar Pres4 , Hidenori Tanaka1,3
 1
   CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
 2
   Department of Physics, Harvard University
 3
   Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc.
 4
   EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor



                                             A BSTRACT
         In-Context Learning (ICL) has significantly expanded the general-purpose nature
         of large language models, allowing them to adapt to novel tasks using merely
         the inputted context. This has motivated a series of papers that analyze tractable
         synthetic domains and postulate precise mechanisms that may underlie ICL. How-
         ever, the use of relatively distinct setups that often lack a sequence modeling na-
         ture to them makes it unclear how general the reported insights from such studies
         are. Motivated by this, we propose a synthetic sequence modeling task that in-
         volves learning to simulate a finite mixture of Markov chains. As we show, mod-
         els trained on this task reproduce most well-known results on ICL, hence offering
         a unified setting for studying the concept. Building on this setup, we demonstrate
         we can explain a model’s behavior by decomposing it into four broad algorithms
         that combine a fuzzy retrieval vs. inference approach with either unigram or bi-
         gram statistics of the context. These algorithms engage in a competition dynamics
         to dominate model behavior, with the precise experimental conditions dictating
         which algorithm ends up superseding others: e.g., we find merely varying con-
         text size or amount of training yields (at times sharp) transitions between which
         algorithm dictates the model behavior, revealing a mechanism that explains the
         transient nature of ICL. In this sense, we argue ICL is best thought of as a mixture
         of different algorithms, each with its own peculiarities, instead of a monolithic
         capability. This also implies that making general claims about ICL that hold uni-
         versally across all settings may be infeasible.

1    I NTRODUCTION
In-Context Learning (ICL)—the ability to perform novel tasks by merely using the inputted
context—has substantially expanded the general-purpose nature of large language models
(LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022), allowing them to solve a broader spectrum of prob-
lems than they may have been initially trained for (Gemini Team, 2023; Qin et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). To better understand the mechanisms underlying ICL, a series of
papers have designed toy, synthetic domains that are amenable to rapid experimentation and can
offer precise hypotheses into how this capability operates. This line of work has established a rich
phenomenology, demonstrating, e.g., the importance of specialized attention heads (aka induction
heads) (Olsson et al., 2022; Edelman et al., 2024; Singh et al., 2024), change in ICL abilities as
a function of data diversity (Raventós et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024; Kirsch et al., 2022), the non-
monotonic trend in test performance as context is increased (Min et al., 2022; Lin & Lee, 2024), and
the transient nature of ICL with training time (Singh et al., 2023; Anand et al., 2024).
Despite the substantial progress highlighted above, we note a unified account of ICL is still lack-
ing. This can be partially attributed to the fact that prior work often focuses on rather disparate
setups to develop its findings—e.g., linear regression (Garg et al., 2023; Von Oswald et al., 2023;
Akyürek et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2024), classification (Chan et al., 2022a;b; Reddy, 2023; Singh et al.,
2023; 2024), and probabilistic automata (Akyürek et al., 2024; Edelman et al., 2024; Bigelow et al.,
  ∗
    Equal contribution. Contact: corefranciscopark@g.harvard.edu, {ekdeeplubana,
hidenori tanaka}@fas.harvard.edu, presi@umich.edu.


                                                    1
     g1.pdf
              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    a) Data Diversity Threshold                                                                  f) Bounded Efficacy



                                      Uni-Inf
                                      Bi-Inf


                                                                                                                      Context Size

                   b) Induction Head Emergence                                                                    e) Early Ascent


                                                  c) Transient Nature       d) Task Retrieval vs Task Learning        Context Size


                              Uni-Ret


                                                                             Context Size
                              Bi-Ret
                              Uni-Inf
                              Bi-Inf


              Figure 1: Algorithmic phase diagram for a finite Markov mixtures task. We propose to study
              ICL phenomena through a minimal experimental system: Transformers trained on sequence data
              generated by a finite mixture of Markov chains. This setup turns out to be extremely rich, capturing
              most (if not all) known phenomenology of ICL, but still being simple enough to be amenable to
              theoretical modeling. We identify four distinct, interpretable algorithmic solutions and characterize
              the transitions between them as functions of data diversity, optimization steps, and context size—
              labeled algorithmic phases. Considering the corresponding phase diagram (middle panel), we find
              part of the rich phenomenology of ICL emerges from competing algorithmic strategies promoted or
              suppressed by broader experimental configurations. Specifically, our framework captures an array of
              known phenomena: a) Data diversity threshold (Raventós et al., 2023); b) Emergence of induction
              heads (Edelman et al., 2024); c) Transient nature (Singh et al., 2023); d) Task retrieval and task
              learning phases (Min et al., 2022); e) Early ascent of risk (Xie et al., 2021); and f) Bounded efficacy
fi
              (Lin & Lee, 2024). See App. C for a concise summary of these findings and propositions.

              2023)—leaving it unclear precisely which ICL phenomena are universal, important, and worth in-
              vestigating to develop a unified theory. To address this issue, we argue a novel experimental setup
              is needed that is rich enough to capture most (if not all) known phenomenology of ICL, but is also
              simple enough to be amenable to modeling, hence offering fertile ground for a unifying account. We
              aim to fill this gap in the current paper.
              This work. We propose a novel sequence modeling task that involves learning to simulate a finite
              mixture of Markov chains. We train Transformers on this task via a standard autoregressive loss
              under different amounts of compute budget (training iterations and model size) and data diversity
              (number of Markov chains in the mixture), while evaluating them with different amounts of context
              seen at inference. Systematically varying these factors, we show our proposed task turns out to
              be extremely rich, reproducing most known phenomenology of ICL and hence offering a unified
              setup for studying the concept. Building on this, we start to deconstruct how a model trained on
              our task performs ICL, finding that there exist (at least) four broad algorithms that can explain the
              model’s behavior. These algorithms combine a fuzzy retrieval vs. inference approach with either
              unigram or bigram statistics of the context, and, as we show, engage in a competition dynamics
              with each other to dictate model behavior. Interestingly, we find the precise experimental conditions
              (e.g., amount of training and context-size) decide which algorithm wins the competition, hence
              yielding several phases in the model’s ability to perform ICL: varying experimental conditions elicits
              different algorithmic behaviors (at times rather abruptly), making it difficult for understanding of
              ICL derived in one configuration to help predict model behavior in another one. This picture also
              helps us better understand several existing phenomena of ICL, e.g., why it can be transient in nature,
              hence enabling a step towards a unified account. Our contributions follow.
              • A finite Markov mixtures task captures ICL’s phenomenology. We introduce a synthetic se-
                quence modeling task wherein a model is trained to simulate a finite mixture of Markov chains
                (Sec. 2). As we show, models trained on this task reproduce most (if not all) known phenomenol-
                ogy of ICL (see Fig. 1, 3), hence offering a unified, controlled setting for studying the concept.


                                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Data generation and evaluation protocol with finite Markov mixtures. (a) Data gen-
eration. We first sample a finite set Ttrain = {T1 , T2 , . . . , TN } of random transition matrices to
define our set of Markov chains. We then randomly select a chain from this set and sample a train-
ing sequence from it. We repeat this process at every step of training, sampling a fresh batch of
sequences from by randomly selecting a chain from our predefined set. (b) Model training. We
train a Transformer (Karpathy, 2022) on this sequence data with a standard autoregressive training
loss. (c) Evaluation. A novel sequence of states is sampled from the test transition matrix, T ∗ , for
evaluation. Here, T ∗ is either (i) selected from the finite set Ttrain (for in-distribution tests), or (ii)
newly sampled (for OOD tests). We subsequently compute the KL divergence between the model’s
empirical transition matrix T̂ vs. ground truth transition matrix T ∗ . See App. A.1 for details.


• Systematic experiments identify different algorithmic phases of ICL. By varying the amount
  of training steps, data diversity (number of chains), and context size in a systematic manner, we
  find a model trained on our proposed task transitions between (predominantly) four phases of
  algorithmic solutions that are characterized by use of unigram vs. bigram context statistics in a
  fuzzy retrieval vs. inference manner (Fig. 4, 5). Furthermore, the scale of the model interacts with
  the boundaries of these phases, e.g., by shifting the critical amount of data diversity needed for
  transitioning between different algorithms (Fig. 8). These results indicate ICL is best regarded as
  an umbrella term for a spectrum of algorithms, instead of a monolithic model capability, and any
  identified phenomenology of ICL should not be deemed universal unless shown otherwise.
• A competition of algorithms picture underlies ICL’s phenomenology. To further develop a
  precise understanding of our identified algorithmic phase diagram, we decompose our model’s
  behavior at any given time into a linear interpolation of the four algorithms mentioned above
  (Fig. 6). This interpolation turns out to be surprisingly accurate, achieving approximately zero
  KL with respect to the trained model’s next token probabilities, and thus suggesting that different
  algorithms compete with each other to dictate model behavior. We then show these competition
  dynamics can explain part of ICL’s phenomenology, e.g., offering an explanation for the transient
  nature of ICL (Singh et al., 2023; Anand et al., 2024) and its non-monotonic out-of-distribution
  performance curves (Kirsch et al., 2022) (Fig. 7).


2    P ROBLEM S ETUP : S IMULATING A F INITE M IXTURE OF M ARKOV C HAINS

We begin by proposing a task that unifies (most) known phenomenology of ICL into a singular setup:
learning to simulate a finite mixture of Markov chains. This task captures the sequence modeling
nature of LLMs by applying a stochastic map to every token (similar to the probabilistic automata
setting of Akyürek et al. (2024)), while also offering a knob (number of chains) that helps assess the
impact of data diversity on ICL (similar to the linear regression setting of Raventós et al. (2023)).
Sequence modeling with finite mixture of Markov chains. As illustrated in Fig. 2, our proposed
task involves modeling of a predefined set of N Markov chains (N ∈ {22 , 23 , . . . , 211 }). A chain
has a unique Transition matrix Tn ∈ Rk×k associated with it, where k denotes the number of states
(k = 10, unless noted otherwise). Each row of Tn is sampled from a Dirichlet distribution, with
T[i,j] denoting the (i, j)th element of the transition matrix, i.e., the probability of transition from
state i to state j. The overall set of transition matrices is denoted Ttrain = {T1 , T2 , . . . , TN −1 , TN }.
The data-generating process (DGP) involves first randomly selecting a matrix Tn ∈ Ttrain following
a prior p ∈ RN , defining a Markov chain using Tn , and then sampling a sequence of length l = 512
from it. Overall, we note the DGP is characterized by three key hyperparameters: (i) N : the number
of chains (a measure of data diversity in this work); (ii) k: the number of states; and (iii) l: the
sequence length. See App. A.1 for further experimental details.
Model Training. We train a 2-layer Transformer (Karpathy, 2022) on sequences sampled from the
above DGP via the standard, autoregressive sequence modeling objective (see App. A.2 for model


                                                      3
 phenomenology.png


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



   a)                                                          b)                                    c)


        N Training Chains
                                     b)
                            c)


                                                               KL
                                                          KL


                                                                                                      KL
                                 Training Steps
                                                                            N Training Chains                        Training Steps


Figure 3: Finite Markov mixture setup captures rich phenomenology of in-context learning
(ICL). (a) KL divergence (OOD evaluation) as a function of training steps and data diversity (Num-
ber of Training Chains). (b) As the data diversity of the training data is increased (see ruby vertical
dashed line in panel (a)), we reproduce the data diversity threshold for “task learning” ICL, similar
to Raventós et al. (2023); Kirsch et al. (2022). (c) At high task-diversity regime with N = 27 (see
green horizontal dashed line in panel (a)), we reproduce non-monotonic performance dynamics in
a sequence modeling setup. This phenomenon was previously reported as “transient nature of ICL”
in Singh et al. (2023). See App. F.1 for more plots from these experiments.


details and hyperparameters). The sampling process is repeated every step of training, i.e., the model
is unlikely to see the same sequence twice during training (a.k.a. online training).
Evaluation. We evaluate trained models on In-Distribution (ID) and Out-Of-Distribution (OOD)
chains. For ID evaluations, we select the transition matrix T ∗ from the training set Ttrain and for
OOD evaluations, we sample a novel T ∗ using a Dirichlet prior. We then draw many sample se-
quences from these transition matrices and compute the average KL divergence between the model’s
predicted transition matrix T̂ and T ∗ . Formally, we compute:
                                                                    *               k
                                                                                                             +
                                                  D            E        X           X              T̂[i,j]
                                                   KL(T̂ ∥T ∗ ) =             ∗
                                                                             π[i]       T̂[i,j] log ∗            .                    (1)
                                                                        i           j=1
                                                                                                   T [i,j]



See Appendix A.3 for further detail about evaluation.

2.1      R EPRODUCING ICL’ S PHENOMENOLOGY

We next demonstrate our proposed task reproduces several known results on ICL, yielding fertile
ground for developing a unified account of this capability. While in the main paper we present only
a few salient phenomena that are of interest to our discussion later, we refer the reader to Fig. 1 and
App. C for a more comprehensive list of captured phenomenology.
Transition via Data Diversity. In Fig. 3 (a), we present a heatmap of the KL divergence between
the model’s predicted transition matrix (T̂ ) and an OOD chain’s transition matrix (T ∗ ) as a function
of training steps (x-axis) and the number of Markov chains used to generate the training dataset
(y-axis) (See App. F.1 for ID evaluation). Similar to Raventós et al. (2023), who argue the model
transitions from a “Bayesian averaging” approach to an “in-context learning” one as the amount
of data diversity is increased, we find that given sufficient training steps, there is a sudden drop in
KL on OOD evaluations: when diversity is low, we find the model performs well on ID chains but
poorly on OOD chains; meanwhile, when diversity is high, we find the model performs well on
OOD chains as well. This phenomenon is explicitly shown in Fig. 3 (b), where we show the KL
of ID and OOD chains at 839 steps of training for different data diversity values. As data diversity
increases, the ID KL slightly increases since the task gets relatively more complex. The OOD KL
drops slowly with data diversity until N = 26 , where we see an abrupt decrease and for n > 26
there is nearly no gap between the ID and OOD performance.
Transient nature of ICL. We first highlight that, given enough data diversity (n > 26 ), there
is always an emergence of induction heads once a critical number of training steps is reached,
similar to Edelman et al. (2024) (see Fig. 1 (b)). Fig. 3 (c) shows KL as a function of training steps
at a high data diversity (N = 27 ). Again, we observe the emergence of the induction head dropping
both the KL of ID and OOD chains at ∼ 6 × 102 steps. Strikingly, after this drop, the KL divergence
begins to increase again, but only for OOD chains. As we show later, this behavior corresponds
to the transient nature of ICL proposed by Singh et al. (2023): the model transitions back from


                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Stationary Distributions                         ID OOD
                    Ti             π1      πn          πN         Uni-Ret           +      -
                                           Histogram
                     Sequence                                     Uni-Inf           +     +
                  27350789
                                                                  Bi-Inf            ++    ++
                                        Transition Matrix
                 Training Chains   T1       Tn         TN         Bi-Ret           +++    --


Figure 4: Proposed algorithms for the finite Markov mixture task. (a) Unigram based Retrieval
(Uni-Ret): Given a sequence, Uni-Ret involves computing a histogram of token frequencies in
the sequence and then creating a new transition matrix that is a weighted average of chains in Ttrain .
Weight associated to a chain is based on the distance between the computed histogram and a chain’s
steady-state distribution. (b) Bigram based Retrieval (Bi-Ret): Similar to Uni-Ret, but uses
observed transitions, i.e., bigrams, to weight the chains. The resulting likelihood is much sharper,
making this algorithm better for the training data. (c) Unigram Inference (Uni-Inf): This algo-
rithm infers a histogram from the given context and draws subsequent tokens from this histogram
directly. (d) Bigram Inference (Bi-Inf): This algorithm infers the transition matrix from the given
context and draws subsequent tokens from this transition matrix directly. This approach achieves
best OOD generalization among considered algorithms. The + and − indicate the performance
expected on ID chains and OOD chains, where a + indicates better performance.


using an algorithm that performs well OOD to one that performs well solely ID; the latter relies on
memorized information that is akin to what the authors in their paper call an “in-weights” solution.

3     A LGORITHMIC P HASES IN FINITE M IXTURE OF M ARKOV CHAINS
Having ascertained the value of our proposed task by reproducing known phenomenology, we now
aim to take a step towards developing a unified account of ICL. To this end, we must better under-
stand how a model trained on our task performs ICL. As we show, we can identify (at least) four
broad algorithms that explain the trained model’s behavior (i.e., its next token predictions) for differ-
ent subsets of experimental configurations. We call these subsets algorithmic phases: continuous
ranges of experimental configurations where the trained model’s behavior is explainable by a prede-
fined algorithm. Building on this analysis, we show in the next section that ICL’s phenomenology,
as it manifests in our setup, is partly driven by a competition between our identified algorithms. We
also offer preliminary mechanistic evidence for our analysis in App. E.

3.1   A LGORITHMS TO SIMULATE FINITE MIXTURE OF M ARKOV CHAINS

Broadly, the axes that help characterize our algorithms (see Fig. 4) are (i) what statistics of the
inputted context are used by the model (unigram vs. bigram), and (ii) whether the approach involves
a fuzzy retrieval of the most relevant Markov chains seen during training to make the next-token
prediction (akin to a Bayesian averaging operation where a discrete prior is defined over Ttrain , i.e.,
chains seen during training), versus an inference of the Markov chain parameters based solely on the
sequence seen in context (akin to a Bayesian averaging operation where a continuous prior, i.e., the
Dirichlet distribution is used)1 . A retrieval approach will generally achieve better performance on ID
evaluations; however, its performance on OOD evaluations will be worse, especially with increased
context length (see App. D for a detailed discussion). Below, we use πn to denote the stationary
distribution of a chain Tn and δ is the Kronecker delta.

Retrieval Approach. Similar to task-retrieval notions of ICL (Min et al., 2022), we define “re-
trieval” algorithms as the accumulation of some relevant statistics of the input sequence to compute
   1
     We note we primarily use distinct names for the two approaches for clarity, but both approaches are in fact
Bayesian inference protocols with priors that depend vs. not on Ttrain . See App. B.1 for further discussion.


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a likelihood function that depends on the Markov chains underlying our training data, i.e., Ttrain .
Specifically, the algorithm utilizing unigram statistics of the input, which we call Uni-Ret (Uni-
grams based Retrieval), uses the following likelihood function.
                          Unigram Likelihood: LU (Tn |x1:t ) = Πtj=1 πn[xj ] ,                       (2)
where x1:t is the sequence of all states 1 to t. Meanwhile, the algorithm utilizing bigram statistics of
the input, which we call Bi-Ret (Bigrams based Retrieval), uses the following likelihood function.
                        Bigram Likelihood: LB (Tn |x1:t ) = Πtj=1 Tn[xj−1 ,xj ] .                    (3)
Given the likelihood functions above, the posterior predictive distribution to predict how likely a
given next state is can be computed as follows.
                                                     X
                Retrieval approach: p(xt |x1:t−1 ) ∝      pn L(Tn |x1:t−1 ) Tn[xt−1 ,xt ] .          (4)
                                                        n

Inference Approaches. Similar to “task-learning” notions of ICL (Raventós et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2024), we define “inference” algorithms as the computation of relevant statistics from the inputted
sequence to infer a probability distribution over the next feasible states. The precise Markov chains
seen during training play no role in this computation (unlike the fuzzy retrieval approaches discussed
above). Consequently, these algorithms exhibit no performance disparity between ID and OOD
evaluations, as they do not incorporate any information from the training dataset. Formally, one
uses either the frequency of token occurrences, i.e., the unigram distribution, or the frequency of
pairwise token occurrences, i.e., the bigram distribution, to define a transition matrix that encodes the
predicted next-token probabilities. We call the former algorithm Uni-Inf and the latter Bi-Inf,
denoting their transition matrices T U and T B respectively.
                                                     Pt
                                         U                  δx ,j
                          Uni-Inf: T[i,j]   (xt ) = k=1 k ;                                           (5)
                                                          t
                                                         Pt−1
                                       B             1 + k=1 δxk ,i δxk+1 ,j
                          Bi-Inf: T[i,j]   (x1:t ) =         Pt−1              .                      (6)
                                                        k + k=1 δxk ,i

3.2   I SOLATING A LGORITHMIC P HASES

We now demonstrate the four algorithms proposed above delineate models trained on our task into
broad algorithmic phases based on the train / test configuration. To this end, we define the following
two evaluations protocols that assess whether the model utilizes bigram statistics and whether it
follows a fuzzy retrieval approach, i.e., relies on the chains seen during training.

Assessing Bigram Utilization. We quantify a model’s reliance on bigram statistics of the sequence
shown in context by exploiting a key difference between our proposed algorithms: unigram-based
methods depend solely on steady-state distributions (π ∗ ), while bigram-based methods consider
state transitions (T ∗ ). Thus, to distinguish between these approaches, we can simply shuffle the
positions of all tokens in the input sequence. This perturbation preserves the stationary distribution,
but disrupts any order-sensitive information, e.g., information about bigram transitions. We can then
measure change in KL between the empirical transition matrix inferred from the model’s predicted
next-token distributions and the ground truth matrix used for sampling the sequence: a large change
would suggest the model relies on bigram statistics to perform the task, while a small change would
indicate a unigram-based approach is at play. See App. A.3.3 for implementation details.

Proximity to a Retrieval Approach. Assessing how much a model relies on the Markov chains
seen during training, e.g., by internalizing their transition matrices (see also App. E.1), helps distin-
guish between solutions that solely leverage context statistics (Bi-Inf and Uni-Inf) and those
that do not (Bi-Ret and Uni-Ret). Motivated by this, we first sample a new set of transition
matrices, denoted Trandom , with the same number of matrices as the train set, Ttrain . We then define a
chain using a transition matrix T ∗ that does not belong to either Ttrain or Trandom . Using a sequence
sampled from this chain, we compute the empirical transition matrix T̂ based on the model’s next
token predictions, and then check whether this matrix is closer (in terms of KL) to the set Ttrain or to
the set Trandom . If the model does not have a preference for the seen transition matrices, i.e., it is not
utilizing a retrieval approach, then T̂ should be (approximately) equally close to the two sets; else,
it should be closer to Ttrain . See App. A.3.3 for further discussion and implementation details.


                                                    6
                      g_algo_phases.png


 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 a)                      Bigram Utilization
                                               Bigram
                                              Sensitive     b)                  Proximity to Retrieval   Retrieval   c)   Uni-Ret   Bi-Ret
                                                                                                                                               d)   Uni-Ret   Bi-Ret


                                                            N Training Chains
  N Training Chains


                                                                                                                                                                       KL
                                                                                                                          Uni-Inf   Bi-Inf          Uni-Inf   Bi-Inf


                                                Bigram
                          Training Steps      Insensitive
                                                                                   Training Steps        Inference


 Figure 5: Algorithmic phases. (a) Bigram Utilization: We shuffle the order of all states in a
 sequence and measure the KL (App. Eq. 9) before and after the perturbation to quantify the bigram
 utilization of a model. The shuffling should only affect algorithms sensitive to higher-order statistics.
 (b) Proximity to Retrieval: A model is labeled “closer” to a retrieval approach when its next-
 token probabilities are closer to matrices seen in the training set. We evaluate this by sampling
 an unseen set of transition matrices, and measuring if the model’s next-token probabilities have
 a lower KL w.r.t. transition matrices seen in training or if it is similar to the freshly sampled set
 (App. Eq. 11). (c) Algorithmic Phases: The product of bigram utilization and proximity to retrieval
 scores delineates four distinct algorithmic phases. (d) Validating phases: KL between model’s and
 predefined algorithms’ next-token probabilities provides validation to our identified phase diagram.
fi



 Results. See Fig. 5. We find the evaluation protocols defined above clearly delineate experimen-
 tal configurations into regions where the solution is (i) unigram-dependent vs. bigram-dependent,
 and (ii) closer to retrieval vs. inference (Figs. 5 (a,b)). These results divide Fig. 3 into four distinct
 phases, each in accordance with the four algorithms proposed in Sec. 3.1: Uni-Ret, Bi-Ret,
 Uni-Inf, and Bi-Inf (see Fig. 5 (c)). We confirm the validity of these phases by comparing
 KL between the model and the predefined algorithms’ next-token probabilities (Fig. 5 (d)). Impor-
 tantly, we observe that with enough training steps and data-diversity, bigram dependence consis-
 tently emerges. Meanwhile, if the data-diversity is large (small), the model is closer to an inference
 (retrieval) approach. Medium data-diversity however sees an interesting learning dynamic, wherein
 the model starts off with a retrieval approach, transitions to an inference approach with enough train-
 ing, but then slowly rolls back to a retrieval approach! We also perform several other experiments to
 corroborate these findings, such as providing preliminary mechanistic evidence for these algorithms;
 e.g., we find we can reconstruct transition matrices from Ttrain via MLP neurons in retrieval phases!
 (see App. E). We also report additional metrics and attention analysis in App. F.
 Overall, we conclude there are (at least) four algorithmic phases in the dynamics of learning to
 simulate finite mixture of Markov chains: a model uses (predominantly) one of the four algorithms
 identified above to perform our task, with the experimental configuration dictating which precise
 algorithm is finally used. Next, we will use these identified algorithmic solutions to better under-
 stand various phenomena associated with ICL. We will especially focus on investigating the non-
 monotonic nature of OOD generalization dynamics, i.e., the transient nature of ICL.

 4                     L INEAR I NTERPOLATION OF A LGORITHMS : A C OMPETITION P ICTURE OF
                       N ON -M ONOTONIC G ENERALIZATION DYNAMICS IN ICL
 In Sec. 3, we identified four algorithms that decompose the learning dynamics of a model trained on
 finite mixture of Markov chains into broad algorithmic phases. We now show these algorithms con-
 sistently compete with each other to dictate a trained model’s behavior (Sec. 4.1), partially driving
 ICL’s phenomenology. Specifically, we analyze the non-montonic generalization dynamics of ICL
 in Sec. 4.2 (e.g., its transient nature), and how model design (e.g., width, tokenization) affect the
 algorithmic phases in Sec. 4.3.

 4.1                    L INEAR I NTERPOLATION OF A LGORITHMS (LIA)

 To begin, we first show that a simple linear interpolation of the four algorithms described in Sec. 3
 captures a trained model’s behavior, i.e., its next-token predictions, extremely well. Formally, let A
 denote the set of our four algorithms [Uni-Ret, Bi-Ret, Uni-Inf, Bi-Inf], then the Linear
 Interpolation of these Algorithms (LIA) is identified by solving the following problem.
                         "                                     #2
                                          X                              X
     LIA: arg min Ex1:t pmodel (x1:t ) −        wa ∗ pa (x1:t ) , where      wa = 1 & wa ≥ 0.        (7)
                             wa ,a∈A
                                                                                               a∈A                                           a∈A



                                                                                                                     7
       algo_dec.png
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



      a)                                             b)            N=26 In-Distribution     c)         N=27 In-Distribution


       N Training Chains


                                                      KL


                                                                                             KL
                                                     wmethod


                                                                                             wmethod
                           Training Steps                                Training Steps                    Training Steps
                                Uni-Ret     Bi-Ret             Uni-Inf       Bi-Inf       Model KL         LIA Fit KL


Figure 6: Linear Interpolation of Algorithms (LIA) (a) Algorithmic Phases extracted by LIA.
We color each location by combining individual colors associated to an algorithm, weighted by
their weights wa . (b) LIA weights across checkpoints extracted using ID data for N = 26 . KL of
the empirical transition matrix fit by LIA from the ground truth matrix is shown as a black dotted
line. The model KL is shown as a black solid line. The evolution of the weights assigned to each
algorithm is shown in the lower plot. (c) LIA weights across checkpoints for N = 27 . This model
was trained with learned positional embeddings. See App. F.2, Fig. 36 for the phase diagram. LIA
reveals transitions between algorithms which were seemingly hidden due to the smooth evolution of
the ID KL divergence (top panel).


Here, pmodel and pa respectively denote the next-token predictions of the model and individual algo-
rithms from set A, given the sequence x1:t as input; meanwhile, wa denotes the weight associated
with algorithm a ∈ A in the interpolation. We optimize the interpolation weights by minimizing
Eq. 7 over multiple ID sequences x1:t , i.e., sequences sampled from Markov chains that constitute
Ttrain (see App. A.3.4 for further details). Fits are almost perfect for all settings (see App. I, Fig. 39).
Results. See Fig. 6. We run the LIA analysis for different amounts of training steps and data
diversity, hence analyzing the dynamics of how the algorithms underlying our identified phases
evolve to dictate a model’s behavior. Crucially, this fine-grained analysis helps us better understand
the model at different phases’ boundaries, where we find algorithms may possibly co-occur.
• Fig. 6 (a) shows that LIA qualitatively finds the same dominant algorithm in each phase as ones
  illustrated in Fig. 5, where we used the bigram utilization and retrieval proximity tests.
• Fig. 6 (b) shows LIA applied across checkpoints for N = 26 , a moderately high data diversity
  setting. Per panel (a), this setting is the first to not have a particularly dominant Bi-Inf phase.
  We see herein an intriguing dynamic occurs as the model undergoes training: since the bigram so-
  lution’s KL divergence is lower, the model transitions from Uni-Inf to Bi-Inf as it undergoes
  training. However, after 103 steps, we start to witness transience: the model slowly cross-overs
  to utilizing the Bi-Ret solution, which performs better than Bi-Inf on ID sequences.
• Fig. 6 (c) finally shows that depending on experimental conditions, the order in which different
  algorithms come to explain the model behavior can be different. For N = 27 and when us-
  ing learned positional embeddings (please see App. F.2 for further details), we show that both
  Bi-Inf and Bi-Ret are delayed to long after Uni-Ret is used as a solution by the model. We
  emphasize that the evolution of the ID KL, which is essentially the training loss, is smooth; how-
  ever, LIA detects interesting underlying dynamics that indicate a persistent competition between
  different algorithms to supersede one another.

4.2   U NDERSTANDING NON - MONOTONIC OOD PERFORMANCE WITH LIA

Our results above show that LIA is a useful tool to probe how a model transitions between different
algorithms to converge on a solution for the task. Next, we discuss how these transitions shape
the evolution of OOD performance, explaining the transient nature of ICL (Singh et al., 2023). We
again use LIA on the ID sequences for this analysis—we emphasize that these experiments amount
to predicting OOD performance of a model by merely using the ID data. See App. A.3.4 for further
explanation, and App. F for more experiments in this vein.
Results. Fig. 7 shows that the weights extracted via LIA can predict the evolution of OOD perfor-
mance during training. Fig. 7 (a, b) correspond to the models in Fig. 6 (b) and (c), but this time we
are plotting OOD performance (unlike before, when we analyzed the ID performance).


                                                                           8
algo_dec_ood_no_line.pdf
      Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



               a)        N=26 Out-of-Distribution               b)        N=27 Out-of-Distribution


                KL


                                                                 KL
                                                                wmethod
               wmethod


                                Training Steps                                  Training Steps
                                                 Model KL                  LIA Predicted KL

         Figure 7: Algorithmic phase transitions drive non-monotonic OOD performance. Note that
         each algorithm’s KL in colored dotted lines has changed from Fig. 6 because of the distribution
         change. (a) Predicting out-of-distribution (OOD) performance corresponding to Fig. 6 (b) using
         LIA weights. By applying the LIA weights fit on ID data, we predict the model’s OOD performance,
         explaining the transient nature of ICL. (b) Predicting out-of-distribution (OOD) performance corre-
         sponding to Fig. 6 (c) using LIA weights. By applying the LIA weights fit on ID data, we predict
         the model’s OOD performance, explaining non monotonic OOD performance and sudden changes.
         • Fig. 7 (a) shows that as the model undergoes training, the Bi-Inf solution, which generalizes
           extremely well OOD, suddenly comes to dictate the model behavior. This algorithm is thus sim-
           ilar to what prior work calls “task-learning” ICL, since the algorithm is entirely reliant on input
           context (Raventós et al., 2023). However, as we saw in Fig. 6 (b), the Bi-Ret solution slowly
           takes over because of its superior performance on ID sequences. This causes the OOD perfor-
           mance to degrade since the Bi-Ret solution does not generalize well to OOD sequences, as
           seen in Sec. 3.1. We argue this dynamic underlies the broader ICL phenomenon demonstrated
           by Singh et al. (2023), who claim ICL can be transient in nature. Specifically, LIA demonstrates
           that an algorithm that heavily relies on internalized knowledge of the train distribution (i.e., a
           retrieval solution) consistently competes with the better OOD-generalizing algorithm. Since the
           former will ultimately achieve a better loss on ID data, it slowly but steadily will supersede the
           better generalizing solution, manifesting as the transient nature of ICL. See also App. C.2.1 for a
           further detailed analysis and discussion, and App. E for mechanistic evidence in support of these
           claims: we show we can reconstruct transition matrices from MLP neurons after the model returns
           to the Bi-Ret phase, but not in the Bi-Inf phase.
         • Fig. 7 (b) shows that the emergence of Bi-Inf, which only changes the ID performance slightly,
           affects the OOD performance more drastically. This demonstrates that certain changes in OOD
           performance can be predicted by carefully decomposing the model’s strategy for performing a
           task. This result also complements the results in (a), demonstrating that both ascents and descents
           in OOD performance can be explained with algorithmic transitions on the training set.
         Overall, the results above show that training dynamics of sequence modeling tasks can be thought
         as a competition of algorithms on the training set; the generalization performance of the model is a
         reflection of the current combination of algorithms used.

         4.3   M ODEL A NALYSIS U SING A LGORITHMIC P HASE DIAGRAMS

         The core finding of Sec. 4.2 is that algorithmic transitions characterize model behavior under differ-
         ent experimental configurations. An extremely crucial component of this configuration is the precise
         set of design decisions made to define the model we are training. For example, as shown in prior
         work (Kirsch et al., 2022), scaling the width of the model can impact its ICL abilities. Building on
         this, we now analyze the effects of model design choices on ICL, specifically evaluating the effects
         of model size, data complexity, and tokenization. See App. F for more experiments.
         Results. See Fig. 8, which yields the following observations.

         • Fig. 8 (a) shows the phase diagram when using a model with an embedding dimension of 256,
           which is 4 times bigger than our baseline experiments. We observe that the data diversity re-


                                                            9
Publishedvariants.png
          as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            a)                   Wider Model       b)                      k=2           c)                   Transition Encoding


             N Training Chains


                                                    N Training Chains


                                                                                          N Training Chains
                                  Training Steps                        Training Steps                             Training Steps


Figure 8: Algorithmic Phase Diagrams Explain the effects model size, data complexity, and
tokenization. (a) Phase diagram for a wider model with an embedding dimension of 256. Here, we
find that the data diversity required to observe Bi-Inf is increased to 210 . (b) A decreased state
space (k = 2, decrease data complexity) enhances the retrieval solutions and causes Bi-Inf to
almost never appear. (c) Encoding the transitions into the tokens removes the Uni-Ret solution by
making it the more complex and higher train loss solution compared to Bi-Ret.

    quired to observe Bi-Inf is increased 16×. Since there is no a priori reason to believe a wider
    model cannot implement the Bi-Inf algorithm, our conclusion is that Uni-Ret and Bi-Ret
    algorithms are relatively faster to appear in a bigger model, hence impeding Bi-Inf’s ability to
    succeed in the overall competition. This finding is intuitive as a bigger model will have more pa-
    rameters to memorize the training set transition matrices. We also note that this result is in contrast
    to Kirsch et al. (2022)’s, who claim width scaling leads to (faster) emergence of “task-learning”
    ICL. We provide further discussion of this point in App. C.2.2, C.2.3.
• Fig. 8 (b) shows the case where the state space of the DGP is set to k = 2, reducing the complexity
  of the data (note that this is independent of the data diversity; see App. D for a discussion). In this
  case, we find that the model can easily internalize the transition matrices needed for the Bi-Ret
  solution—even N = 211 chains do not allow the Bi-Inf solution to win the competition.
• Fig. 8 (c) shows the effect of expanding the token space to allow each token to represent the last
  state and transition (See App. A.2 for details). This experiment is motivated to understand the
  effect of a tokenization on downstream abilities. We find tokenization allows the model to be able
  to count transitions without a formation of a complex attention head, which we suspect is one of
  the reasons Bi-Ret is slower to learn than Uni-Ret (see App. J for a discussion and App. E.3
  for attention head visualizations). As expected, we find the Uni-Ret phase disappears in this
  case, since Bi-Ret is both superior on the training set and (now) the simpler solution.
Overall, our results shows that the downstream effect of design choices can be well understood at
the algorithm level. Please see App. F for additional perturbations, including positional embeddings,
model depth, and number of attention heads.


5     C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduced finite Markov mixtures as a model system of ICL which reproduces a
myriad of phenomena discovered in recent studies of ICL, hence offering a unified setting for study-
ing the concept. This setup also allowed us to write down four algorithmic solutions, each with their
peculiarities, that can explain the trained model’s behavior. We then decomposed trained models
into a combination of these solutions, revealing a competition dynamics between the algorithms
to dictate model behavior. These dynamics result in an algorithmic phase diagram of in-context
learning spanning data diversity and optimization, and can be interpreted as the model finding the
best algorithm on the training data, leading to both sudden and slow transitions towards better solu-
tions. These transitions of algorithms can offer insights into ICL’s phenomenology, e.g., offering a
mechanism that leads to the transient nature of ICL (Singh et al., 2023). More broadly, we claim our
findings challenge the traditional “more is better” view of scaling laws by showing that ICL emerges
from competing algorithmic behaviors rather than a single mechanism. This insight suggests a fresh
perspective on how we should approach model development: instead of solely focusing on reduc-
ing the loss through scaling, can we promote desired algorithms over competing alternatives that
may achieve lower training loss but generalize poorly? Through careful design of data composition,
model architecture, and training duration, we can potentially guide models toward implementing
more robust and generalizable algorithms.


                                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING
CFP and HT gratefully acknowledge the support of Aravinthan D.T. Samuel. CFP acknowledges the
support of Cecilia Garraffo and Douglas P. Finkbeiner. IP was supported by BERI. The computations
in this paper were run on the FASRC cluster supported by the FAS Division of Science Research
Computing Group at Harvard University. The authors thank Gautam Reddy, Pulkit Gopalani, Robert
Kirk, Andrew Lee, Daniel Wurgaft, Maya Okawa, Cole Gibson, Alex Nguyen, Sadhika Malladi,
Zechen Zhang, Helena Casademunt, Yongyi Yang, and Wei Hu for useful discussions.

C ONTRIBUTIONS
CFP and ESL independently defined the setup, ran preliminary investigations, and converged on a
bulk of the experiments, evaluation protocols, and phenomenology; CFP ran extensive experiments
to verify the latter. CFP ran the final experiments in Section 3 in collaboration with ESL to identify
the algorithmic phases and uncover transience of ICL. This formed the basis of the paper. ESL and
CFP proposed the LIA protocol in Section 4, which they used to develop explanations for ICL’s phe-
nomenology; CFP led the experiments. ESL and CFP performed a first version of the mechanistic
interpretability analysis, which IP significantly expanded. IP also proposed the memorization anal-
ysis and the analysis of attention maps at phase boundaries. ESL defined the project narrative and
wrote the paper, with inputs from all authors. CFP, ESL, and HT designed the conceptual diagrams.
HT supervised the project.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models, 2023. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2211.15661.
Ekin Akyürek, Bailin Wang, Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas. In-context language learning: Archi-
  tectures and algorithms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12973.
Suraj Anand, Michael A Lepori, Jack Merullo, and Ellie Pavlick. Dual process learning: Con-
  trolling use of in-context vs. in-weights strategies with weight forgetting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.00053, 2024.
Yu Bai, Fan Chen, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Song Mei. Transformers as statisticians:
  Provable in-context learning with in-context algorithm selection. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 36, 2024.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
  lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Eric J Bigelow, Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Robert P Dick, Hidenori Tanaka, and Tomer D Ullman.
  In-context learning dynamics with random binary sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17639,
  2023.
Blake Bordelon, Alexander Atanasov, and Cengiz Pehlevan. A dynamical model of neural scaling
  laws, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01092.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891,
  2022a.
Stephanie CY Chan, Ishita Dasgupta, Junkyung Kim, Dharshan Kumaran, Andrew K Lampinen, and
  Felix Hill. Transformers generalize differently from information stored in context vs in weights.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05675, 2022b.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, and more. The llama 3
  herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
Benjamin L. Edelman, Ezra Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Eran Malach, and Nikolaos Tsilivis. The evo-
  lution of statistical induction heads: In-context learning markov chains, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.11004.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, et al. Toy models of superposi-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652, 2022.
Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, Alexander R Loftus, Eric Todd, Jannik Brinkmann, Caden Juang, Koyena
  Pal, Can Rager, Aaron Mueller, Samuel Marks, Arnab Sen Sharma, Francesca Lucchetti, Michael
  Ripa, Adam Belfki, Nikhil Prakash, Sumeet Multani, Carla Brodley, Arjun Guha, Jonathan Bell,
  Byron Wallace, and David Bau. Nnsight and ndif: Democratizing access to foundation model
  internals, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14561.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2208.01066.
Gemini Team. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models.                arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.14913.
Akhilesh Gotmare, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A closer look at
  deep learning heuristics: Learning rate restarts, warmup and distillation, 2018. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1810.13243.
Dean S. Hazineh, Zechen Zhang, and Jeffery Chiu. Linear latent world models in simple transform-
  ers: A case study on othello-gpt, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07582.
Tom Henighan, Shan Carter, Tristan Hume, Nelson Elhage, Robert Lasenby, Stanislav Fort,
  Nicholas Schiefer, and Christopher Olah. Superposition, memorization, and double descent.
  Transformer Circuits Thread, 6:24, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Jesse Hoogland, George Wang, Matthew Farrugia-Roberts, Liam Carroll, Susan Wei, and Daniel
  Murfet. The developmental landscape of in-context learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2402.02364.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Andrej Karpathy. nanogpt. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT, 2022.
Louis Kirsch, James Harrison, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Luke Metz. General-purpose in-context
  learning by meta-learning transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04458, 2022.
Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathe-
  matical statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951.
Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wat-
  tenberg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic
  task. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=DeG07_TcZvT.
Shuai Li, Zhao Song, Yu Xia, Tong Yu, and Tianyi Zhou. The closeness of in-context learning
  and weight shifting for softmax regression, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
  13276.
Yingcong Li, M Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. Transformers as al-
  gorithms: Generalization and implicit model selection in in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.07067, 2023c.
Ziqian Lin and Kangwook Lee. Dual operating modes of in-context learning, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2402.18819.
Liyuan Liu, Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Jiawei
  Han. On the variance of the adaptive learning rate and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03265,
  2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08786, 2021.
Yue M Lu, Mary I Letey, Jacob A Zavatone-Veth, Anindita Maiti, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Asymptotic
  theory of in-context learning by linear attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11751, 2024.
Arvind Mahankali, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. One step of gradient descent is
  provably the optimal in-context learner with one layer of linear self-attention, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03576.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00941.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2209.11895.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Jane Pan, Tianyu Gao, Howard Chen, and Danqi Chen. What in-context learning ”learns” in-context:
  Disentangling task recognition and task learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.09731.
Madhur Panwar, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the bayesian prism,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04891.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library, 2019.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023.
Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the
  emergence of non-bayesian in-context learning for regression, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2306.15063.
Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
  classification task, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03002.
Melanie Sclar, Yejin Choi, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Alane Suhr. Quantifying language models’ sen-
 sitivity to spurious features in prompt design or: How i learned to start worrying about prompt
 formatting, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11324.
Aaditya K. Singh, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew M. Saxe, and Felix
  Hill. The transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2311.08360.
Aaditya K. Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, and Andrew M. Saxe. What
  needs to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and
  their formation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07129.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
   hanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
   2104.09864.
William L. Tong and Cengiz Pehlevan. Mlps learn in-context on regression and classification tasks,
 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15618.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023.
Johannes Von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordv-
  intsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient
  descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35151–35174. PMLR, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao
   Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Larger language models do in-context learning
   differently, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03846.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


APPENDIX

C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                    1

2   Problem Setup: Simulating a Finite Mixture of Markov Chains                                    3
    2.1   Reproducing ICL’s phenomenology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         4

3   Algorithmic Phases in finite Mixture of Markov chains                                          5
    3.1   Algorithms to simulate finite mixture of Markov chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
    3.2   Isolating Algorithmic Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6

4   Linear Interpolation of Algorithms: A Competition Picture of Non-Monotonic Gener-
    alization Dynamics in ICL                                                                       7
    4.1   Linear Interpolation of Algorithms (LIA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
    4.2   Understanding non-monotonic OOD performance with LIA . . . . . . . . . . . . .            8
    4.3   Model Analysis Using Algorithmic Phase diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9

5   Conclusion                                                                                     10

A Experimental Details                                                                             18
    A.1 Data Generating Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
    A.2 Training Details: Model & Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
    A.3 Evaluation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
          A.3.1 KL Divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
          A.3.2 Estimating Transition Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
          A.3.3 Bigram Utilization and Retrieval Proximity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
          A.3.4 Linear Interpolation of Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
    A.4 Learning curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22

B More About Solutions                                                                             23
    B.1 Inference Approaches are “Bayesian” with a relaxed prior . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
    B.2 Unigram Posterior Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23

C Phenomenology of In-Context Learning: Summary of reproduced results and im-
  proved understanding                                                        24
    C.1 List of phenomena we reproduce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
    C.2 Improved understanding of ICL: Insights into Transience and effects of model scaling 25
          C.2.1    Transient Nature of In-Context Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
          C.2.2    ICL and Model-Size Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
          C.2.3    Effects of Model-Size Scaling, Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D High Dimensional Distances                                                                       28

E Mechanistic Analysis                                                                             29
    E.1 Reconstructing Markov Chains from MLP Neurons in Retrieval Phases . . . . . .              29
    E.2 Dynamics of Memorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
          E.2.1   Superposition of neurons with increase in data diversity . . . . . . . . . .     31
    E.3 Attention Maps: Implementing Inference approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          34
    E.4 Attention Pattern Evolution Corroborates LIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       37
          E.4.1   Validating LIA: Attention heads in different phases . . . . . . . . . . . . .    37
          E.4.2   Validating LIA: Attention heads at phase boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . .      39

F Additional Results                                                                               41
    F.1   Additional plots from the main experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     41
          F.1.1   High Quality Version of Fig. 1 subplots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    41
          F.1.2   KL Divergence Heatmaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       42
          F.1.3   KL Divergence vs. {Steps, Diversity, Context} . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      43
          F.1.4   KL divergence between the model and solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        46
    F.2   Architecture Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47

G Generalization to chains from a different prior                                                  48

H In-Context Learning of Markov Chains in Real Large Language Models                               49

I   Further validation of LIA                                                                      50
    I.1   Does LIA fit the model well? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
    I.2   Robustness of LIA to arbitrary algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51

J   Importance of sequence-space structure to study transformers                                   52

K Discussion and Future Directions                                                                 53

L Code Availability                                                                                53


                                                  17
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     A     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
     A.1    DATA G ENERATING P ROCESS

     The Data Generating Process (DGP) is defined by 3 crucial hyperparameters:

           1. k: The number of states in the Markov chain, fixed to 10 unless mentioned otherwise.
           2. l: The length of the sequence generated, fixed to 512 unless mentioned otherwise.
           3. N : The number of training matrices, N ∈ {22 , 23 , . . . , 211 } for the main experiments.

     The set of Markov chains used for training is constructed by drawing N transition matrices. We draw
     each row of each transition matrix from a Dirichlet distribution with parameter α = 1k . We index
     individual transition matrices via a subscript, i.e., Tn and use square brackets to index the matrix
     elements, e.g., T[i,j] . Thus, the next state probability is p(xt+1 = j|xt = i) = T[i,j] . The probability
     of selecting a chain is also drawn from a Dirichlet distribution with parameter α = 1N . We denote
     this prior as pn in equation Eq. 4, although its precise values did not yield any interesting effects in
     our experiments. To generate data, we first choose a transition matrix from the prior probability pn ,
     define a Markov chain with that transition matrix, and then sample a sequence of length l.
     Each transition matrix Tn naturally defines a single stationary distribution we denote as πn . We
     draw the first state from this stationary distribution to initialize a sequence. By definition, this
     distribution should remain the same when moving forward in the chain, i.e., it satisfies the relation
     πn = Tn πn ; we calculate the stationary distribution analytically from this relation. Please see the
     function get stationary distribution in the code snippet below.
     To make the dataset clear we attach a minimal PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementation. We
     generated this code with the help of GPT4o (OpenAI, 2024). The code is for clarity only and is not
     optimized for speed or compatibility.
 1 import torch
 2 from torch.utils.data import IterableDataset
 3 import numpy as np
 4
 5 class MarkovChainDataset(IterableDataset):
 6     def __init__(self, k, l, n, seed=None):
 7         self.k = k # Number of states
 8         self.l = l # Output sequence length
 9         self.n = n # Number of transition matrices
10         self.seed = seed # Seed for reproducibility
11
12              if seed is not None:
13                  np.random.seed(seed)
14                  torch.manual_seed(seed)
15
16             # Generate n transition matrices, each with k states
17             self.transition_matrices = []
18             for _ in range(n):
19                 matrix = np.array([np.random.dirichlet([1] * k) for _ in
           range(k)])
20                 self.transition_matrices.append(matrix)
21
22              # Prior distribution over transition matrices
23              self.prior = np.random.dirichlet([1] * n)
24
25         def get_stationary_distribution(self, matrix):
26             # Compute the stationary distribution of the transition matrix
27             eigvals, eigvecs = np.linalg.eig(matrix.T)
28             stationary = np.real(eigvecs[:, np.isclose(eigvals, 1)])
29             stationary = stationary[:, 0]
30             stationary /= stationary.sum()
31             return stationary
32
33         def sample_chain(self, transition_matrix):


                                                        18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


34             # Sample the first state from the stationary distribution
35             stationary_distribution = self.get_stationary_distribution(
           transition_matrix)
36             first_state = np.random.choice(self.k, p=stationary_distribution)
37
38             # Generate the sequence
39             sequence = [first_state]
40             for _ in range(1, self.l):
41                 current_state = sequence[-1]
42                 next_state = np.random.choice(self.k, p=transition_matrix[
           current_state])
43                 sequence.append(next_state)
44
45              return sequence
46
47         def __iter__(self):
48             while True:
49                 # Choose a transition matrix based on the prior
50                 matrix_index = np.random.choice(self.n, p=self.prior)
51                 chosen_matrix = self.transition_matrices[matrix_index]
52
53                   # Generate a sequence using the chosen transition matrix
54                   sequence = self.sample_chain(chosen_matrix)
55                   yield torch.tensor(sequence)
56
57 # Example usage:
58 # k = 3 (states), l = 10 (sequence length), n = 5 (transition matrices),
       seed = 42
59 dataset = MarkovChainDataset(k=3, l=10, n=5, seed=42)
60 iterator = iter(dataset)
61
62 # Get a sample sequence
63 sample_sequence = next(iterator)
64 print(sample_sequence)#e.g. tensor([8, 8, 9, 5, 3, 4, 8, 8])

                             Listing 1: Markov Mixtures Data Generating Process


     A.2    T RAINING D ETAILS : M ODEL & O PTIMIZATION

     Model Architecture We train a Transformer model with softmax attention (Vaswani et al., 2023)
     on sequence data generated by the DGP described above in Sec. A.1. We adapted code from
     nanoGPT (Karpathy, 2022), and implemented Rotational Positional Embedding (RoPE) (Su et al.,
     2023) instead of the default learning positional embedding, which significantly delayed the emer-
     gence of Bi-Inf. Further discussion about these results are in App. F.2. All matrix weights
                                                                                               p    are ini-
     tialized as N (0, 0.02) except residual projections which are initialized as N (0, 0.02/ 2 ∗ Nlayer ).
     All biases are initialized as zero. The embedding layers for Sec. F.2 are initialized from N (0, 0.02).
     We trained our models on NVIDIA A100 80 GB GPUs, running 5 experiments in parallel on the
     same GPU, and hence yielding a wallclock time of 3.5 hours.

     Tokenization We tokenize each state as a single token. Since we do not have task tokens or
     separator tokens, the model is trained on k tokens. The only exception is the transition encoding
     tokens experiments in in Sec. 4.3 and Fig. 8, where we include the last transition into all tokens.
     In this case, we define k 2 + k tokens where k 2 tokens are used to represent all transitions while k
     tokens are used only to indicate the first state, for which the last transition is not defined.

     Optimization We trained the model above using sequences from the DGP in Sec. A.1 with an
     autoregressive next-token prediction cross-entropy loss. We used the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov
     & Hutter, 2019) with learning rate 6 × 10−4 . We kept the estimated FLOPs constant to 1 × 1016 ,
     where we estimate the compute by 6DN (D denotes the number of tokens seen during training and
     N denotes the number of model parameters). This compute estimate is not proportional to wall time,
     especially since we operate with small models, but are kept for consistency when scaling the model


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


in order to normalize for faster optimization of bigger models (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al.,
2022; Bordelon et al., 2024). See App. C.2.3 for further details on scaling. Using a batch size of
128 resulted in a training of 107978 steps. Changing the batch size to 64 or 256 had no significant
changes to results to the best of our knowledge. We experimented with a learning rate warmup and
cooldown, sometimes pointed out to be crucial (Liu et al., 2019; Gotmare et al., 2018), but found no
significant difference.

A.3     E VALUATION D ETAILS

Our evaluation process involves two scenarios: In-Distribution (ID) and Out-Of-Distribution (OOD).
For ID evaluations, we select a transition matrix T ∗ from the set Ttrain , i.e., the set of transition
matrices used to sample sequences for training; for OOD evaluations, we sample a novel transition
matrix T ∗ , using again the Dirichlet prior over the row elements2 . We next define a Markov chain
using T ∗ and sample a sequence of length leval to feed as input to the trained model; unless mentioned
otherwise, leval = 400. The model then computes a probability distribution over possible next tokens
given this sequence as context. Repeating this process, we can collect pairs of last tokens from the
in-context sequence and the model’s predicted next token probabilities. This allows us to construct
an empirical transition matrix, T̂ , that denotes the model’s inferred state transitions based on
the provided context and the prior knowledge it may have internalized during training (e.g., Ttrain ).
To assess how accurate this predicted transition matrix is, we calculate the expected KL divergence
between T̂ and T ∗ by marginalizing over the stationary state distribution of T ∗ (denoted π ∗ ). Details
are below.

A.3.1    KL D IVERGENCE
We compute the Kullback-Leibler divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951) between a model or a
method’s predicted probabilities and the GT probabilities from a transition matrix rows to quantify
performance. We draw an evaluation transition matrix T ∗ from either the training set or the Dirichlet
prior respectively to quantify the ID and OOD performance. Given sequences drawn from T ∗ , we
estimate the transition matrix T̂ inferred by either a model checkpoint or one of the two retrieval
approaches proposed in Sec. 3.1 (which depend on the context). Given this T̂ , the average KL
divergence for a distribution of transition matrices T is then quantified by:
                                             *           k
                                                                               +
                    D
                                ∗
                                   E           X
                                                     ∗
                                                        X              T̂[i,j]
                      KL(T̂ ∥T )           =       π[i]     T̂[i,j] log ∗        .                 (8)
                                    T ∗ ∈T
                                                 i      j=1
                                                                       T[i,j]
                                                                                  T ∗ ∈T

A.3.2    E STIMATING T RANSITION M ATRICES
To estimate a transition matrix, we need sequences which end with all states in the state space, so
that every row of the estimates transition matrix T can be filled. Thus, for each context length,
we generate k sequences which end with the states 1 to k. The exact way the estimated transition
matrices T̂ for the model and the methods are computed is as follows.

        • T̂Model : We draw k sequences from T ∗ ending in states from 1 to k, controlling for the
          desired context length leval (= 400, unless mentioned otherwise). Given a sequence ending
          with a certain state, xt = i, we can evaluate the next state probability p(xt+1 = j|x1:t ) by
          a forward pass through the model and taking the softmax of the logits to obtain an estimate
          of the matrix element T̂ [i, j] for all i simultaneously. We iterate this process for all last
          states j ∈ [1, · · · k] to estimate the whole transition matrix.
        • T̂Uni-Ret : We use the same procedure to draw evaluation sequences as above, and use Eq. 2
          and Eq. 4 to estimate the next state probability.
        • T̂Bi-Ret : We use the same procedure to draw evaluation sequences as above, and use Eq. 3
          and Eq. 4 to estimate the next state probability.
    2
      We use the Dirichlet prior to define OOD Markov chains primarily for consistency with the training prior.
We do note that our preliminary experiments show that there are certain phases of training configuration wherein
the model generalizes to essentially arbitrary prior distributions (see App. G and Fig. 37).


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        • T̂Uni-Inf : We use equation Eq. 5 to estimate the transition matrix directly.
        • T̂Bi-Inf : We use equation Eq. 6 to estimate the transition matrix directly.

We repeat this process nrep = 30 times for statistical power. For ID evaluations, we choose T ∗ from
the training set Ttrain using the task prior pn defined in App. A.1. For OOD evaluations, we draw
each row of T ∗ directly from the Dirichlet distribution as seen in App. A.1.

A.3.3    B IGRAM U TILIZATION AND R ETRIEVAL P ROXIMITY
We quantify Bigram Utilization and Retrieval Proximity using the following procedure:

Bigram Utilization We quantify Bigram Utilization as described in the main text: we shuffle the
context and measure the increase in KL. We normalize this value by the stationary KL divergence
given by simply predicting the stationary distribution over the whole training set.
                                      *                                               +       !
                                                Shuffled
                                         KL(T̂model      ||T ∗ ) − KL(T̂model ||T ∗ )
            Utilization = clip                               ∗                          , 0, 1  (9)
                                                   KL(TStationary   ||T ∗ )
                                                                              Shuffled
where <> is an ensemble average over different samples of ID sequences, T̂model         is the model es-
                                                                                      ∗
timated transition matrix when we shuffle all states in the context randomly, and TStationary  describes
the transition matrix corresponding to the perfect stationary solution, i.e.,
                                           ∗
                                          TStationary[i,j] = πj∗ .                                       (10)

Proximity to a Retrieval Approach We quantify proximity to a retrieval approach by constructing
a set of transition matrices, denoted Trandom , with the same number of matrices as the training set. If
a model has no bias towards the training set, T̂model inferred from a sequence drawn from T ∗ (which
itself has no bias towards the training set) should be closer to Trandom with 50% chance, and thus
the expected value of the fraction in Eq. 11 should be unity, yielding null proximity. If the model
generates a sequence precisely from one of the training set matrices, the demoninator will vanish
yielding unity proximity.
                                          *                                     +        !
                                                  minT ∈Ttrain KL(T ||T̂model )
                  Proximity = clip          1−                                    , 0, 1           (11)
                                                 minT ∈Trandom KL(T ||T̂model )
<> is an ensemble average over different samples of ID sequences.

A.3.4    L INEAR I NTERPOLATION OF A LGORITHMS
Recalling the main text, we defined LIA as:

                        "                                        #2
                                         X                                      X
   LIA: arg min Ex1:t pmodel (x1:t ) −         wa ∗ pa (x1:t )        , where         wa = 1 & wa ≥ 0.   (12)
          wa ,a∈A
                                         a∈A                                    a∈A

where we are interested in extracting wa from the model output probabilities and individual algo-
rithm’s probabilities. The positivity constraint exists so that methods can not destructively compen-
sate. We used the squared error in probability space instead of, e.g. KL divergence, since we found
similar results when the fit was successful, while avoiding numerical subtleties.
In practice, we used 300 independent chains to optimize for LIA and find the method weights. To
use the method weights for OOD prediction, we simply apply:
                                                          X
                          LIA prediction: ppred (x1:t ) =   wa ∗ pa (x1:t )                (13)
                                                            a∈A

where x1:t is the context sequence.
We note that analyzing the deviation of model outputs to a single analytic solution has been explored
in a linear regression setting (Raventós et al., 2023). In contrast, LIA extracts the weights of each
member solution in a set of solutions using Eq. 7.


                                                    21
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             A.4           L EARNING CURVES

             Fig. 9 shows the learning curves (loss) and ID / OOD KL divergence through training. The data is
             the same as in Fig. 3, but shown as a plot.


              a)

kl_app.pdf
              C.E. Loss


                                                                                        N (data diversity)
                                                                                                      22=4
                                                                                                      23=8
              b)
                                                                                                      24=16
                          ID KL


                                                                                                      25=32
                                                                                                      26=64
                                                                                                     27=128
                                                                                                     28=256

              c)                                                                                     29=512
                                                                                                    210=1024
                          OOD KL


                                                                                                    211=2048


                                              Training Steps


             Figure 9: Online Training loss, ID KL divergence and OOD KL divergence We show the loss
             and the ID/OOD KL divergence. a) The next-token cross entropy loss averaged over the whole
             sequence. At high data diversity, we find a sudden loss drop with the formation of an induction
             head. After loss drops, sometimes we find a slower further decrease of the loss. We have shown
             that this dynamics is behind the transient nature of ICL. b) In-Distribution KL divergence. The ID
             KL divergence is monotonically decreasing as expected. This is a simple re-parametrization of the
             loss. c) Out-of-Distribution KL divergence. The OOD KL divergence simply rises for low data
             diversity (See Sec. D) while it suddenly drops for high data diversity. However, we find that this
             drop can be transient, as discussed in Sec. 2.1 and explained in Sec. 4.2.


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     M ORE A BOUT S OLUTIONS
B.1   I NFERENCE A PPROACHES ARE “BAYESIAN ” WITH A RELAXED PRIOR

The inference approaches, i.e., Uni-Inf and Bi-Inf, can be interpreted as a Bayesian inference
operation with a relaxed hypothesis space. This relaxed hypothesis space is the infinite dimensional
space of all transition matrices drawn from a Dirichlet distribution. This relaxed prior is in fact
required to set up the Uni-Inf and Bi-Inf transition matrices, since without it some matrix
elements will be strictly zeros for small context length (specifically, for unobserved transitions).
This interpretation thus sets a prior distribution so that all transition matrix elements are non-zero
even if a transition is not observed. This can be seen by setting the second term of the numerator
to zero in Eq. 6. The solution is still Bayesian, but only has a “memory” of the distribution of
transition matrices and not the distribution of the sequences itself (i.e., the precise transition matrices
seen during training). However, we expect the context dependent part of Eq. 5 and Eq. 6 to very
quickly dominate the estimate of T as we increase the context, hence yielding a frequentist solution.
Specifically, this can be seen in the distributional OOD example in Fig 37, where the context is
drawn from a distribution extremely far from the Dirichlet prior.

B.2   U NIGRAM P OSTERIOR S OLUTIONS

Other than the four algorithms discussed in the main text (see Sec. 3), we formalized two more
algorithms but found that they did not significantly contribute to the model explanation in the linear
combination of algorithms analysis. Thus we focused our analysis on the four solutions in the main
text. Nevertheless, we describe these two solutions and their properties here.
Unigram based Retrieval with Unigram Posterior. This algorithm is similar to Uni-Ret in
Sec. 3.1, however it draws the next token from the stationary distribution corresponding to the cho-
sen training set chain. This algorithm is expected to be less expressive than Uni-Ret, but we
nevertheless observe a small contribution from it (overlapping with Uni-Inf), especially at high
N . This is expected as a large number of N can easily span the full distribution of stationary distri-
butions from a Dirichlet distributed transition matrix.
Bigram based Retrieval with Unigram Posterior. This algorithm is similar to Bi-Ret in Sec. 3.1,
however it draws the next token from the stationary distribution corresponding to the chosen train-
ing set chain. Although the likelihood is sharper than unigram posterior retrieval, exactly the way
Bi-Ret’s likelihood is sharper than Uni-Ret, this algorithm is again not expressive due to the
nature of its output distribution.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C     P HENOMENOLOGY OF I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING : S UMMARY OF
      REPRODUCED RESULTS AND IMPROVED UNDERSTANDING

C.1   L IST OF PHENOMENA WE REPRODUCE

We first provide a short summary of ICL phenomenology we reproduce in this work.
1. Emergence of Non-Bayesian ICL with data diversity: Prior work exploring linear regression
   tasks shows that ICL performance drastically improves on OOD data with increase in data di-
   versity Raventós et al. (2023); Kirsch et al. (2022); Lu et al. (2024). In specific, Raventós et al.
   (2023) shows that there is a threshold needed for a “non-Bayesian” ICL to emerge. Here, we
   reproduce this data diversity threshold in We reproduce this phenomena as seen in Fig. 1 (a),
   Fig. 3 (a,c) and Fig. 27 (a). We show that this transition happens because of an “inference” ap-
   proach (see Sec. 3.2) becoming better than the available “retrieval” approach at this data diversity,
   echoing the results of Lu et al. (2024). Furthermore we show that in order to observe this transi-
   tion we need a certain optimization threshold to be reached before a Bayesian circuit (Bi-Ret)
   dominates. We also show that this threshold can further increase with more optimization – the
   transpose effect of the transient nature of ICL.
2. Formation of induction heads and variants: Induction heads are a specialized attention head
   that help infer next-token predictions in a context-conditioned manner Elhage et al. (2021); Ols-
   son et al. (2022); Reddy (2023); Edelman et al. (2024); Akyürek et al. (2024). Often, there is
   a sudden loss drop that correlates with induction head formation, and we find consistently find
   this drop occurs in our results with training time: this drop, in fact, is the cause of sudden tran-
   sition from unigram to bigram dependence in the model. We reproduce this phenomena as seen
   in Fig. 1 (b), Fig. 3 (a,c) and Fig. 27 (b). Interestingly, we find that data-diversity has almost
   no effect to the formation of this circuit. In App. K, we discuss that this transition is likely an
   “Optimization Limited Emergence” as opposed to the Bi-Inf vs. Bi-Ret transition which is
   mostly data limited.
3. Transient Nature of In-Context Learning: Recently researchers have found that ICL can be
   transient during pre-training Singh et al. (2023); Anand et al. (2024); Panwar et al. (2024). In this
   work we show that this happens when a solution performing better on the training set emerges
   later in optimization, likely due to its complexity. We reproduce this phenomena when there
   is enough data diversity to allow Bi-Inf to emerge before Bi-Ret is implemented, largely
   between N = 25 and N = 210 . This is demonstrated in Fig. 1 (c), Fig. 27 (c). See also Fig. 10)
   for a direct comparison with Singh et al. (2023).
4. Task Retrieval to Task Learning transition: Researchers have classified the operation of ICL
   as either “task retrieval” or “task learning” (Min et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2023). To this end, such
   papers explore effects of, e.g., shuffling next-token predictions in few-shot tasks and finding that
   one can still achieve almost similar performance as the scenario when exemplars are matched
   with the correct labels (Min et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2021). In our work, the unigram retrieval
   approach to ICL captures this phenomenon: since shuffling the tokens does not affect stationary
   distribution of a sequence, we can retrieve the relevant transition matrix regardless of the states
   being matched to next-state transitions with the correct probabilities. In other words, in context
   learning performance might not need correct labels if the circuitry to correctly use the question-
   answer relation has not developed during training. We show that this happens in our setting
   when the model is under-trained and thus the bigram circuit has not formed yet (see Fig. 5 a).
5. Early Ascent: Early ascent describes the phenomena where the error/risk on an ICL task initially
   increases before decreasing. This phenomena is empirically observed in Xie et al. (2021) while
   Lin & Lee (2024) suggests an explanation with the linear regression setting. In this work, we
   show that this phenomena can be reproduced when training with an intermediate data diversity
   N = 25 chains with sufficient optimization to enable Bi-Ret to dominate at small context
   length. In these settings, the model uses a context length dependent superposition of Bi-Ret
   and Uni-Inf, as seen in Fig. 1 (e), Fig. 27 (e).
6. Bounded Efficacy: Bounded efficacy of biased label ICL is observed empirically in Min et al.
   (2022) and coined as a term in Lin & Lee (2024). In this work, we show that this happens when
   the model’s algorithm is a superposition of a retrieval solution and an inference solution, as seen
   in Fig. 1 (f), Fig. 27 (f). In this case, at short context length the model mostly uses Uni-Ret,


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   and thus retrieving the right task even though the context is shuffled (biased labels) while at long
   context length it uses Bi-Inf, thus inferring a wrong transition matrix

C.2       I MPROVED UNDERSTANDING OF ICL: I NSIGHTS INTO T RANSIENCE AND EFFECTS OF
          MODEL SCALING

We highlight two specific insights on understanding ICL drawn from our experiments: the dynamics
of transience and the effects of model size scaling.

C.2.1                    T RANSIENT NATURE OF I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING
We reproduce the transient nature of ICL in Fig. 10, making a clear comparison to Singh et al.
(2023). Then, applying LIA (see Sec. 4.1), we find a precise dynamic that underlies transience: an
algorithm that performs better on the training set (and hence ID), but perhaps is more complex to
represent, slowly and steadily comes to dominate the algorithm that performs well OOD. This yields
severe performance degradation on OOD data and leads us to the conclusion: if the best solution on
the training set is one that does not generalize OOD, but is slowly learned due to learning signal
from the training loss, ICL can be transient. We also find an interesting memorization dynamic
underneath this result. Specifically, as we show in App. E, we can find neurons which are responsible
for encoding specific state transitions (i.e., they have low KL divergence with respect to transition
probabilities) in the Bi-Ret phase of learning in Fig. 10, but not in the Bi-Inf phase of learning!
           transient_nature_app.pdf
                                    a)    Singh et al. 2024                    b)             Singh et al. 2024
        Phenomena


                                                                                                                                                         Performance
                                    c)         Ours                            d)                  Ours
        Explanation Phenomena


                                                                                                                                                           Performance
                                                                                                    Peak OOD ICL
                                                                                                    performance                       s
                                                                                                                                   los
                                                 slow ID pe                                                                  nce
                                                                                    KL


                                                           rformance
                                KL


                                                                     ga   in                                             orma
                                                                                                                     erf
                                                                                                                   Dp
                                                                                                             OO
                                wmethod


                                                                                    wmethod


                                                                                                                                          Bi-Ret is the reason!



                                               Steps                                               Steps



Figure 10: Explaining the Transient Nature of In-Context Learning Our setup and LIA allows a
clear understanding of the transient nature of In-Context Learning. a,b) are panels from Singh et al.
(2023). a) shows that the training loss slowly decreases after a initial drop. b) shows that during
the slow drop of training loss the ICL accuracy decreases. c) We find the same phenomenology in
our experiments. The ID KL divergence, directly related to the model’s loss (see App. A.4), slowly
decreases after an initial drop. Our setup has two initial drops due to the formation of induction
heads. d) Just like b), we find a performance loss (KL increase) in the OOD evaluations during the
slow decrease of ID KL. We have a very clear explanation to this phenomena in the panels below.
The ID KL decreases as the Bi-Ret solution, optimal on the training set, slowly replaces Bi-Inf.
This change causes the OOD performance to degrade.


C.2.2                    ICL AND M ODEL -S IZE S CALING
Kirsch et al. (2022) analyzed Transformer models trained to meta-learn, i.e., to learn tasks in-context
(aka ICL). Therein, the authors run experiments by changing the model size and find that bigger
models can develop a “General Purpose ICL” solution. Here, we produce similar results, as shown in


                                                                                    25
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


variants.pdf
   Fig. 11. However, on further investigation, we found evidence that our results are confounded by the
    faster learning speed of bigger models (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Bordelon et al.,
    2024). We thus properly normalized the training by FLOPs, as shown in the next subsection,
    and found no model scale dependent emergence. We believe this finding also explains the results
    by Kirsch et al. (2022), i.e., we claim their results are confounded by lack of FLOPs-normalization!


     a)            Kirsch et al. 2024                    b)                  Ours


                                                         # Parameters


                                                                                                    KL
                                                                        N Training Chains



    Figure 11: Effect of Model Scaling? We find results similar to Kirsch et al. (2022), where we
    observe both a data diversity and model size threshold. a) Figure from Kirsch et al. (2022). b) OOD
    KL depending on model scale, when training for 10000 steps. However, we believe that these results
    are caused by keeping the number of steps constant and not FLOPs. See Sec. C.2.3.

    C.2.3   E FFECTS OF M ODEL -S IZE S CALING , R EVISITED
    As argued above in App. C.2.2, we found a model size threshold to ICL emergence. However, here
    we refute our own findings (and hence those of Kirsch et al. (2022)). To this end, we study the
    effects of model-size scaling at the algorithmic phase diagram level (see Sec. 3).
    Effects of equi-FLOPs training while varying model size. First, we train models with equal
    estimated FLOPs, calculated as 6DN (Hoffmann et al., 2022), where D is the number of to-
    kens passed through the model and N is the number of parameters in the model. This results
    in a much bigger wall-time for smaller models as they will run for vastly more steps. However,
    we proceed with this normalization for an analogy to real systems where training is bottlenecked
    by actual GPU compute unlike our smallest models. The resulting phase diagrams for widths of
    {32, 48, 64, 96, 128, 192, 256} are shown in Fig. 12. Generally, we find that Bi-Inf, the gener-
    alizing ICL solution, is in fact suppressed up to higher data diversity. This is well aligned with
    the intuition that bigger models have more memorization capacity and thus develop a memorizing
    solution more easily.
    Effects of equi-FLOPs training while varying model size. Next, we construct a diagram spanning
    data diversity and model width, and show it for different amount of FLOPs. This result is shown
    in Fig. 13. We now see that the effect of model size threshold for Bi-Inf is entirely removed! In
    fact, smaller models are more robust at developing the Bi-Inf solution given the same amount of
    FLOPs. This highlights that normalizing for FLOPs and steps can yield very different qualitative
    conclusions about the role of model scaling for ICL.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            width = 32    width = 48                   width = 64                       width = 96
    N Training Chains


                                            width = 128   width = 192                 width = 256


                                                                                                                  Uni-Ret            Uni-Inf
                                                                                                                  Bi-Ret             Bi-Inf


                                                                 Training Steps



Figure 12: Algorithmic Phase diagrams depending on model width We show algorithmic phase
diagrams as we increase the model’s embedding dimension from 32 to 256. Larger models seem to
enhance the memorization solutions.


                                                                         Training


                                                 0.22 %     1.06 %                    2.33 %                  24.41 %
                        N Training Chains


                                                                                                    Uni-Ret   Uni-Inf
                                                                        Model Width                 Bi-Ret    Bi-Inf


Figure 13: Algorithmic Phases spanning data diversity and model scale. We see the algorith-
mic phases of models depend on data diversity and their width. We find that smaller models form
Bi-Inf solution more efficiently, when properly normalizing for FLOPs.


                                                                           27
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        D    H IGH D IMENSIONAL D ISTANCES
        At first glance, it could be confusing why a retrieval approach would perform worse with more
        context on OOD chains. Both retrieval approaches discussed in the main paper (see Sec. 3) achieve a
        lower KL on ID sequences when given more context, as they can determine the transition matrix with
        higher precision, i.e., sharper likelihood. However, not only their performance on OOD sequences
        is worse in general, the KL becomes higher with more context. This can be confusing, as even
        for OOD sequences they are still choosing the “closest” transition matrix—a process that should
        become precise with increasing context.
        This counterintuitive result originates from properties of distances in higher dimensions. Fig. 14
        compares the KL of a freshly drawn T ∗ to the distributional mean and the nearest neighbor from a
        big set of draws, representing the training set. In 2 dimensions, as seen in Fig. 14 (a), it is clear that
        the nearest neighbor will be closer to a novel draw compared to the distributional mean. However
        in higher dimensions, it is increasingly the case that the distance to the distributional mean is closer
        than the nearest neighbor. We quantify this in Fig. 14 (b,c,d) using 30 different seeds. For different
        values of N , i.e., number of Markov chains in training data, we find consistently that as k increases,
        the KL to the distributional mean increases much more moderately than the nearest neighbor KL.
        This is the reason why a retrieval approach could perform worse with more context: as more context
        is added, a retrieval approach chooses a transition matrix with a higher precision. However, as
        seen from the tests in Fig. 14, choosing the nearest neighbor transition matrix is in fact worse than
        averaging over all transition matrices seen in training uniformly.


                                  a)                                        Training Set
high_d_dist.pdf                                                             Mean of Distribution


                                                                            Test Matrix

                                                                            Distance to Mean

                                                                            Distance to
                                                                            Nearest Neighbor

                                                                            k=10



                          b)                        c)                         d)
                                  N=25                      N=27                           N=29
                     KL


                                    k                           k                              k


        Figure 14: High Dimensional Distances We show that the distance of a point to the nearest
        neighbor within a set of points increases faster than the distance to the distributional mean as the
        dimension increases. (a) Schematic of the distances. In 2 dimensions, it is much more intuitive to
        think that the nearest neighbor of a set of points is closer than the distributional mean. (b, c, d)
        However, we show that in higher dimensions the nearest neighbor distance increases quickly while
        the distributional mean stays relatively constant. This relation is only mildly affected by changes in
        the number of elements in the nearest neighbor pooling set (n).


                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E     M ECHANISTIC A NALYSIS

In this section, we perform a preliminary mechanistic analysis to provide further evidence for the
claims from main paper. Specifically, we perform the following experiments.
• Reconstructing Markov Chains from MLP Neurons in Retrieval Phases. In Sec E.1, we
  attempt to directly retrieve the transition matrices of Markov chains used during training by ana-
  lyzing the MLP weights of the model, demonstrating successful retrieval in low diversity settings.
• Dynamics of Memorization. In Sec E.2, we quantify the extent to which individual neurons
  memorize transition matrices by measuring the minimum KL divergence between neuron outputs
  and in-distribution transitions across training, showing greater memorization in retrieval phases.
• Attention Maps: Aggregating Context Statistics. In Sec E.3, we further visualize attention
  maps to infer the specific algorithms implemented by the model during different training phases.
• Attention Maps’ Evolution Corroborates LIA. In Sec E.4, we investigate the evolution of
  attention maps throughout training, finding evidence for shifts in algorithms predicted by LIA.

E.1   R ECONSTRUCTING M ARKOV C HAINS FROM MLP N EURONS IN R ETRIEVAL P HASES

In Sec. 3.2, we claim that for certain experiment configurations, the model relies on a fuzzy re-
trieval approach to perform the finite mixture of Markov chains task. Specifically, this corresponds
to the phases wherein the model is involved in the Uni-Ret and Bi-Ret algorithms. To pro-
vide further evidence towards these algorithms explaining model behavior in these phases, we try
to reconstruct the Markov chains seen during training (denoted Ttrain in the main paper) from its
internals—specifically, from the MLP neurons. This analysis builds on the approach for knowledge
localization by Geva et al. (2021).
Model Setup. Based on our analysis in Sec. 4.1, we know that fully trained models with data di-
versities N = 22 and N = 26 should possess a mechanism that is behaviorally equivalent to the
Bi-Ret algorithm; meanwhile, for N = 211 , the model should implement something akin to the
Bi-Inf solution. Ideally, this implies, we can reconstruct the Markov transition matrices used to
generate training sequences directly from the model weights in the retrieval phases, whereas for
inference-based phases we should yield less accurate (if any) reconstructions. Note the reconstruc-
tions may still be feasible in the inference-based phases since the model generally arrives at them
after going through a retrieval-based phase.
Approach. In the following, we use the term neuron to refer to an entry in the second fully con-
nected layer of an MLP of the second (i.e., last) Transformer block. For each neuron, we compute
its next-token distribution (called neuron output) by applying the final LayerNorm, multiplying by
the Unembedding matrix, and applying a Softmax. We then randomly sample a Markov chain seen
during training, and compare the rows of its transition matrix to neuron outputs. We then select the
neurons with the smallest KL divergence to form a row in the “reconstructed matrix”.
Results. We provide visualizations of the reconstructions in Fig. 15. Note that the Markov chains
are redefined for different experiments, and hence the transition matrices targeted for reconstruction
are different for different experimental settings. To assess the accuracy of the reconstruction more
quantitatively, we also report the average KL divergence between the reconstructed and the targeted
ground truth transition matrix, averaging over 100 randomly selected rows from different transition
matrices.3 We also report the average KL between the stationary distributions of a randomnly sam-
pled chain’s transition matrix and its reconstruction (see Table 1). To contextualize these quantitative
experiments, we report two baselines as well.
1. Random model’s ability to reconstruct a transition matrix: We take a randomly initialized model
   and report the KL it achieves when trying to reconstruct a transition matrix.
2. Trained model’s ability to reconstruct an unseen transition matrix: We take a trained model,
   sample an unseen transition matrix, and analyze whether we can reconstruct such an unseen
   3
     Performing this analysis over all seen matrices can be prohibitively expensive, requiring analysis of as
many as 20480 transitions, and hence we focus on only 100 randomly-sampled transitions instead of all seen
matrices.


                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   matrix. Since a random model’s neurons are likely to be arbitrary in their weights, we believe
   this baseline offers a more meaningful comparison.


Figure 15: Reconstructing Markov Chains from Neuron Weights. We show that transitions from
Markov chains seen in training (left column) can be directly reconstructed from neuron weights
(right column). As expected, results are especially good in low data diversity settings (top row).
Reconstructions in the medium data-diversity are structurally sound (more or less the same tran-
sitions have highest probability mass as ground truth), but the precise magnitudes are off (middle
row). Meanwhile, the reconstructions for high data-diversity are quite poor, barely capturing the
structure of the transition matrix and almost uniformly spread magnitudes (bottom row).


                 Table 1: Reconstruction similarities for ID and OOD transitions.
                          Category          Avg KL Stationary KL
                          Random model         0.34            0.30
                          Seen chains
                          N = 22               0.09            0.09
                          N = 26               0.11            0.11
                          N = 211              0.17            0.17
                          Unseen chains
                          N = 22               0.17            0.16
                          N = 26               0.13            0.13
                          N = 211              0.18            0.22


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2     DYNAMICS OF M EMORIZATION

In the previous section, we posthoc analyze trained models to assess signatures of memorization.
We now perform this analysis over time, hence yielding the dynamics of memorization.
Approach. To demonstrate that neurons store transition matrices as part of retrieval solutions, we
evaluate their outputs for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution transitions. Specifically, we
repeat the analysis from previous section across time: we randomly select 100 in-distribution state
transitions from the training data (sampling chains and transitions with replacement) and compute
the outputs of all neurons in the second MLP layer. For each transition, we identify the neuron with
the minimum KL divergence from the target transition distribution and record the average minimum
KL across all 100 transitions. This process is repeated at every training checkpoint.
Baseline. As a baseline, we apply the same procedure to 100 unseen transitions. Additionally, we
create a second baseline by sampling 256 random vectors (matching the number of neurons in the
MLP layer) from Dirichlet distributions with α = 1k (k = 10). For each of these random vectors, we
compute the minimum KL divergence with the 100 in-distribution transitions. This baseline assesses
whether the observed neuron behaviors reflect structured learning of training-specific distributions
or merely random mappings.
Results. As shown in Fig. 16, neurons closely align with the specific transitions observed during
training in lower data diversity settings. This is especially the case when the model enters the
Bi-Ret phase, where the KL from seen transitions starts to substantially diverge from that of
unseen transitions. This pattern partially shows up for medium data diversity N = 26 , consistent
with LIA’s prediction that the model continues to perform bigram retrieval. However, for large data
diversity N = 211 , the neurons show greater dissimilarity to the training transitions compared to
random transitions, suggesting that the model is no longer memorizing transitions in this regime.

E.2.1    S UPERPOSITION OF NEURONS WITH INCREASE IN DATA DIVERSITY
In Sec. 3, we claim models in high data diversity scenarios rely on inference-based algorithms.
Consequently, as data-diversity increases and the ability to rely on a retrieval approach goes down,
we hypothesize that predicting the correct next-token distribution likely requires a complex linear
combination of neuron outputs. If this were not the case, we would need to scale the number of
neurons in proportion with data diversity to witness a retrieval based solution. To circumvent this,
the model then likely represents transitions across several neurons—akin to the superposition effects
discussed by, e.g., Henighan et al. (2023); Elhage et al. (2022).
Results. To quantitatively investigate the hypothesis, we analyze neuron activity across different
data diversity regimes. As shown in Fig 17a, the distribution of neuron activity is sharply concen-
trated in lower data diversity regimes and is smoother as data diversity increases (with the most
active distribution observed at data diversity 211 ). This supports our hypothesis that representations
are distributed across neurons. In panel (b), we examine linear combinations of neuron outputs and
their similarity to the ground truth transition. Neurons are first sorted by their GeLU activations
on in-distribution samples. For the k-th linear combination, the top k neuron outputs are aggre-
gated, weighted by their respective GeLU activations, and summed to form a composite output. Our
findings reveal that as data diversity increases, more neurons are required to reconstruct the ground
truth transition. This suggests that higher data diversity leads the model to adopt more distributed
representations, providing more support for our hypothesis.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                    Algorithm Probability
            KL Divergence


      (a)


                                                                                    Algorithm Probability
            KL Divergence


      (b)


                                                                                    Algorithm Probability
            KL Divergence


      (c)


                                         Training Step


Figure 16: Memorization as Training Progresses. Minimum KL of transitions from training and
neuron outputs, averaged across 100 randomly selected transitions. a) N = 22 . b) N = 26 . c)
N = 211 . Lower data diversity settings display much greater degree of similarity with training
transitions than higher data diversity settings.


                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                     Mean KL with GT Transition
     Mean GeLU Activation


                            Sorted Neuron Ranking                                 # of Neurons in Linear Comb.
                                     (a)                                                      (b)


Figure 17: Neural Activity Across Increasing Data Diversities. a) Sorted GeLU activations of
neurons, normalized by their maximum activation, are shown for increasing levels of data diversity.
In the Bi-Ret regime, significantly fewer neurons are active compared to the Bi-Inf regime.
b) Similarity of linear combinations of top neuron outputs to the ground truth transition. As data
diversity increases, a larger number of neurons are required to reconstruct the correct ground truth
transition.


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.3   ATTENTION M APS : I MPLEMENTING I NFERENCE APPROACHES

We visualize attention maps to provide further evidence for our algorithmic solutions. Specifically,
we train a model with a single attention head to avoid the ambiguity of choosing the most relevant
attention head for model behavior or an algorithm being implemented over different heads. While
in this section we focus on only a single value of data-diversity (N = 26 ), in App. E.4, we will show
the effects of data-diversity as a function of number of iterations, contextualizing the results in light
of different algorithmic phases to provide evidence in support of the validity of LIA.
Analysis of first layer’s attention head. Fig. 18 shows the first layer attention matrix when a
context sequence is input to the model. This model is trained using N = 26 training chains, and the
dominant algorithm changes from Uni-Inf to Bi-Inf to Bi-Ret.
 • Fig. 18 (a) shows that the attention map is uniform at model initialization.
 • Fig. 18 (b) shows the attention pattern at step 189, corresponding to a Uni-Inf solution. Each
   position attends to most tokens in the context, enabling a frequency count. This is consistent
   with the hypothesis that the model is simply computing the unigram distribution.
 • Fig. 18 (c) shows the attention pattern at step 855, corresponding to a Bi-Inf solution according
   to our analysis in Sec. 3. Each position attends almost only to the previous token. This is a
   characteristic of an induction head (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022; Edelman et al.,
   2024; Akyürek et al., 2024) for copying or gathering statistic from a context. This is consistent
   with the hypothesis that the model is performing a statistical induction to enable computation of
   the bigram statistics, as theoretically characterized by Edelman et al. (2024).
 • Fig. 18 (d) shows the attention pattern at step 110133, corresponding to a Bi-Ret solution. Each
   position now attends to the previous token and partially the current token. This is consistent with
   the hypothesis that this head is forwarding transitions to upper layers of the model, where upper
   layers are expected to count them.

Analysis of second layer’s attention head. Fig. 19 shows the second layer attention maps for the
same sequence input as in Fig. 18.
 • Fig. 19 (a) shows the uniform attention at initialization.
 • Fig. 19 (b) shows that the attention pattern for Uni-Inf is mostly uniform, again consistent
   with the hypothesis that it computes a histogram. Note that it is unclear as of yet how much of
   the histogram computation is delegated to layer 1 or 2.
 • Fig. 19 (c) shows that the second layer attention pattern for the model performing Bi-Inf is
   consistent with our hypothesis. We draw a red cross wherever the query state matches the previ-
   ous state of the key state. These red crosses precisely overlap where the attention pattern peaks:
   alongside the first layer head, this head combines to form the induction head as in Edelman et al.
   (2024).
 • Fig. 19 (d) Interestingly, the second layer attention again becomes uniform as the model drifts
   from Bi-Inf to Bi-Ret. This is again consistent with the hypothesis that the first layer at-
   tention presents transitions into the residual stream so that the second layer attention can count
   these transitions.
By visualizing the attention patterns, we find that the observed patterns are consistent with how we
would expect the 2 layer transformer model to implement the solutions in Sec. 3.1. While these
results are strongly suggesting our algorithms are implemented, causality experiments (Nanda et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023a; Hazineh et al., 2023) or attention patching could help confirm these results in
the future.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                a)            Init (step=0)            b)             Uni-Inf (step=189)


                                                       Query Index
                Query Index


                               Key Index                                  Key Index


                c)            Bi-Inf (step=855)        d)            Bi-Ret (step=110133)
                Query Index


                                                       Query Index


                               Key Index                                  Key Index


Figure 18: First layer attention maps from the N = 26 run. We visualize the first layer attention
maps from different points in the checkpoint. Each query is normalized by the maximal value present
in the row for visualization purposes. The title shows the number of training steps elapsed as well as
the dominant strategy at the checkpoint. a) The attention map at initialization. The attention pattern
is mostly uniform. b) The attention map during Uni-Inf. The attention map attends to most tokens
in the context. c) The attention map during Bi-Inf. The attention pattern clearly implements an
induction head, where the first layer attends to the previous token xt−1 and thus provides potential
to copy the current token xt given the same token as xt−1 appears. d) The attention map during
Bi-Ret. The attention pattern develops non-zero values for the diagonal entries. This suggests
that this head might be combining information from two subsequent tokens for it to be available for
the next layer to use. We trained a model with a single attention head to avoid the ambiguity of
choosing the most relevant attention head for model behavior or an algorithm being implemented
over different heads.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               a)            Init (step=0)            b)             Uni-Inf (step=189)


                                                      Query Index
               Query Index


                              Key Index                                  Key Index


               c)            Bi-Inf (step=855)        d)            Bi-Ret (step=110133)
               Query Index


                                                      Query Index


                              Key Index                                  Key Index


Figure 19: Second layer attention maps from the N = 26 run. We visualize the second layer
attention maps from different points in the checkpoint. Each query is normalized by the maximal
value present in the row for visualization purposes. The title shows the number of training steps
elapsed as well as the dominant strategy at the checkpoint. a) The attention map at initialization.
The attention pattern is mostly uniform. b) The attention map during Uni-Inf. The attention map
attends to most tokens in the context. c) The attention map during Bi-Inf. The red crosses are
locations where we find that the query state matches the previous state of the key state. We find
that the attention pattern clearly implements this logic. d) The attention map during Bi-Ret. The
attention pattern is again mostly uniform.


                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4     ATTENTION PATTERN E VOLUTION C ORROBORATES LIA

Our analysis of MLP neurons in App. E.1, E.2 helps provide mechanistic evidence in support of
retrieval-based approaches by demonstrating the memorization of Markov chains seen during train-
ing. Meanwhile, the analysis in App. E.3 demonstrates different attention head patterns that provide
evidence for unigram vs. bigram strategies, especially ones that finally aid an inference-based algo-
rithm. These analyses thus demonstrate the model possesses components necessary for implement-
ing four of our identified algorithms. We now contextualize these results by analyzing the evolution
of attention heads for different data-diversity values as the model makes its way through different
algorithmic phases, providing evidence for LIA’s validity. To this end, we first plot results at points
where the model is in different algorithmic phases, and then when the model is at the phase bound-
aries, where, if LIA is an accurate methodology, we would expect a simple linear interpolation of
attention maps from different phases would approximately match the actual attention head retrieved
from running a forward pass on the model.

E.4.1    VALIDATING LIA: ATTENTION HEADS IN DIFFERENT PHASES
Figs. 20, 21, and 22 show attention maps for different data diversities and different checkpoints—
specifically, checkpoints that correspond to particular phases in the learning dynamics. As we can
see, LIA effectively predicts algorithmic shifts in the model across training steps and data diversi-
ties. For N = 26 , the model transitions from an induction head configuration to a bigram statistical
pattern, consistent with the prediction that it relies on an inference-based solution (Fig. 21). Simi-
larly, for N = 22 , the model begins using bigram statistics only when in the bigram retrieval state
(Fig. 20). Finally, for N = 211 , the model demonstrates induction behavior in the bigram inference
state, which was not evident earlier (Fig. 22).

                                    Layer 1       Layer 2          Algorithm Probabilities
                     Query Index


              (a)
                     Query Index


               (b)
                     Query Index


              (c)


                                   Key Index     Key Index             Training Step


Figure 20: Attention Maps At Key Checkpoints Across Training For N = 22 . a) Training
checkpoint with maximal likelihood of Uni-Inf according to LIA. b) Training checkpoint with
maximal likelihood of Uni-Ret according to LIA. c) Training checkpoint with maximal likelihood
of Bi-Ret according to LIA.



                                                  37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Layer 1       Layer 2      Algorithm Probabilities


                   Query Index
             (a)


                   Query Index


             (b)
                   Query Index


             (c)


                                 Key Index     Key Index         Training Step


Figure 21: Attention Maps At Key Checkpoints Across Training For N = 26 . a) Training
checkpoint with maximal likelihood of Uni-Inf according to LIA. b) Training checkpoint with
maximal likelihood of Bi-Inf according to LIA. c) Training checkpoint with maximal likelihood
of Bi-Ret according to LIA. A red × indicates the position after previous occurrences of the
current tokens during Bi-Inf.

                                  Layer 1       Layer 2      Algorithm Probabilities
                   Query Index


             (a)
                   Query Index


             (b)


                                 Key Index     Key Index         Training Step


Figure 22: Attention Maps At Key Checkpoints Across Training For N = 211 . a) Training
checkpoint with maximal likelihood of Uni-Inf according to LIA. b) Training checkpoint with
maximal likelihood of Bi-Inf according to LIA. A red × indicates the position after previous
occurrences of the current tokens during Bi-Inf.


                                                38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4.2   VALIDATING LIA: ATTENTION HEADS AT PHASE BOUNDARIES
We next want to explore the model’s mechanisms when LIA predicts the dominant algorithm is
changing. Figs. 23, 24, and 25 show that the attention patterns during these states appear to inter-
polate between those observed when LIA predicts each algorithm as the most likely. For instance,
during the transition from Bi-Inf to Bi-Ret, the attention pattern resembles an interpolation of
the two.
To validate this observation, we manually interpolate between the attention patterns of the last two
algorithms the model implements during training across data regimes. As shown in Fig 26, the
interpolated attention maps are highly correlated with the ground truth attention maps, supporting
the hypothesis that the model transitions between the algorithms at this point.

                                   Layer 1      Layer 2          Algorithm Probabilities
                    Query Index


              (a)
                    Query Index


              (b)


                                  Key Index    Key Index             Training Step


Figure 23: Attention Maps At Predicted Transition Points For N = 22 . a) First predicted
transition checkpoint according to LIA. b) Second predicted transition checkpoint according to LIA.

                                   Layer 1      Layer 2          Algorithm Probabilities
                    Query Index


              (a)
                    Query Index


              (b)


                                  Key Index    Key Index             Training Step


Figure 24: Attention Maps At Predicted Transition Points For N = 26 . a) First predicted
transition checkpoint according to LIA. b) Second predicted transition checkpoint according to LIA.


                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                   Layer 1      Layer 2        Algorithm Probabilities


                    Query Index
              (a)


                                  Key Index    Key Index           Training Step


  Figure 25: Attention Maps At Predicted Transition Points Across Training For N = 211 .


      (a)                                         (b)


                                    (c)


Figure 26: Attention Interpolation. Manually interpolating between attention patterns correspond-
ing to different algorithms closely matches the attention patterns observed during training when
the model is predicted to be transitioning between these algorithms. This supports the hypothesis
that the model is implementing these two algorithms during training. (a) N = 22 (b) N = 26 (c)
N = 211


                                                40
           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           F      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

           F.1          A DDITIONAL PLOTS FROM THE MAIN EXPERIMENTS

           In this section, we visualize our main experiments in a more detailed manner. Specifically, we first
           show a high quality version of the subplots in Fig. 1. Next, we show 2D and 3D heatmaps of KL
           divergence on OOD vs ID sequences. Third, we show different slices our of experiment to show
           the evolution of the KL divergence as we change the optimization steps, data diversity, and context
           length independently. Finally, we directly evaluate the KL divergence between the model and each
           solution to verify our findings in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 4.1.

           F.1.1                H IGH Q UALITY V ERSION OF F IG . 1 SUBPLOTS

           We reproduce the small subplots of Fig. 1 here in Fig. 27. The color of every subplot corresponds to
           their algorithmic phases, except (d), where the color represents OOD KL divergence. Each plot has
           other fixed axes annotated. These 6 subplots corresponds to the 6 phenomena discussed in App. C.1.

                                a) Data Diversity Threshold             b) Induction Head Emergence        c) Transient Nature of ICL
                                 steps=best Context=400                     N=211 Context=400                N=27 Context=400
_app.pdf

                                                    Uni-Inf
                                                    Bi-Inf


                 d) Task Retrieval vs Task Learning                          e) Early Ascent                  f) Bounded Efficacy
                                          N=28                              N=25   steps=26357                N=210 steps=839
                 Context Size


                                                                                 Context Size                      Context Size

                                                              Uni-Ret          Bi-Ret            Uni-Inf      Bi-Inf



           Figure 27: Subplots of Figure 1 We reproduce the subplots of Figure 1 here for visibility. a) Data
           diversity threshold (Raventós et al., 2023); b) Emergence of induction heads (Edelman et al., 2024);
           c) Transient nature (Singh et al., 2023; Anand et al., 2024; Panwar et al., 2024); d) Task retrieval
           and task learning phases (Min et al., 2022); e) Early ascent of risk (Xie et al., 2021); and f) Bounded
           efficacy (Lin & Lee, 2024).

           Fig. 27 (a). We reproduce the data diversity threshold (Raventós et al., 2023), where a certain num-
           ber of task (here 26 ) is required for the model to learn an optimally OOD-generalizing ICL solution
           (Bi-Inf). Note that we selected the checkpoint with the best OOD performance throughout train-
           ing.
           Fig. 27 (b). We reproduce the emergence of induction heads (Edelman et al., 2024), where the model
           transitions from Uni-Inf to Bi-Inf.
           Fig. 27 (c). We reproduce the transient nature of ICL (Singh et al., 2023; Hoogland et al., 2024),
           where an OOD-generalizing solution (Bi-Inf) is learned, but disappears with more training as a
           retrieval solution (Bi-Ret) slowly replaces it.


                                                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fig. 27 (d). We reproduce the findings on Task Retrieval vs Task Learning. Please see App. C.1 for
a detailed discussion.
Fig. 27 (e). We reproduce the Early Ascent phenomena where a small amount of exemplars harm
the ICL performance. This has been observed in Xie et al. (2021). Our explanation is from the
phase diagram. The model implements Bi-Ret for small context length and this causes a wrong
task retrieval, as explained in App. D. This lost performance is recovered as the model performs
Uni-Inf when more context is given.
Fig. 27 (f). We reproduce bounded efficacy shown in (Min et al., 2022; Lin & Lee, 2024). When we
shuffle labels, an analogy to the perturbation in Min et al. (2022), the OOD KL first decreases since
it finds roughly the right algorithm via Uni-Ret. However with more context the Bi-Inf strategy
kicks in, and as the model learns transitions from a wrong context, the KL does not improve (and in
fact slightly increases). This is similar to the explanation of bounded efficacy in Lin & Lee (2024).

F.1.2   KL D IVERGENCE H EATMAPS
In Fig. 28, we show a 3D plot of the KL divergence for ID sequences and OOD sequences. We find
that the ID KL always decreases with less data diversity (since the task is simpler), more context
(more information), and with more training. OOD KL divergence, on the other hand, shows non-
monotonicity in two axes: steps and context. Especially, with more optimization steps the OOD
KL divergence shows up-down non-monotonicity (24 , similar to double descent), down-up non-
monotonicity (n = 26 , transient ICL) and up-down-up non-monotonicity (n = 23 , explained by 3
mechanisms).
                                     KL Divergence

                  In-Distribution                          Out-of-Distribution


Figure 28: 3D heatmap of ID/OOD KL divergence. (left) KL divergence on ID sequences. (right)
KL divergence on OOD sequences.

In Fig. 29 (a), we show the ID KL corresponding to Fig. 3. We find that the ID KL divergence drops
with the induction head formation for high data diversity, but drops earlier for lower data diversity.
We explain this by a Uni-Ret solution developing for small data diversity, as seen in Sec. 4.1.
Fig. 29 (b) is equivalent to Fig. 3 (a). Fig. 29 (c) shows the difference between the ID KL and the
OOD KL, clearly highlighting regions where the model follows a retrieval approach.
Fig. 30 illustrates the ID and OOD KL divergence depending on context size and optimization steps
for N = 24 , a low data diversity. Fig. 30 (a) shows that the ID KL divergence always decreases
with more context and more training. Fig. 30 (b) shows that unlike the ID KL, the OOD KL has
an ascent and decent in both optimization steps and context size. As we increase the concext size
at step=26357, we find that the KL divergence first rises before falling. This is precisely the early
ascent phenomenon Xie et al. (2021). Fig. 30 (c) shows the difference between the ID KL and the
OOD KL, clearly highlighting regions where the model follows a retrieval approach.
Fig. 31 illustrates the ID and OOD KL divergence depending on context size and optimization steps
for N = 26 , a medium data diversity. Fig. 31 (a) shows that the ID KL divergence again always
decreases with more context and more training. The only qualitative difference from Fig. 30 (a) is


                                                 42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
                         kl_heatmap_ns.png



      a)                           ID               b)                     OOD                 c)                 KL Difference


     N Training Chains


                                                    N Training Chains


                                                                                              N Training Chains


                                                                                                                                     KLOOD-KLID
                                               KL


                                                                                         KL
                              Training Steps                            Training Steps                             Training Steps


Figure 29: KL divergence depending on data diversity and optimization. a) ID KL divergence.
b) OODkl_heatmap_cs1.pdf
        KL divergence. c) Excess KL divergence on OOD sequences.

                                                                          N=24
      a)                           ID               b)                     OOD                  c)                KL Difference
     Context Size


                                                    Context Size


                                                                                               Context Size


                                                                                                                                      KLOOD-KLID
                                               KL


                                                                                         KL
                              Training Steps                            Training Steps                              Training Steps


Figure 30: KL divergence depending on context size and optimization steps for N = 24 . a) ID
KL divergence. b) OOD KL divergence. c) Excess KL divergence on OOD sequences.


that there is a much sharper evolution near step ∼ 6×102 . Fig. 31 (b) shows that the OOD KL shares
this drop, but only to increase KL again as the training proceeds. This is exactly the transient nature
of ICL revisited. Fig. 31 (c) shows the difference between the ID KL and the OOD KL, highlighting
regions kl_heatmap_cs2.pdf
         where the model follows a retrieval approach.

                                                                          N=26
     a)                            ID               b)                     OOD                  c)                KL Difference
     Context Size


                                                    Context Size


                                                                                              Context Size


                                                                                                                                     KLOOD-KLID
                                               KL


                                                                                         KL


                              Training Steps                            Training Steps                              Training Steps


Figure 31: KL divergence depending on context size and optimization steps for N = 26 . a) ID
KL divergence. b) OOD KL divergence. c) Excess KL divergence on OOD sequences.


F.1.3                    KL D IVERGENCE VS . {S TEPS , D IVERSITY, C ONTEXT}
Recall that we showed model’s ID and OOD KL divergence vs. N at 839 steps of training in Sec. 2.1
(Fig. 3 (b)). This specific value was used as a representative setting as it clearly demonstrates the data
diversity threshold “inference” solutions to emerge. For completeness, we now show similar plots
for different number of training steps Fig. 32. Additionally, we plot the four different solutions’ ID
and OOD KL divergence as well. We can clearly observe the transition from Uni-Inf to Bi-Inf
for high N , while, at low N , the ID and OOD KL divergences split because of retrieval solutions.
Recall also that we showed the model’s ID and OOD KL divergence for N = 27 in Sec. 2.1
(Fig. 3 (c)). This value was chosen as a representative setting since it clearly demonstrates the
transient nature of ICL. However, for completeness, we show similar plots for many different values
of in Fig. 33. Again, we plot the four different solutions’ ID and OOD KL divergence as well. We


                                                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   a)          step = 49       b)      step = 383        c)     step = 613


   KL


   d)        step = 2148        e)    step = 10294       f)   step = 107978               Uni-Ret
                                                                                           Bi-Ret
                                                                                          Uni-Inf
   KL


                                                                                           Bi-Inf


                   N                        N                        N



Figure 32: KL vs. N at fixed step. We show the effect of data diversity at fixed number of gradient
steps. We plot the model’s KL divergence with respect to ground truth for both ID and OOD chains
in black. We also plot the ID and OOD KL for each of the 4 solutions. Note that while the solutions’
expected KL divergence is, in theory, smooth, we estimate them numerically from Eq. 5 and Eq. 6
over 30 transition matrices, thus resulting in some noise. In each plot, the number of training steps
is fixed, as denoted in the title, and the KL divergence is averaged over a context size of 400 and
over 30 random transition matrices.


can clearly see the emergence of Bi-Inf and the transient nature driven by Uni-Ret or Bi-Ret.
Notable phenomena we observe are as follows.

        1. Panel (a): We observe a very robust Bi-Ret solution for N = 22 , a very low data diversity.
        2. Panel (c): We observe a highly non-monotonic OOD KL divergence for N = 25 , a medium
           data diversity.
        3. Panels (d, e): We observe at high data diversity N = 26 , 28 the transient nature of ICL.
           Specifically, the model first finds the Bi-Inf solution and then moves to a retrieval solu-
           tion which harms the OOD KL.
        4. Panel (f): At a very high data diversity (N = 211 ), we observe that the Bi-Ret solution
           does not show up (at least not noticeably) within the compute budget.

We show both the ID and OOD KL divergence of the model and different solutions at fixed N , step,
and across context length in Fig. 34. Each subplot is marked on the phase diagram. We find that,
as expected, the model’s KL divergence, both ID and OOD, follows that of the dominant solution in
each phase. Notably, the agreement with Bi-Inf is very strong.


                                                  44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     a)                   N=22             b)        N=24             c)           N=25
   KL


    d)                    N=26             e)        N=28              f)          N=211                    Uni-Ret
                                                                                                             Bi-Ret
                                                                                                             Uni-Inf
   KL


                                                                                                              Bi-Inf


                       Training Steps           Training Steps                  Training Steps



Figure 33: KL vs. Steps at fixed N . We show the effect of optimization at each fixed data diversity,
N . We plot the model’s KL divergence with respect to ground truth for both ID and OOD chains in
black. We also plot the ID and OOD KL for each of the 4 solutions in horizontal colored lines. In
each plot, the data diversity N is fixed, as denoted in the title, and the KL divergence is averaged
over a context size of 400 and over 30 random transition matrices.


                                                            N = 27 step = 280                    N = 210 step = 2148
   N Training Chains


                                                KL


                          Training Steps
                                                            N = 23 step = 1147                   N = 22 step = 107978

                       Uni-Ret
                        Bi-Ret
                       Uni-Inf
                                                KL


                        Bi-Inf

                                                                 Context Size                      Context Size


Figure 34: KL vs. context size at fixed N and step. We show the effect of context size at fixed data
diversity N and gradient steps. We plot the model’s KL divergence with respect to ground truth for
both ID and OOD chains. We also plot the ID and OOD KL for each of the 4 solutions. As explained
in Fig. 32, the solution KLs have a noise contribution. In each plot, the data diversity N and the
number of training steps are fixed, as denoted in the title, and the KL divergence is averaged over 30
random transition matrices. In the left side of the figure, we show where in the phase diagram each
of these plots live in.


                                                             45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.1.4   KL DIVERGENCE BETWEEN THE MODEL AND SOLUTIONS
In Fig. 35, we show the KL divergence between the algorithmic solutions          and the model es-
timated transition matrix. First, we find that KL T̂Model ||T̂Solution quantified in Fig. 5 and

KL T̂Solution ||T̂Model in Fig. 35 are very similar. As discussed in Sec. 3.2, we again find that all
four solutions indeed show a small KL divergence from the model exactly where we expect them
to from Fig. 5 (c). These findings further confirms our findings in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 4.1 are indeed
                                                              ̂
                                                          KL(TUni-Ret    ̂     )
accurate characterizations of the model’s behavior.                   | TModel


                                             Uni-Ret                               Bi-Ret



                         N Training Chains



                                             Uni-Inf                               Bi-Inf


                                                                                            KL
                                                       Training Steps



Figure 35: KL divergence between algorithmic solutions and the model. We quantify the KL
divergence of each algorithmic solution from the model estimate of the transition matrix, across
optimization steps and data diversity. We find nearly identical low KL regions as in Fig. 5 (d). The
axes are same as in Fig. 5.


                                                             46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   A RCHITECTURE C HANGES

Similarly to our analysis in Sec. 4.3, we analyze the effect of different architectural changes to the
algorithmic phase diagram. These results are shown in Fig. 36.

            a)                Learned Pos. Embed.      b)     1 Head      c)   16 Heads
          N Training Chains


                                  Training Steps
                                                       d)   rMLP = 0.25   e)   rMLP = 16


                                  Uni-Ret    Uni-Inf
                                  Bi-Ret     Bi-Inf


Figure 36: Algorithmic Phase diagrams for different architectures. Results with a Transformer
using a) learned positional embeddings; b) a single attention head; c) using 16 attention heads; d)
using an MLP fan-out ratio of 0.25; and e) using an MLP fan-out ratio of 16.

Fig. 36 (a) shows results when using a learned positional embedding. A learned positional embed-
ding significantly biases the learning dynamics towards the Uni-Ret algorithm. We suspect that
this is because the formation of a precise induction head for Bi-Ret (See App. E.3) is more difficult
with learned positional embeddings without passing through an intermediate Uni-Ret solution. As
a result, the observed data diversity threshold is increased from 26 to 28 .
Fig. 36 (b,c) shows the phase diagram when using, respectively, a single head and 16 heads. We
originally expected that more heads would be able to support more solutions simultaneously and a
single head will yield sharper transitions. However this did not result in a significant phase diagram
change. We speculate that multiple algorithms can exist within one head by dividing up the residual
stream’s subspace (similar to the argument by Elhage et al. (2021); Olsson et al. (2022)). An inter-
esting future direction is to mechanistically analyze the checkpoints after the emergence of Bi-Inf
but where Bi-Ret dominated to find out if the Bi-Inf circuit still exists but is unused.
Fig. 36 (d,e) shows the phase diagram when changing the MLP fan-out ratio (from the default of 4)
to 0.25 or 16. Our prior hypothesis was that MLP layers carry memorization (Geva et al., 2021). This
experiment validated our findings. Reducing the MLP layers hidden dimension width significantly
suppressed Uni-Ret and Bi-Ret, resulting in Bi-Inf available with 25 chains only. On the
other hand, increasing the hidden dimension to 16 caused the run with N = 26 to never show
Bi-Inf, as the “memorizing” retrieval solutions are promoted.


                                                               47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    G ENERALIZATION TO CHAINS FROM A DIFFERENT PRIOR
In the main experiments, we generally drew the test matrix T ∗ from the same Dirichlet prior gener-
ating the training set. As discussed in App. A.1 and App. D, this evaluation is already OOD, since
the Dirichlet prior is only shared between the matrices and not the sequences themselves. However,
here we verify that our OOD-generalizing solutions can indeed go far out of their training distribu-
tions. In particular, we design a context which is highly unlikely to be drawn from a Dirichlet prior
and evaluate different model checkpoints.
Fig. 37 illustrates these results. We fed in a context consisting of a repeating pattern of 0, 1, 2 and
we generate a sequence from the model. We generate the sequence with zero temperature, i.e., select
the state with the highest predicted probability. We visualize the next token probability as a pixel
value intensities. For a model implementing mostly the Uni-Inf strategy, we find, as expected, a
stationary distribution not depending on the last token, and thus not evolving. However, when the
model is in the Bi-Inf phase, we find that the model can learn in-context to generate this totally
out-of-distribution chain. Finally, when the model is implementing mostly Bi-Ret, the model
implements a completely different chain, which is the training set chain having the most similar
transitions. The model now generates a different sequence. We find that the non-linear evolution of
accuracy is reproduced here again, as we see the next token accuracy to rise to 100% when Bi-Inf
is implemented only to fall back to 1/3 when Bi-Ret takes over.


                                                  T=0.0 Generations
                                        Context            Probabilities

                Uni-Inf                                                         Accuracy:
                            State


             (step=204)                                                          33.3%


                Bi-Inf                                                          Accuracy:
                            State


             (step=839)                                                          100%


               Bi-Ret                                                           Accuracy:
                            State


           (step=107978)                                                         33.3%



                                                  Context

Figure 37: Testing a model’s ability to generalize far out of the training distribution. We feed
a completely out of distribution sequence to the model that consists of repeats of 0, 1, 2. The left
side shows the sequence and the right side shows the output probabilities for different settings. We
generate tokens with temperature T=0.0, and continue to show next-token probabilities conditioned
on the generated tokens. (Top) We find that the model in the Uni-Inf dominant phase indeed
implements a unigram solution. (Middle) We find that the model in the Bi-Inf dominant phase
learns the transition pattern in the context successfully to generate an adequate sequence. The accu-
racy rises accordingly. (Bottom) As the pre-training phase is continued, the Bi-Inf solution gets
wiped out by the Bi-Ret solution as seen in Sec. 4.1. We find that the model now selects the best
Markov chain in the training data, and thus generates a different sequence, resulting in an accuracy
drop.


                                                  48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING OF M ARKOV C HAINS IN R EAL L ARGE
     L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Real language models trained on complex patterns including human languages, code and structured
documents are known to acquire general in context learning abilities (Brown et al., 2020). Thus, we
expect these models to deliver non-trivial performance at learning to continue a Markov sequence
given in-context even though they haven’t been explicitly trained on this task. Furthermore, Wei et al.
(2023) showed that larger language models “do in-context learning differently”, rougly speaking, in
a more context-dependent way. To this end (and also motivated by curiosity) we evaluate the ICL
ability of Llama-3.1 (Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024) across model scales: 8B, 70B and
405B. Since LLMs are known to be prompt sensitive (Sclar et al., 2024), we test three different
prompts which differ by how precisely the Markovian nature of the sequence is described. We use
NNsight and NDIF (Fiotto-Kaufman et al., 2024) to run these experiments.
Fig. 38 illustrates the results of inputting a sequence from a Markov chain as tokens of digits from
0 to 9. More precisely, we drew a transition matrix T ∗ from the DGP in App. A.1, and generated
300 sequences to collect next token probabilities to construct T̂ as in App. A.3. We used a separator
token, “,”, and we constrained the outputs to the digit tokens.
In Fig. 38 (left) we used a simple prompt without mentioning “Markov process”. Interestingly, we
found a performance in between Uni-Inf and Bi-Inf, demonstrating Llama is able to model
the sequence better than purely predicting a random probability from the stationary distribution
(histogram), without even being instructed that the sequence is Markovian. Furthermore, bigger
models (405B > 70B > 8B) are able to model the Markov sequence better (lower KL).
Fig. 38 (center, right) respectively used a prompt which mentions the process is Markovian and
a prompt which additionally and explicitly states that next state probabilities only depends on the
last state. We find a significant KL divergence improvement on the 70B model when adding these
specifications, revealing that LLMs can, to some extent parse a natural language instruction and
reflect it into its sequence modeling process.

                               Prompt 1:                           Prompt 2:                            Prompt 3:
                    “Continue the given sequence of   “Continue the given sequence of      “Continue the given sequence of
                      digits between 0 and 9. The        digits between 0 and 9. The          digits between 0 and 9. The
                       sequence is as follows:\n”      sequence comes from a Markov         sequence comes from a Markov
                                                         process. The sequence is as         process, so it only depends on
                                                                  follows:\n”              the last state. The sequence is as
                                                                                                       follows:\n”
               KL


                            Context Size                      Context Size                         Context Size

                                                             Uni-Inf              Bi-Inf

                                             Llama-3.1-8B              Llama-3.1-70B             Llama-3.1-405B


Figure 38: In-context learning Markov chains on Llama-3.1. We input sequences generated from
the DGP in App. A.1 into LLama-3.1 8B, 70B and 405B and measure the KL divergence on the
next state probability between the model predictions and the ground truth transition matrix. Each
state is tokenized into a single token, from “0” to “9”. The tokens are separated by the “,” token to
avoid the tokenizer merging states together. The output space was constrained to the state tokens.
(left) Prompt 1, not explicitly stating the Markovian nature of the sequence. (center) Prompt 2,
stating the Markovian nature of the sequence. (right) Prompt 3, additionally stating that the next
state probability will only depend on the last state.

An interesting future direction would be to reverse engineer what algorithmic solutions are imple-
mented by these models to generate the next state, e.g. by decomposing the logit outputs as in
Sec. 4.1.



                                                                49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     F URTHER VALIDATION OF LIA

I.1   D OES LIA FIT THE MODEL WELL ?

Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 showed that the linear interpolation of algorithms from Sec. 3 (i.e., LIA) achieves
similar performance as the trained model: the empirical transition matrix identified from either
systems yields similar ID KL, and in fact LIA predicts the trained model’s OOD performance fairly
accurately. Here, we show that in fact both the trained model and LIA produce similar predictions
by comparing them to each other.


                                      LIA L2 Residual


                                                                        L2
Figure 39: Residual L2 of LIA fit. We show the residual probability space L2 (the argument of
arg min in Eq. 7) for the LIA fit shown in Fig. 6. Note the color-scale, which is much smaller than
the order of magnitude of probability vectors, which is unity.


             a)    KL ( Model || LIA )                 b)   KL ( LIA || Model )


                                                                                         KL


Figure 40: KL divergence between the model and LIA fit. (Left) KL divergence between model
predictions and LIA across data diversity and optimization. (Right) KL divergence between LIA
and model predictions across data diversity and optimization.


L2 distance between model and LIA predictions. The L2 or Euclidean distance between the
trained model and LIA predictions defines the optimization problem used to define weights in LIA
(see the argument of arg min in Eq. 7). To demonstrate LIA identifies an interpolation of algo-
rithms that in fact does minimize this distance, we report the residual (i.e., excess error) from this
optimization problem. Results are shown in Fig. 39 across different settings of data diversity and
optimization. We clearly see that the residual is consistently low across all settings—specifically,
on the order of 10−3 . Note that since the target of this optimization problem is a probability vector
(i.e., its elements sum to 1), this low order of an error clearly demonstrates LIA solves the problem
almost perfectly in most settings. Moreover, we note that the landscape of this residual error is quite
intriguing: the slightly high error (which is still very low in an absolute sense; around ∼ 0.005)
occurs at the phase boundaries! This suggest that the models very slightly deviate from a linear
combination during transitions, but the nonlinear effects are relatively ignorable.


                                                  50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


KL between model and LIA predictions. We also show the KL divergence of the model predic-
tions to the ones predicted by LIA (and vice-versa) in Fig. 40. While Fig. 6 is already suggestive that
LIA fits the model’s predictions accurately, these KL divergence plots give yet another quantitative
validation of the results alongside our L2 / Euclidean distance plots in Fig. 39. In particular, we
again find the KL is very low in regions we ascribed to precise phases in our analysis in Sec. 3;
meanwhile, the phase boundaries have some (very minimal) deviation from linearity.

I.2   ROBUSTNESS OF LIA TO ARBITRARY ALGORITHMS

Does LIA give rises to phases even when the solutions are arbitrary? In Sec. 4.1, we used
Linear Interpolation of Algorithms (LIA) to demonstrate that we can decompose the model’s next
token probability into a linear combination of the probability predicted from the four algorithms.
Here we conduct two simple experiments to assess the robustness of these findings. In Fig. 41 we
perform LIA for the(a):same
                        Frozenmodel
                               Dirichlet
                                      usedsampled
                                             in Fig.transition matrix
                                                      6 (a), but with 4 arbitrary solutions, described in the
figure caption. We(b):
                     doFrozen   Dirichlet
                          not see         sampled stationary
                                  the algorithmic              distribution
                                                       phases seen   in Fig. 6 (a) and each solution’s weight
                   (c): 0.2 probability
remains largely constant    throughoutonmodel
                                            every training.
                                                  even states
                      (d): 1.0 probability on the first state
                (a)                         (b)                   (c)                      (d)


                                                                                                       w
Figure 41: Applying LIA with 4 arbitrary solutions LIA is optimized with 4 arbitrarily chosen
solutions (a) weight for the first solution, which outputs a next state probability using a frozen
transition matrix drawn from the Dirichlet prior. (b) weight for the second solution, which outputs
a next state probability using a frozen stationary distribution drawn from the Dirichlet distribution.
(c) weight for the third solution, which outputs a 0.2 probability for even states and 0.0 probability
for odd states. (d) weight for the fourth solution which outputs a 1.0 probability for state 0 and 0.0
otherwise.

Are the same algorithmic phases extracted from LIA when arbitrary solutions are mixed with
algorithmic solutions? In Fig. 42, we combine the 4 arbitrary solution with the 4 solutions de-
scribed in the(a):
                main    text. We find
                   Uni-Ret          (e):that the Dirichlet
                                         Frozen  4 algorithmic
                                                            sampled solutions
                                                                       transitionindeed
                                                                                  matrix show high weight in the
same way as (b):
               in Fig.
                   Bi-Ret6 (a). The (f):
                                     4 arbitrary   solutions
                                         Frozen Dirichlet       get assigned
                                                           sampled    stationaryadistribution
                                                                                   near zero weight everywhere.
These experiments      in Fig. 41 and
              (c): Uni-Inf          (g):Fig. 42 confirms
                                         0.2 probability on that
                                                              everyLIA
                                                                     evenextract
                                                                           states meaningful phases only when
              (d): Bi-Inf
the solutions are  indeed relevant(h):   1.0 probability
                                     to the  task and theonmodel.
                                                              the first state

                (a)                         (b)                   (c)                     (d)
                                                                                                       w


                (e)                         (f)                   (g)                      (h)
                                                                                                       w


Figure 42: Applying LIA with the 4 algorithmic solutions and 4 arbitrary solutions (a) weight
for Uni-Ret. (b) weight for Bi-Ret. (c) weight for Uni-Inf. (d) weight for Bi-Inf. (e, f, g,
h) weights corresponding to, respectively, solutions (a, b, c, d) in Fig. 41.



                                                          51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


J   I MPORTANCE OF SEQUENCE - SPACE STRUCTURE TO STUDY
    TRANSFORMERS

In this work, we focused on a sequence modeling task consisting of a mixture of Markov chains. We
argue that there are unique properties of sequence modeling which makes phenomena qualitatively
different. Sequence modeling tasks involve the integration of information embedded in individual
tokens and their positions. In order to compose this information, a sequence-space computational
structure should be learned. This is not the case for many synthetic tasks used to study transformers.
More specifically, many ICL studies focus on Linear regression (Garg et al., 2023; Akyürek et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023c; Von Oswald et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023; Raventós et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023b; Lu et al., 2024; Lin & Lee, 2024), where exemplars are presented in pairs as (xi , yi ).
Following (Garg et al., 2023), many works do not use a tokenized representation. Thus, the only
spatial computational structure needed to be implemented is a fixed template which recognizes pairs
of (xi , yi ) from the context. Furthermore, a recent paper (Tong & Pehlevan, 2024) showed that multi
layer perceptrons (MLPs) can learn linear regression and classification tasks in-context, sometimes
competitively to transformers.
Motivated by a lack of language structure in synthetic studies of ICL, some recent studies have begun
analyzing transformers trained on probabilistic formal languages (Edelman et al., 2024; Akyürek
et al., 2024). In such a setting, Edelman et al. (2024) found statistical induction heads which is a
probabilistic variant of a copying induction head (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022). Akyürek
et al. (2024) study in-context learning of deterministic finite automata (DFA), and find n-gram heads
which perform copying similarly to induction heads but based on n-grams. These studies showed
that studying ICL on formal languages helps develop rich training dynamics (Edelman et al., 2024)
and a complex relation to model architectures (Akyürek et al., 2024). It is also the case that, to
the best of our knowledge, there does not exist a study equivalent to Tong & Pehlevan (2024) for
linear regression but applied to formal languages. We suspect MLPs will struggle to learn formal
languages requiring a dynamic spatial computational structure.
The unigram solutions vs bigram solutions discussed in our work highlights that even the simplest
form of spatial computational structure, counting states vs. counting pairs (transitions), introducing a
new axis of analysis: the circuit complexity of solutions. In our work, the bigram solutions, Bi-Ret
and Bi-Inf, arguably need a more complex circuit structure. The attention maps visualized in
Fig. 18 and Fig. 19 support this argument, though there is substantial work to be done to confirm this
intuition (e.g., by properly defining circuit complexity). Nevertheless, well aligned to this intuition,
both bigram solutions always follow after a unigram solution in our experiments.
In Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3, we demonstrated how a varying circuit complexity can result in significantly
different learning time for different algorithms. We have also demonstrated that different learning
speeds can cause an algorithm to be hidden or suppressed (Fig. 8 (a,c)). Additionally, we have
demonstrated that a change of tokenization, which does not change the task but only alters how
the task is presented to the model, can remove a solution from emerging by closing the circuit
complexity gap.
Overall, we believe that studying in-context learning with setups requiring non-trivial sequence-
space computation, e.g., formal languages, will be crucial to advance our understanding of ICL in
LLMs at scale.


                                                  52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K    D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
Distributional Adaptation An interesting phenomenon observed in Sec. 4.1, Fig. 6 is that the
predicted OOD KL is always slightly higher (worse) than the model’s actual performance. This
signifies that our algorithmic decomposition does not explain the model’s behavior perfectly, and
the model is likely applying a combination of solutions slightly better fit for sequences it has not
observed. A possible future direction would be to understand how such behavior is possible. We
lay down a hypothesis: Bi-Ret emerges on top of the Bi-Inf solution, but there is a circuit
triggering this solution preferentially for ID sequences.

Parallel or Interacting Circuit Evolution? An interesting question raised by our analysis is
whether different algorithms can evolve in parallel or not. This question is especially motivated
by the extremely stable emergence of the Bi-Inf solution with respect to optimization steps. As
seen in Fig. 6, the Bi-Inf solution emerges very stably even for data diversity levels different by
25 . One natural question is whether it could emerge with data diversity under 26 , but is just not ob-
served due to Uni-Ret and Bi-Ret being found first. Another question with a slightly different
implication is whether the circuit supporting the solution did in fact already emerge, yet is not used.
Thus, an explicit and interesting future direction is to try to ablate the Bi-Ret solution (via careful
design, which we do not know yet) and see if Bi-Inf can be observed from data diversity level it
is not observed in the current experiment.

Optimization Limited Emergence vs Data Limited Emergence We find many algorithmic tran-
sitions in our study. The formation of an induction head (Fig. 1 (b)) and the rise of Bi-Ret
(Sec. 4.1) are two of them. Here, we argue that these transitions are different in nature. If one
carefully looks at Fig. 6, one can notice (as discussed in the paragraph above) that the emergence
of Bi-Inf is largely independent of data diversity. We thus suggest this emergence is only limited
by optimization. However, the emergence of Bi-Ret is limited by data diversity (usually limited
means that a higher data diversity is needed, however for Bi-Ret, a lower data diversity makes it
easier to emerge). We thus propose a classification of emergence of mechanisms into two classes:
one driven by the introduction of sufficient compute and another driven by a sufficient data diversity.

L    C ODE AVAILABILITY
All code used to run the experiments and analysis are available at
https://github.com/cfpark00/markov-mixtures.


                                                  53
