Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(M IS )F ITTING : A S URVEY OF S CALING L AWS
 Margaret Li*, Sneha Kudugunta*, Luke Zettlemoyer
 {margsli,snehark}@cs.washington.edu



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Modern foundation models rely heavily on using scaling laws to guide crucial
             training decisions. Researchers often extrapolate the optimal architecture and
             hyper parameters settings from smaller training runs by describing the relationship
             between, loss, or task performance, and scale. All components of this process vary,
             from the specific equation being fit, to the training setup, to the optimization method.
             Each of these factors may affect the fitted law, and therefore, the conclusions of
             a given study. We discuss discrepancies in the conclusions that several prior
             works reach, on questions such as the optimal token to parameter ratio. We
             augment this discussion with our own analysis of the critical impact that changes in
             specific details may effect in a scaling study, and the resulting altered conclusions.
             Additionally, we survey over 50 papers that study scaling trends: while 45 of these
             papers quantify these trends using a power law, most under-report crucial details
             needed to reproduce their findings. To mitigate this, we we propose a checklist for
             authors to consider while contributing to scaling law research.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Training at the scale seen in recent large foundation models (Dubey et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2023;
Reid et al., 2024) is an expensive and uncertain process. Given the infeasibility of hyperparameter
tuning multi-billion parameter models, researchers extrapolate the optimal training setup from
smaller training runs. More precisely, scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020) are used to study many
different aspects of model scaling. Scaling laws can guide targets for increasing dataset size and
model size in pursuit of desired accuracy and latency for a specific deployment scenario, study
architectural improvements, determine optimal hyperparameters and assist in model debugging.

Scaling laws are often characterized as power Table 1: We provide a summary of the papers sur-
laws between the loss and size of the model and veyed, highlighting the reproducibility challenges
dataset, and are seen in several variations (Sec- endemic to scaling law papers.
tion 2). These laws are found empirically by
training models across a few orders of magni- # Papers...
tude in model size and dataset size, and fitting     Surveyed                                        51
the loss of these models to a proposed scaling       With a quantified scaling law                   45
law. Each component of this process varies in        With a description of training setup            40
the reported literature, from the specific equa- With a definition of equation variables             36
tion being fit, to the training setup, and the op- With a description of evaluation                  29
timization method, as well as specific details for   With a description of curve fitting             28
selecting checkpoints, counting parameters and       With analysis code                              19
the objective loss optimized during fitting.         With metric scores or checkpoints provided 17
Changes to this setup can lead to significant
changes to the results, and therefore completely
different conclusion to the study. For example, Kaplan et al. (2020) studied the optimal allocation
of compute budget, and found that dataset size should be scaled more slowly than model size
(D ∝ N 0.74 , D is dataset size, N is model size). Later, Hoffmann et al. (2022) contradicted this
finding, showing that model size and dataset size should be scaled roughly equally for optimal scaling.
They highlight the differences in setup which lead to them showing that large models should be
    *
        Equal contribution


                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 S CALING L AW R EPRODUCILIBILITY C HECKLIST
 Scaling Law     Training Setup (§4)   Data Collection(§5) Fitting Algorithm (§6)
 Hypothesis (§3) • # of models         • Checkpoint Open   • Objective (Loss)
 • Form              • Model size range            Sourcing              • Algorithm
 • Variables (Input) • Dataset source & size     • # Checkpoints per     • Optimization
 • Parameters                                      Power Law               Hyperparameters
                    • Parameter/ FLOP Count
 • Derivation and     Calculation                • Evaluation Dataset & • Optimization Initialization
   Motivation                                      Metric
                    • Hyperparameter Choice                             • Data Usage Coverage
 • Assumptions                                   • Metric Modification
                    • Other Settings               & Code               • Validation of Law(s)
                    • Code Open Sourcing

Figure 1: We introduce a checklist for researcher to use for scaling laws research. In Appendix B, we
include an expanded version of the checklist that may be used as a template.


trained for significantly more tokens: particularly, they point to using later checkpoints, training larger
models, a different learning rate schedule and changing the number of training tokens used across
runs. Multiple followup works have focused on either reproducing or explaining the differences
between these two papers (Besiroglu et al., 2024; Porian et al., 2024; Pearce & Song, 2024b). The
authors find it challenging to reproduce results of previous papers - we refer the reader to Section 2
for a further discussion on these replication efforts.
Motivated by this, we survey over 50 papers on scaling laws across a variety of modalities, tasks
and architectures, and find that essential details needed to reproduce scaling law studies are often
underreported. We broadly categorize these details as follows:

Section 3: What form are we fitting? Researchers may choose any number of power law forms
relating any set of variables, to which they fit the data extracted from training runs. Even seemingly
minor differences in form, may imply critical changes in assumptions – for example, about certain
interactions between variables which are excluded, the definitions of these variables or error terms
which are deemed significant enough to include.
Section 4: How do we train models? In order to fit a scaling law, one needs to train a range of
models spanning orders of magnitude in parameter count and/or dataset size. Each model requires a
multitude of hyperparameter and parameter choices, such as the specific model/dataset sizes to use,
the architecture shape, batch size or learning rate schedule.
Section 5: How do we extract data after training? Once these models are trained, downstream
metrics like perplexity must be obtained from the intermediate or final checkpoints. This data may be
also scaled, interpolated or bootstrapped to create more datapoints to fit the power law parameters.
Section 6: How are we optimizing the fit? Finally, the variable must be fit with an objective and
optimization method, which may in turn have their own initialization and hyperparameters to choose.
To aid scaling laws researchers in reporting details necessary to reproduce their work, we propose a
checklist (Figure 1 - an expanded version may be found in Appendix B ). Based on this checklist,
we summarize these details for all 51 papers in tabular form in Appendix C. We find that important
details are frequently underreported, significantly impacting reproducibility, especially in cases
where there is no code - only 19 of 42 papers surveyed have analysis code/code snippets available.
Additionally, 23 (a little over half) of surveyed papers do not describe the optimization process, and
15 do not describe how training FLOPs or number of parameters are counted, which has been found
to significantly change results (Porian et al., 2024). In addition, we fit our own power laws to further
demonstrate how these choices critically impact the final scaling law (Section §7).

2    PAPERS ON S CALING L AWS
Researchers have proposed scaling laws to study the scaling of deep learning across multiple domains
and for several tasks. Studies of the scaling properties of generalization error with training data size
and model capacity predate modern deep learning. Banko & Brill (2001) observed a power law
scaling of average validation error on a confusion set disambiguation task with increasing dataset size.
The authors also claimed that the model size required to fit a given dataset grows log linearly. As


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for larger scale models, Amodei et al. (2016) observe a power-law WER improvement on increasing
training data for a 38M parameter Deep Speech 2 model. Hestness et al. (2017) show similar power
law relationships across several domains such as machine translation, language modeling, image
processing and speech recognition. Moreover, they find that these exponential relationships found
hold across model improvements.
Kaplan et al. (2020) push the scale of these studies further, studying power laws for models up to
1.5B parameters trained on 23B tokens to determine the optimal allocation of a fixed compute budget.
Later studies (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024) revisit this and find that Kaplan et al. (2020)
greatly underestimate the amount of data needed to train models optimally, though major procedural
differences render it challenging to attribute the source of this discrepancy. Since then, researchers
have studied various aspects of scaling up language models. Wei et al. (2022) examine the emergence
of abilities with scale that are not present in smaller models, while Hernandez et al. (2021) study
the scaling laws for transfer between distributions in a finetuning setting. Henighan et al. (2020)
consider possible interactions between different modalities while recently, Aghajanyan et al. (2023)
study scaling in multimodal foundation models. Tay et al. (2022) show that not all architectures scale
equally well, highlighting the importance of using scaling studies to guide architecture development.
Poli et al. (2024) scale hybrid architectures like Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023), showing the efficacy
of this new model family. Other researchers also formulate specific scaling laws to study other
Transformer based architectures. For example, Clark et al. (2022) and Frantar et al. (2023) introduce
new scaling laws to study mixture of expert models (Fedus et al., 2022; Shazeer et al., 2017) and
sparse models (Zhu & Gupta, 2017) respectively. Researchers have also used scaling laws to study
encoder-decoder models for neural machine translation (Ghorbani et al., 2021; Gordon et al., 2021),
and the effect of data quality and language on scaling coefficients (Bansal et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022). While language models form the majority of the papers surveyed, we also consider papers
that study VLMs (Cherti et al., 2023; Henighan et al., 2020), vision (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2022;
Zhai et al., 2022), reinforcement learning (Hilton et al., 2023; Jones, 2021; Gao et al., 2023) and
recommendation systems (Ardalani et al., 2022). We further discuss different forms of scaling laws
researchers introduce for the specific research questions they wish to answer in Section 3.
A majority of the surveyed papers study Transformer (Vaswani, 2017) based models, but a few
consider different architectures. For example, Sorscher et al. (2022) investigate data pruning laws in
ResNets, and some smaller scale studies use MLPs or SVMs (Hashimoto, 2021). This overrepresen-
tation is perhaps partially a result of Transformer-based models achieving higher scale than other
architectures; a ResNet101 has 44M parameters, while the largest Llama 3 model has 405B.

Replication Efforts Besiroglu et al. (2024) seek to reproduce the parameter fitting approach used
by Hoffmann et al. (2022). They are unable to recover the scaling law from Hoffmann et al. (2022),
and demonstrate that the claims of the original paper are inconsistent with descriptions of the setup.
They then seek to improve the fit of the scaling law by initializing from the parameters found in
Hoffmann et al. (2022) and modifying parts of the power law fitting process.
Porian et al. (2024) isolate several decisions as primarily responsible for the discrepancy between the
recommendations of Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022): (1) learning rate scheduler
warmup, (2) learning rate decay, (3) inclusion of certain parameters in total parameter count, and (4)
specific training hyperparameters. By adjusting these factors, they are able to reproduce the results
of Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022). However, they only use 16 training runs to fit
their scaling laws, each designed to match one targeted setting (e.g., replicating Kaplan et al. (2020)).
Instead of using raw loss values, they fit to loss values found by interpolating between checkpoints.
Like Pearce & Song (2024b), they apply a log transform and linear regression to fit their law.


3    W HAT form ARE WE FITTING ?

A majority of papers we study fit some kind of power law (f (x) = ax−k ). That is, they specify
an equation defining the relationship between multiple factors, such that a proportional change in
one results in the proportional change of at least one other. They then optimize this power law to
find some parameters. A few efforts do not seem to fit a power law, but may show a line of best fit,
obtained through unspecified methods (Rae et al., 2021; Dettmers et al., 2022; Tay et al., 2022; Shin
et al., 2023; Schaeffer et al., 2023; Poli et al., 2024).


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The specific form may be motivated by researcher intuition, previous empirical results, prior work,
code implementation, or data availability. More importantly, the form is often determined by the
specific question(s) a paper investigates. For example, one may attempt to predict the performance
achieved by scaling up different model architectures, or the optimal ratio for model scaling vs data
scaling when increasing training compute (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). Based on
this, we loosely classify scaling laws by their form as performance prediction and ratio optimization
approaches. We indicate this classification for all surveyed papers in Appendix C.

3.1   R ATIO O PTIMIZATION

The simplest scaling law forms usually predict the relation between two variables in an optimal
setting. For example, approaches 1 and 2 from Hoffmann et al. (2022) fit to the optimal (i.e., lowest
loss) D and N values for a particular compute budget C. Porian et al. (2024), aiming to resolve these
                              D∗
inconsistencies, defines ρ∗ = N ∗ and writes this relationship as:


                     N ∗ (C) = N0∗ · C α ; D∗ (C) = D0∗ · C α ; ρ∗ (C) = ρ∗0 · C α                   (1)
They assume C ≈ 6N D, and thus only need to fit the first equation; the other power laws can be
inferred. This simplicity is deceptive in some cases, as collecting (N ∗ (C), C) pairs may not be
trivial. It is possible to fix C and follow a binary search approach to train a multitude of models, then
bisect to approximate the performance-optimal N, D pair. However, this quickly grows prohibitively
costly. In practice, it is common to interpolate between a set of fixed results to estimate the true
N ∗ (C) §5. This adds to the complexity of this approach, and introduces a hidden dependency on
the performance evaluation, yet it does not actually predict the performance of the optimal points.
If only the performance of the optimal-ratio model is of interest, it is possible to fit a second power
law L(N ∗ (C), D∗ (C)) = a · C α . Most papers we survey choose to fit a power law which directly
predicts performance.

3.2   P ERFORMANCE PREDICTION

Kaplan et al. (2020) proposes a power law between Loss L, number of model Parameters N , and
number of Dataset tokens D:
                                          "    αN          #αD
                                              N αD      D
                               L(N, D) =             +                                    (2)
                                             Nc         Dc

On the other hand, Approach 3 of Hoffmann et al. (2022) proposes
                                                       A     B
                                     L(N, D) = E +       α
                                                           + β                                       (3)
                                                       N    D

In both of the above, all variables other than L, N , and D are parameters to be found in the power
law fitting process. Though these two forms are quite similar, they differ in some assumptions.
Kaplan et al. (2020) constructs their form on the basis of 3 expected scaling law behaviors, and
Hoffmann et al. (2022) explains in their Appendix D that their form is based on risk decomposition.
The resulting Kaplan et al. (2020) form includes an interaction between N and D in order to satisfy a
constraint requiring assymmetry introduced by one of their expected behaviors. The Hoffmann et al.
(2022) form, on the other hand, consists of 3 additive sources of error, E representing the irreducible
error that would exist even with infinite data and compute budget, as well as two terms representing
the error introduced by limited parameters and limited data, respectively.
Power laws for performance prediction can sometimes yield closed form solutions for optimal ratios
as well. However, the additional parameters and input variables, introduced by the need to incorporate
the performance metric term, add random noise and dimensionality. This increases the difficulty
of optimization convergence, so when prediction performance is not the aim, a ratio optimization
approach is frequently a better choice.
Many papers directly adopt one of these forms, but some adapt these forms to study relationships with
other input variables. Clark et al. (2022), for example, study routed Mixture-of-Expert models, and
propose a scaling law that relates dense model size (effective parameters) N and number of experts E


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with a biquadratic interaction (log L(N, E) ≜ a log N + b log E + c log N log E + d). Frantar et al.
(2023) study sparsified models, and propose a scaling law with an additional parameter sparsity S, the
                                                                                   bN          bD
optimal value of which increases with N (L(S, N, D) = aS (1 − S)bS + cS · N1          + aDD

                                                                                                  +c).
Other papers change the form to model variables in the data setup. Aghajanyan et al. (2023) consider
                                                                                       A         B
interference and synergy between multiple data modalities (L(N, Dj ) = Ej + N αjj + |D |jβj ,
                                                                                                   j
                    L(N,D )+L(N,D )
                         i       j                 A            B
L(N, Di , Dj ) = [         2        ] − Ci,j + N αi,j
                                                   i,j +
                                                                i,j
                                                         |Di |+|Dj |βi,j
                                                                         ), while Goyal et al. (2024),
Fernandes et al. (2023) and Muennighoff et al. (2024) add terms to their scaling law formulations
which represent mixing data sources and/or repeated data, using notions such as diminishing utility.
A comprehensive list of the power law forms in the surveyed papers may be found in Table 6.



4    H OW DO WE train models?

In order to fit a scaling law, one needs to train a range of models across multiple orders of magnitude
in model size and/or dataset size. Researchers must first decide the range and distribution of N
and D values for their training runs, in order to achieve stable convergence to a solution with high
confidence, while limiting the total compute budget of all experiments. Many papers did not specify
the number of data points used to fit each scaling law; those that did range from 4 to several hundred,
but most used fewer than 50 data points. The specific N and D values also skew the optimization
process towards a certain range of N/D ratios, which may be too narrow to include the true optimum.
Some approaches, such as using IsoFLOPs (Hoffmann et al., 2022), additionally dictate rules for
choosing N and D values. Moreover, using a minimum N or D value may result in outlier values that
may need to be dropped (Porian et al., 2024; Shin et al., 2023; Henighan et al., 2020). We investigate
this choice in Section §7.2
The definition of N , D, or compute cost C can affect the results of a scaling study. For example, if a
study studies variation in tokenizers, a definition of training data size based on character count may
be more appropriate than one based on token count (Tao et al., 2024). The inclusion or exclusion
of embedding layer compute and parameters, may also skew the results of a study - a major factor
in the different in optimal ratios determined by Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022)
has been attributed to not factoring embedding FLOPs into the final compute cost (Pearce & Song,
2024b; Porian et al., 2024). Given the increase in extremely long context models (128k-1M) Reid
et al. (2024), the commonly used training FLOPs approximation C = 6N D (see Appendix C) may
not hold for such models, given the additional cost proportional to the context length and model
dimension - Bi et al. (2024) introduce a new terms non-embedding FLOPs/token to account for this.
Scaling law fit depends on the performance of each individual checkpoint, which is highly dependent
on factors such as training data source, architecture and hyperparameter choice. Bansal et al. (2022)
and Goyal et al. (2024), for instance, discuss the effect of data quality and composition on power law
exponents and constants. Repeating data has also been found to yield different scaling patterns in
large language models (Muennighoff et al., 2024; Goyal et al., 2024).
Researchers have also studied the effect of architecture choice on scaling - Hestness et al. (2017) find
that architectural improvements only shift the irreducible loss, while Poli et al. (2024) suggest that
these improvements may be more significant. The way in which a model is scaled can also affect
results. Within the same architecture family, Clark et al. (2022) show that increasing the number of
experts in a routed language model has diminishing returns beyond a point, while Ghorbani et al.
(2021) find that scaling the encoder and decoder have different effects on model performance. Scaling
embedding size can also drastically change scaling trends (Tao et al., 2024).
The optimal hyperparameters to train a model changes with scale. Changing batch size, for example,
can change model performance McCandlish et al. (2018); Kaplan et al. (2020). Optimal learning rate
is another hyperparameter shown to change with scale, though techniques such as those proposed
in Tensor Programs series of papers (Yang et al., 2022) can keep this factor constant with simple
changes to initialization. More specifically, changing the learning rate schedule from a cosine decay
to a constant learning rate with a cooldown (or even changing the learning rate hyperparameters) has
been found to greatly affect the results of scaling laws studies (Hu et al., 2024; Porian et al., 2024;
Hägele et al., 2024; Hoffmann et al., 2022).


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


One common motivation for fitting a scaling laws is extrapolation to higher compute budgets.
However, there is no consensus on the orders of magnitude up that one can project a scaling law and
still find it accurate, nor on the breadth of compute budgets that should be covered by the data. We
find that the range of model size N and dataset size D greatly varies, with the maximum value of
N in each paper ranging from 10M parameters to around 7B and that of D being as large as 400B
tokens. For most papers we survey, the scales are relatively modest: 13 of 51 papers train models
beyond 2B parameters; most only train models smaller than 1B parameters. It has been shown, with
some controversy Schaeffer et al. (2023), that scaling to significantly larger scales can result in new
abilities that did not appear in smaller models (Wei et al., 2022). Forecasting limits to extrapolation
and the appearance of new abilities at new scales is an open question.


5    H OW DO WE collect data FROM MODEL TRAINING ?

To evaluate the range of models trained to fit a scaling law, train or validation loss are most commonly
used, but some works consider other metrics, such as ELO score (Jones, 2021; Neumann & Gros,
2022), reward model score (Gao et al., 2023), or downstream task metrics like accuracy or classifica-
tion error rate (Henighan et al., 2020; Zhai et al., 2022; Cherti et al., 2023; Goyal et al., 2024; Gao
et al., 2023). This choice is non-trivial - while some papers show that there is a power law relation
between the predicted loss found by using validation loss and a different downstream task (Dubey
et al., 2024), it is possible for the results of a study to change completely depending on the metric
used. Schaeffer et al. (2023), for example, find that using linear metrics such as Token-edit distance
instead of non-linear metrics such as accuracy produces smooth, continuous predictable changes in
model performance, contrary to an earlier study by Wei et al. (2022). Moreover, Neumann & Gros
(2022) find that they are unable to use test loss instead of Elo scores to fit a power law.
While it is most straightforward to evaluate only the final checkpoint on the target metric, some studies
may use the median score of the last several checkpoints of each training run Ghorbani et al. (2021),
or multiple intermediate checkpoints throughout each training run for various reasons. One common
reason is that this is the only computationally feasible way to obtain a fit with sufficient confidence
intervals (Besiroglu et al., 2024). For instance, the ISOFLop approach to finding the optimal D/N
ratio in Hoffmann et al. (2022) requires training multiple models for each targeted FLOP budget - this
would be computationally prohibitive to do without using intermediate checkpoints. Hoffmann et al.
(2022), in particular, use the last 15% checkpoints. Some papers also report bootstrapping values
(Ivgi et al., 2022). This detail is often not specified in scaling law papers, with only 29 of 51 papers
reporting this information - we point the reader to Appendix C for an overview.
A related technique is performance interpolation. Porian et al. (2024) do not aim to exactly match
the desired FLOP counts when evaluating model checkpoints mid-training. They instead interpolate
between multiple model checkpoints to estimate the performance of a model with the target number
of FLOPs. Hoffmann et al. (2022) and Tao et al. (2024) also interpolate intermediate checkpoints.
Hilton et al. (2023), relatedly, smooth the learning curve before extracting metric scores.
As discussed in Section 4, training models with too little data or too few parameters can skew the
results. To prevent this issue, several works report filtering out data points before fitting their power
law. Henighan et al. (2020) drop their smallest models, while Hilton et al. (2023) and Hoffmann
et al. (2022) exclude early checkpoints. Muennighoff et al. (2024) remove outlier datapoints that
perform badly due to excess parameters or excess epochs. Similarly, Ivgi et al. (2022) remove outlier
solutions after bootstrapping.


6    H OW ARE WE optimizing THE FIT ?

The optimization of a power law requires several design decisions, including optimizer, loss, ini-
tialization values, and bootstrapping. We discuss each in this section. Over half of the papers we
analyze do not provide any information about their power law fitting process, or provide limited
information only and fail to detail crucial aspects. Specifically, many papers fail to describe their
choice of optimizer or loss function. In Table 2, we provide an overview of the optimization details
(if specified) for each paper considered.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paper                           Curve-fitting Method                               Loss Objective            Hyperparameters   Initialization              Are scaling laws
                                                                                                             Reported?                                     validated?
Rosenfeld et al. (2019)         Least Squares Regression                           Custom error term         N/A               Random                      Y
Mikami et al.                   Non-linear Least Squares in log-log space                                    N/A               N/A                         Y
Schaeffer et al. (2023)         NA                                                 NA                        NA                NA                          NA
Sardana & Frankle (2023)        L-BFGS                                             Huber Loss                Y                 Grid Search                 N
Sorscher et al. (2022)          NA                                                 NA                        NA                NA                          NA
Caballero et al. (2022)         Least Squares Regression                           MSLE                      N/A               Grid Search, optimize one   Y
Besiroglu et al. (2024)         L-BFGS                                             Huber Loss                Y                 Grid Search                 Y
Gordon et al. (2021)            Least Squares Regression                                                     N/A               N.S.                        N
Bansal et al. (2022)            NS                                                 NS                        N                 NS                          N
Hestness et al. (2017)          NS                                                 RMSE                      N                 NS                          Y
Bi et al. (2024)                NS                                                 NS                        N                 NS                          Y
Bahri et al. (2024)             NS                                                 NS                        N                 NS                          N
Geiping et al. (2022)           Non-linear Least Squares                                                     NA                Non-augmented parameters    Y
Poli et al. (2024)              NS                                                 NS                        N                 NS                          N
Hu et al. (2024)                scipy curvefit                                     NS                        N                 NS                          N
Hashimoto (2021)                Adagrad                                            Custom Loss               Y                 Xavier                      Y
Ruan et al. (2024)              Linear Least Squares                               Various                   N/A               N/A                         Y
Anil et al. (2023)              Polynomial Regression (Quadratic)                  N.S.                      N                 N.S.                        Y
Pearce & Song (2024a)           Polynomial Least Squares                           MSE on Log-loss           N/A               N/A                         N
Cherti et al. (2023)            Linear Least Squares                               MSE                       N/A               N/A                         N
Porian et al. (2024)            Weighted Linear Regression                         weighted SE on Log-loss   N/A               N/A                         Y
Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)     Least Squares Regression                           MSE                       Y                 N.S.                        Y
Gao et al. (2024)               N.S                                                N.S                       N.S               N.S                         N.S
Muennighoff et al. (2024)       L-BFGS                                             Huber on Log-loss         Y                 Grid Search, optimize all   Y
Rae et al. (2021)               None                                               None                      N/A               N/A                         N
Shin et al. (2023)              NA                                                 NA                        NA                NA                          NA
Hernandez et al. (2022)         NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Filipovich et al. (2022)        NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Neumann & Gros (2022)           NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Droppo & Elibol (2021)          NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Henighan et al. (2020)          NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Goyal et al. (2024)             Grid Search                                        L2 error                  Y                 NA                          Y
Aghajanyan et al. (2023)        L-BFGS                                             Huber on Log-loss         Y                 Grid Search, optimize all   Y
Kaplan et al. (2020)            NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          N
Ghorbani et al. (2021)          Trust Region Reflective algorithm, Least Squares   Soft-L1 Loss              Y                 Fixed                       Y
Gao et al. (2023)               NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          Y
Hilton et al. (2023)            CMA-ES+Linear Regression                           L2 log loss               Y                 Fixed                       Y
Frantar et al. (2023)           BFGS                                               Huber on Log-loss         Y                 N Random Trials             Y
Prato et al. (2021)             NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Covert et al. (2024)            Adam                                               Custom Loss               Y                 NS                          Y
Hernandez et al. (2021)         NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          Y
Ivgi et al. (2022)              Linear Least Squares in Log-Log space              MSE                       NA                NS                          Y
Tay et al. (2022)               NA                                                 NA                        NA                NA                          NA
Tao et al. (2024)               L-BFGS, Least Squares                              Huber on Log-loss         Y                 N Random Trials from Grid   Y
Jones (2021)                    L-BFGS                                             NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Zhai et al. (2022)              NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)   NA                                                 NA                        NA                NA                          NA
Dubey et al. (2024)             NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          Y
Hoffmann et al. (2022)          L-BFGS                                             Huber on Log-loss         Y                 Grid Search, optimize all   Y
Ardalani et al. (2022)          NS                                                 NS                        NS                NS                          NS
Clark et al. (2022)             L-BFGS-B                                           L2 Loss                   Y                 Fixed                       NS


Table 2: We provide an overview of which papers provide specific details required to reproduce how
they fit their scaling law equation.


Optimizer Power laws are most commonly fit with a variety of algorithms designed to optimize
non-linear functions. One of the most common is the BFGS (Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno)
algorithm, or a variation L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989). Some papers (Hashimoto, 2021; Covert
et al., 2024) use Adam, Adagrad, or other optimizers common in machine learning, such as AdamW,
RMSProp, and SGD. Though effective for LLM training, these are sometimes ill-suited for the
purpose of fitting a scaling law, due to various factors limiting their practicality, such as data-
hungriness. Goyal et al. (2024) forgo the use of an optimizer altogether due to instability of solutions
(see initialization) and rely exclusively on grid search to fit their scaling law parameters.
Some scaling law works (Rosenfeld et al., 2019) opt to use a linear method, such as linear regression,
which is generally much simpler. To do this, they typically convert the hypothesized power law
to a linear form by taking the log. For example, for a power law y b = c · xa + d, use the form
β·log(y) = γ+α·log(x) instead. For loss prediction, this results in a form similar to log(L(N, D)) =
α · logN + β · logD + E. This trick is employed even when using an optimizer capable of operating
on non-linear functions (Hashimoto, 2021). Though this conversion may sometimes work in practice,
it is generally not advised because the log transformation also changes the distribution of errors,
exaggerating the effects of errors at small values. This mismatch increases the likelihood of a poor fit
(Goldstein et al., 2004). We found this approach to be very common among the papers we study.

Loss Various loss functions have been chosen for power law optimization, including variants on
MAE (mean absolute error), MSE (mean squared error), and the Huber loss (Huber, 1992), which is
identical to MSE for errors less than some value δ (a hyperparameter), but grows linearly, like MAE,
for larger errors, effectively balancing the weighting of small errors with robustness to outliers. Of
the papers which specify their loss function, most use a variant of MAE (Ghorbani et al., 2021), MSE
(Goyal et al., 2024; Hilton et al., 2023), Huber loss (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Aghajanyan et al., 2023;
Frantar et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2024; Muennighoff et al., 2024), or a custom loss (Covert et al., 2024).


                                                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Initialization Initialization can have a substantial impact on final optimization fit (§7). One
approach is to iteratively train with different initializations, selecting the best fit at the termination
of the search. This is typically a grid search over choices for each parameter (Aghajanyan et al.,
2023; Muennighoff et al., 2024), or a random sample from that grid (Frantar et al., 2023; Tao et al.,
2024). Alternatively, the full grid of potential initializations can be evaluated on the loss function
without training, and the most optimal k used for initialization and optimization (Caballero et al.,
2022). Finally, if a hypothesis exists, either from prior work or expert knowledge about the function,
this hypothesis may be used instead of a search, or to guide the search (Besiroglu et al., 2024).

Validating the Scaling Law A majority of the papers surveyed do not report validating the scaling
law in any meaningful way. Knowing this is critical to understanding whether the results of the
scaling laws study are valid, given the examples given throughout the paper of scaling laws study
conclusions changing depending on the process details. Porian et al. (2024) and Alabdulmohsin et al.
(2022) use confidence intervals and goodness of fit measures to validate their scaling laws. Ghorbani
et al. (2021) and Bansal et al. (2022) also do this. Otherwise, a majority of the papers that we report
as validating their scaling laws mainly extrapolate to models a few orders of magnitude larger and
observe the adherence to the scaling law obtained.


7    O UR R EPLICATIONS AND A NALYSES

Each of the choices discussed above in Sections 3 - 6 may have a crucial impact on the result,
yet it remains common to critically underspecify the setup for fitting a power law. Scaling law
works often fail to open source their model and code, making reproduction infeasible, and likely
contributing to contradictory conclusions as discussed in Section 2. Though some efforts have been
made (Porian et al., 2024; Besiroglu et al., 2024) to reconcile such discrepancies, there is still only
sparse understanding of the impact of each of the decisions we discuss.
To investigate the significance of these scaling law optimization decisions, we vary these choices to
fit our own scaling laws. We fit both the Chinchilla-scraped data from Besiroglu et al. (2024), and
data from our own models.

Reconstructed Chinchilla data (Besiroglu et al., 2024) This data is extracted from a vector-based
figure in the pdf of Hoffmann et al. (2022), who claim that this includes all models trained for the
paper. It consists of 245 datapoints, each corresponding to a final checkpoint collected at the end of
model training. There is a potential risk of errors in this recovery process.

Data from Porian et al. (2024) This data includes training losses for Transformer LMs ranging
in size from 5 to 901 million parameters, each trained on OpenWebText2 (Gao et al., 2020) and
RefinedWeb data (Penedo et al., 2023), across a variety of data and compute budgets, from 5 million
to 14 billion tokens, depending on parameter count. Each model is trained with a different peak
learning rate and batch size setting, found by fitting a separate set of scaling laws.

Our models We train a variety of Transformer LMs, ranging in size from 12 million to 1 billion
parameters, on varied data and compute budgets and hyperparameter settings. Details about our setup,
including hyperparameters, are listed in Appendix A. We open source all of our models, evaluation
results, code, and FLOP calculator at https://github.com/hadasah/scaling_laws
We fit a multitude of power laws and study the effects of: (1) power law form; (2) model learning
rate; (3) compute budget, model size, and data budget range and coverage; (4) definition of N and C;
(5) inclusion of mid-training checkpoints; (6) power law parameter initialization; (7) choice of loss
and (8) optimizer.
We plot all results in Appendix Figure 2. In our initial analysis of (5), we find substantial differences,
sometimes improvements, in stability of fit when including mid-training checkpoints. As a result, we
include analyses and corresponding figures for power law fitting with only data from final checkpoints,
as well as with all mid-training checkpoints, when applicable.
Based on our observations, we also make some more concrete recommendations in Appendix §D,
with the caveat that following the recommendations cannot guarantee a good scaling law fit.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.1   F ORM (§3)


We consider the (1) baseline Hoffmann et al. (2022) form (Approach 3) and then (2) apply the trick
employed by Muennighoff et al. (2024) of setting α = β in the Hoffmann et al. (2022) form, which
assumes the optimal D/N ratio stays roughly constant – L(N, D) = E + NAα + DBα . We also
compare with (3) an ISOFlop approach (Approach 3 of Hoffmann et al. (2022)), in which we fit
an optimal N for each compute budget C, Nopt (C), which can then be used to fit the predicted
loss L(N, D). This approach usually necessitates the usage of mid-training checkpoints (discussed
further in §7.3), as it is infeasible to train a large enough number of models for each FLOP budget
considered. However, we apply it here without using only final model checkpoints, and extend to
mid-training checkpoints in §7.3). We adapt the implementation from Porian et al. (2024), which
contains more details about interpolation of data points and specific hyperparameters. In all data sets,
(2) approaches the law reported by Hoffmann et al. (2022), but (1) only does so for the data from
Porian et al. (2024) (Figure 2a).
We experiment with the power law form reported by Kaplan et al. (2020), but this consistently
yields a law which suggests that the optimal number of data points is 1, even when varying many
aspects of the power law fitting procedure. The difficulty of fitting to this form might be partially a
result of severe under-reporting in Kaplan et al. (2020) with regard to procedural details, including
hyperparameters for both model training and fitting.



7.2   T RAINING (§4)


Hu et al. (2024) study the effects of several model training decisions, including batch size, learning
rate schedule, and model width. Their analysis focuses on optimizing hyperparameters, not on the
ways hyperparameter and architecture choices affect the reliability of scaling law fitting. Observed
variations between settings suggest that suboptimal performance could skew the scaling law fit.
To substantiate this further, we simulate the effects of not sweeping the learning rate in our models.
As a baseline, (1) we sweep at each (N , D) pair for the optimal learning rate over a range of values,
at most a multiple of 2 apart. Next, (2) we use a learning rate of 1e-3 for all N , the optimal for our
1 billion parameter models, and do the same for (3) 2e-3 and (4) 4e-3, which is optimal for our 12
million parameter models. Lastly, we use all models across all learning rates at the same N and D.
Results vary dramatically across these settings. Somewhat surprisingly, using all learning rates results
in a very similar power law to sweeping the learning rate, whereas using a fixed learning rate of 1e-3
or 4e-3 yields the lowest optimization loss or closest match to the Hoffmann et al. (2022) power laws,
respectively (Figure 2b).
We also study the effects of limiting model scale range, data scale range (implicitly), and data-to-
parameters range by filtering all datasets: we compare (1) using all N, D scales, (2) only models
with N up to about 100 million or (3) 400 million parameters, and including (4) only models
with D/N ≤ 18 or (5) D/N ≥ 22. These ranges are designed to exclude D/N = 20, the rule
of thumb based on Hoffmann et al. (2022). The minimum or maximum D/N ratio tested does
skew results; above 1022 FLOPs, (4) and (5) fit to optimal ratios D/N < 18 and D/N > 22,
respectively. Removing our largest models in (2) also creates a major shift in the predicted optimal
D/N (Figure 2c).
Related to choice of N, D and C values, we investigate different ways of counting N and C,
specifically whether to include embedding parameters and FLOPs. We compare (1) our baseline,
which includes embeddings in both N and C, with (2) excluding embeddings only in N , (3) excluding
embeddings only in C, (4) excluding embeddings in both N and C. We also compare to (5) using
the C = 6N D approximation, including embedding parameters. In all other settings, we calculate
the FLOPs in a manner similar to Hoffmann et al. (2022), and we open source the code for these
calculations. With both datasets, the exclusion of embeddings in FLOPs has very little impact on the
final fit. Similarly, using the C = 6N D approximation has no visible impact. For the Porian et al.
(2024) models, the exclusion of embedding parameters in the calculation of N results in scaling laws
which differ substantially, and with increasing divergences at large scales (Figure 2d).


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


7.3   DATA C OLLECTION (§5)

We compare using data from (1) only the final checkpoints of each model with (2) using all available
mid-training checkpoints. We also consider removing checkpoints collected during the (3) first 10%,
(4) 20%, and (5) 50% of training, Using mid-training checkpoints sometimes results in more stable
fits which are similar to the Hoffmann et al. (2022) scaling laws, but the effect is unreliable and is
dependent on other decisions. Following this finding, we also run all other analyses using setting (2),
and find that these scaling law fits are often more consistent when varying other aspects of the fitting
procedure (Figure 2e).

7.4   F ITTING (§6)

We vary the initialization method for our power law fitting procedure: (1) our baseline replication
of Hoffmann et al. (2022) Approach 3, which conducts the full optimization process on a grid of
6x6x5x5x5=4500 initializations (Hoffmann et al., 2022), (2) searching for the lowest loss initialization
point (Caballero et al., 2022) and optimizing only from that initialization, (3) optimizing from the
1000 lowest loss initializations, (4) randomly sampling k(=100) points (Frantar et al., 2023; Tao et al.,
2024), and (5) initializing with the coefficients found in Hoffmann et al. (2022), as Besiroglu et al.
(2024) does. With the Besiroglu et al. (2024) data, (5) yields a fit nearly identical to that reported
by Hoffmann et al. (2022), although (1) results in the lowest fitting loss. With the Porian et al.
(2024) data, all approaches except (2) yield a very similar fit, which gives a recommended D/N ratio
similar to that of Hoffmann et al. (2022). However, using our data, (2) optimizing over only the most
optimal initialization yields the best match to the Hoffmann et al. (2022) power laws, followed by (5)
initialization from the reported Hoffmann et al. (2022) scaling law parameters. Optimizing over the
full grid yields the power law that diverges most from the Hoffmann et al. (2022) law, suggesting the
difficulty of optimizing over this space, and the presence of many local minima (Figure 2f).
Then, we analyze the choice of loss objectives, including (1) the baseline log-Huber loss, (2) MSE,
(3) MAE, and (4) the Huber loss. We find that there is somewhat less variance in the resulting power
laws than we have seen in other power law fitting decisions, but the recommended optimal data
budgets still span a wide range (Figure 2g).
Finally, we consider the choice of optimizer. We first fit a power law to using the original (1)
L-BFGS, with settings matching those described by Hoffmann et al. (2022). L-BFGS and BFGS
implementations have an early stopping mechanism, which conditions on the stability of the solution
between optimization steps. We experiment with setting this threshold for L-BFGS to a (2) higher
value 1e-4 (stopping earlier). We find that using any higher or lower values results in the same
solutions or instability for all three datasets. L-BFGS and BFGS also have the option to use the true
gradient of the loss, instead of an estimate, which is the default. In this figure, we include this setting,
(3) using the true gradient for L-BFGS. We compare these L-BFGS settings to (4) BFGS. We test the
same tolerance value and gradient settings, and find that none of these options change the outcome of
BFGS in our analysis. Finally, we compare to (5) non-linear least squares and (6) pure grid search,
using a grid 5 times more dense along each axis as that which we used for initialization with other
optimizers. This density is chosen to approximately match the runtime of L-BFGS. Many of these
optimizer settings converge to similar solutions, but this depends on the data, and the settings which
diverge from this majority do not follow any immediately evident pattern (Figure 2h).

8     C ONCLUSION

We survey over 50 papers on scaling laws, and discuss differences in form, training setup, evaluation,
and curve fitting, which may lead to significantly different conclusions. We also discuss significant
under-reporting of details crucial to replicating the conclusion of these studies, and provide guidelines
in the form of a checklist aid researchers in reporting more complete details. In addition to discussing
several prior replication studies in literature, we empirically demonstrate the fragility of this process,
by systematically varying these choices on available checkpoints and models that we train from
scratch. We choose to avoid overly prescriptive recommendations, because there is no known set of
actions which can guarantee a good scaling law fit, but we make some suggestions based on patterns
in our findings (Appendix §D). Despite our preliminary investigations, our understanding of which
decisions may skew the results of a scaling law study is sparse, and defines the path for future work.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethics Statement This work discusses how a lack of reproducibility and open-sourcing may be
harmful for scaling laws research, given that the factors in a study setup that may change research
conclusions vary widely.

Reproducibility Statement The model checkpoints and analysis code required to reproduce the
results discussed in Section 7 are at https://github.com/hadasah/scaling_laws.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Aaron Defazio, Divyansh Pareek, Aditya Kusupati and Tim Althoff for their valuable
feedback. We also acknowledge the computing resources and support from the Hyak supercomputer
system at the University of Washington.

R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Lili Yu, Alexis Conneau, Wei-Ning Hsu, Karen Hambardzumyan, Susan Zhang,
  Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Scaling laws for generative
  mixed-modal language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 265–279.
  PMLR, 2023.

Ibrahim M Alabdulmohsin, Behnam Neyshabur, and Xiaohua Zhai. Revisiting neural scaling laws in
   language and vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22300–22312, 2022.

Dario Amodei, Sundaram Ananthanarayanan, Rishita Anubhai, Jingliang Bai, Eric Battenberg, Carl
  Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Qiang Cheng, Guoliang Chen, et al. Deep speech 2: End-to-
  end speech recognition in english and mandarin. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 173–182. PMLR, 2016.

Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.

Newsha Ardalani, Carole-Jean Wu, Zeliang Chen, Bhargav Bhushanam, and Adnan Aziz. Under-
  standing scaling laws for recommendation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08489, 2022.

Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
  scaling laws. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(27), June 2024. ISSN
  1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2311878121. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
  2311878121.

Michele Banko and Eric Brill. Scaling to very very large corpora for natural language disambiguation.
 In Proceedings of the 39th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
 26–33, 2001.

Yamini Bansal, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ankush Garg, Biao Zhang, Colin Cherry, Behnam Neyshabur,
  and Orhan Firat. Data scaling laws in nmt: The effect of noise and architecture. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1466–1482. PMLR, 2022.

Tamay Besiroglu, Ege Erdil, Matthew Barnett, and Josh You. Chinchilla scaling: A replication
  attempt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10102, 2024.

Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Honghui Ding,
  Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu, et al. Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with
  longtermism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.

Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace He,
  Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Michael Pieler, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Shivanshu
  Purohit, Laria Reynolds, Jonathan Tow, Ben Wang, and Samuel Weinbach. Gpt-neox-20b: An
  open-source autoregressive language model, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.
  06745.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ethan Caballero, Kshitij Gupta, Irina Rish, and David Krueger. Broken neural scaling laws. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2210.14891, 2022.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade
 Gordon, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2818–2829, 2023.
Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Arthur Mensch, Michela Paganini, Jordan Hoffmann,
  Bogdan Damoc, Blake Hechtman, Trevor Cai, Sebastian Borgeaud, et al. Unified scaling laws for
  routed language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4057–4086. PMLR,
  2022.
Ian Covert, Wenlong Ji, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and James Zou. Scaling laws for the value of individual
  data points in machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20456, 2024.
Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettlemoyer. The case for 4-bit precision: k-bit inference scaling laws. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7750–7774. PMLR, 2023.
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Llm. int8 (): 8-bit matrix
  multiplication for transformers at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07339, 2022.
Jasha Droppo and Oguz Elibol. Scaling laws for acoustic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09488,
  2021.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
 models with simple and efficient sparsity. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(1):
 5232–5270, 2022.
Patrick Fernandes, Behrooz Ghorbani, Xavier Garcia, Markus Freitag, and Orhan Firat. Scaling laws
  for multilingual neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09650, 2023.
Matthew J Filipovich, Alessandro Cappelli, Daniel Hesslow, and Julien Launay. Scaling laws beyond
 backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14593, 2022.
Elias Frantar, Carlos Riquelme, Neil Houlsby, Dan Alistarh, and Utku Evci. Scaling laws for
  sparsely-connected foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08520, 2023.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang,
  Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile: An 800gb
  dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.
  00027.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
Leo Gao, Tom Dupré la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2406.04093.
Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum, Gowthami Somepalli, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Tom Goldstein, and
  Andrew Gordon Wilson. How much data are augmentations worth? an investigation into scaling
  laws, invariance, and implicit regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06441, 2022.
Behrooz Ghorbani, Orhan Firat, Markus Freitag, Ankur Bapna, Maxim Krikun, Xavier Garcia,
  Ciprian Chelba, and Colin Cherry. Scaling laws for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.07740, 2021.
Michel L Goldstein, Steven A Morris, and Gary G Yen. Problems with fitting to the power-law
 distribution. The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 41:
 255–258, 2004.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mitchell A Gordon, Kevin Duh, and Jared Kaplan. Data and parameter scaling laws for neural
 machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 5915–5922, 2021.
Sachin Goyal, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C Lipton, Aditi Raghunathan, and J Zico Kolter. Scaling
  laws for data filtering–data curation cannot be compute agnostic. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22702–22711, 2024.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Alexander Hägele, Elie Bakouch, Atli Kosson, Loubna Ben Allal, Leandro Von Werra, and Martin
  Jaggi. Scaling laws and compute-optimal training beyond fixed training durations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.18392, 2024.
Tatsunori Hashimoto. Model performance scaling with multiple data sources. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4107–4116. PMLR, 2021.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
Danny Hernandez, Tom Brown, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson
  Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, et al. Scaling laws and interpretability
  of learning from repeated data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10487, 2022.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
Jacob Hilton, Jie Tang, and John Schulman. Scaling laws for single-agent reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13442, 2023.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Shengding Hu, Yuge Tu, Xu Han, Chaoqun He, Ganqu Cui, Xiang Long, Zhi Zheng, Yewei Fang,
  Yuxiang Huang, Weilin Zhao, et al. Minicpm: Unveiling the potential of small language models
  with scalable training strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06395, 2024.
Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology
  and distribution, pp. 492–518. Springer, 1992.
Maor Ivgi, Yair Carmon, and Jonathan Berant. Scaling laws under the microscope: Predicting
 transformer performance from small scale experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06387, 2022.
Andy L Jones. Scaling scaling laws with board games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03113, 2021.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
  Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
  2020.
T Kudo. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for
  neural text processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06226, 2018.
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization.
 Mathematical programming, 45(1):503–528, 1989.
Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, and OpenAI Dota Team. An empirical model of
  large-batch training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06162, 2018.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hiroaki Mikami, Kenji Fukumizu, Shogo Murai, Shuji Suzuki, Yuta Kikuchi, Taiji Suzuki, Shin-ichi
  Maeda, and Kohei Hayashi. A scaling law for syn-to-real transfer: How much is your pre-training
  effective?
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra
  Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin A Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Oren Neumann and Claudius Gros. Scaling laws for a multi-agent reinforcement learning model.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00849, 2022.
R OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774, 2023.
Tim Pearce and Jinyeop Song. Reconciling kaplan and chinchilla scaling laws. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2406.12907, 2024a.
Tim Pearce and Jinyeop Song. Reconciling kaplan and chinchilla scaling laws, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12907.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
  dataset for falcon llm: Outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only, 2023.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116.
Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin
  Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the
  finest text data at scale, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17557.
Michael Poli, Armin W Thomas, Eric Nguyen, Pragaash Ponnusamy, Björn Deiseroth, Kristian
 Kersting, Taiji Suzuki, Brian Hie, Stefano Ermon, Christopher Ré, et al. Mechanistic design and
 scaling of hybrid architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17844, 2024.
Tomer Porian, Mitchell Wortsman, Jenia Jitsev, Ludwig Schmidt, and Yair Carmon. Resolving
  discrepancies in compute-optimal scaling of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19146,
  2024.
Gabriele Prato, Simon Guiroy, Ethan Caballero, Irina Rish, and Sarath Chandar. Scaling laws for the
  few-shot adaptation of pre-trained image classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06990, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of machine learning research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-baptiste
 Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Gemini
 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Jonathan S Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. A constructive prediction
  of the generalization error across scales. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12673, 2019.
Yangjun Ruan, Chris J Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Observational scaling laws and the
  predictability of language model performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10938, 2024.
Nikhil Sardana and Jonathan Frankle. Beyond chinchilla-optimal: Accounting for inference in
  language model scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00448, 2023.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language
  models a mirage? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.15004, 2023.
Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.05202.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
  Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
Kyuyong Shin, Hanock Kwak, Su Young Kim, Max Nihlén Ramström, Jisu Jeong, Jung-Woo Ha,
  and Kyung-Min Kim. Scaling law for recommendation models: Towards general-purpose user
  representations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp.
 4596–4604, 2023.
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:19523–19536, 2022.
Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced
   transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
Chaofan Tao, Qian Liu, Longxu Dou, Niklas Muennighoff, Zhongwei Wan, Ping Luo, Min Lin, and
  Ngai Wong. Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2407.13623, 2024.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, William Fedus, Jinfeng Rao, Sharan
  Narang, Vinh Q Tran, Dani Yogatama, and Donald Metzler. Scaling laws vs model architectures:
  How does inductive bias influence scaling? arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10551, 2022.
A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder,
  Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural networks
  via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.
Biao Zhang, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ankur Bapna, Yong Cheng, Xavier Garcia, Jonathan Shen, and Orhan
  Firat. Examining scaling and transfer of language model architectures for machine translation. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 26176–26192. PMLR, 2022.
Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. To prune, or not to prune: exploring the efficacy of pruning for model
 compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01878, 2017.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     O UR MODEL TRAINING (§7)
We train a variety of Transformer LMs, ranging in size from 12 million to 1 billion parameters, on
FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024), tokenized with the GPT-NeoX-20B tokenizer (Black et al., 2022),
which is a BPE tokenizer with a vocabulary size of 50257, trained on the Pile (Gao et al., 2020).
All models were trained on a combination of NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti, Quadro RTX 6000,
NVIDIA A40, and NVIDIA L40 GPUs. These transformers follow the standard architecture, and
use pre-layer RMSNorm (Kudo, 2018), the SwiGLU activation function (Shazeer, 2020), and rotary
positional embeddings (Su et al., 2024). We use a batch size of 512 with a sequence length of 2048.
The learning rate is warmed up linearly over 50 steps to the peak learning rate and then follows a
cosine decay to 10% of the peak. We use an Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95. We sweep
over learning rates and data budgets at each model scale. For our evaluation metric, we use perplexity
on a validation set of C4 (Raffel et al., 2020). See Table 3 and Table 10 for additional architecture
details and hyperparameters, including data budget and learning rate.

                        Hyperparameter                          Value
                        Vocabulary size                        50K
                        Batch Size                              512
                        Sequence Length                        2048
                        Attention Head Size                      64
                        Learning Rate               Swept 2{0,1,2,3} · 10{−3,−4}
                        Feedforward Dimension         4 x hidden dimension
                        LR Schedule                       Cosine Decay
                        LR Warmup                            50 steps
                        End LR                            0.1 x Peak LR
                        Optimizer                   Adam (β1 , β2 = 0.9, 0.95)

                         Table 3: Hyperparameter details for models trained in §7


 Model size     # layers     Hidden Dim       # Attn Heads                       # Steps
 12M                5            448                7              {100, 200, 250, 360, 500, 750,
                                                                           1,000, 4,000}
 17M                7            448                7             {100, 200, 250, 500, 750, 1,000,
                                                                           1,250, 1,500}
 25M                8            512                8            {250, 360, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,500,
                                                                       2,000, 8,000, 16,000}
 35M                9            576                9             {200, 250, 360, 500, 750, 1,000,
                                                                    1,250, 1,500, 4,000, 16,000}
 50M               10            640                10          {250, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,250, 1,500,
                                                                1,800, 2,000, 2,500, 4,000, 16,000}
 70M               12            704                11          {250, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,250, 1,500,
                                                                    2,000, 2,500, 3,000, 5,000}
 100M              14            768                12            {250, 500, 1,000, 1,500, 2,000,
                                                                2,500, 3,000, 4,000, 6,000, 12,000}
 200M              18            960                15               {500, 1,500, 6,000, 9,000}
 300M              19            1152               18                          {4,000}
 400M              20            1280               20                      {3,000, 6,000}
 1B                26            1792               28                         {20,000}

                  Table 4: Architecture and Data budget details for models trained in §7


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B    F ULL C HECKLIST

We define each category as follows:

      • Scaling Law Hypothesis: This specifies the form of the scaling law, that of the variables
        and parameters, and the relation between each.

      • Training Setup: This specifies the exact training setup of each of the models trained to test
        the scaling law hypothesis.

      • Data Collection: Evaluating various checkpoints of our trained models to collect data points
        that will be used to fit a scaling law in the next stage.

      • Fitting Algorithm: Using the data points collected in the previous stage to optimize the
        scaling law hypothesis.

S CALING L AW R EPRODUCILIBILITY C HECKLIST
Scaling Law Hypothesis (§3)
• What is the form of the power law?
• What are the variables related by (included in) the power law?
• What are the parameters to fit?
• On what principles is this form derived?
• Does this form make assumptions about how the variables are related?
Training Setup (§4)
• How many models are trained?
• At which sizes?
• On how much data each? On what data? Is any data repeated within the training for a model?
• How are model size, dataset size, and compute budget size counted? For example, how are
  parameters of the model counted? Are any parameters excluded (e.g., embedding layers)?
  How is compute cost calculated?
• Are code/code snippets provided for calculating these variables if applicable?
• How are hyperparameters chosen (e.g., optimizer, learning rate schedule, batch size)? Do they
  change with scale?
• What other settings must be decided (e.g., model width vs. depth)? Do they change with scale?
• Is the training code open source?
Data Collection(§5)
• Are the model checkpoints provided openly?
• How many checkpoints per model are evaluated to fit each scaling law? Which ones, if so?
• What evaluation metric is used? On what dataset?
• Are the raw evaluation metrics modified? Some examples include loss interpolation, centering
  around a mean or scaling logarithmically.
• If the above is done, is code for modifying the metric provided?
Fitting Algorithm (§6)
• What objective (loss) is used?
• What algorithm is used to fit the equation?
• What hyperparameters are used for this algorithm?
• How is this algorithm initialized?
• Are all datapoints collected used to fit the equations? For example, are any outliers dropped?
  Are portions of the datapoints used to fit different equations?
• How is the correctness of the scaling law considered? Extrapolation, Confidence Intervals,
  Goodness of Fit?


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C        F ULL S HEET
We provide an overview of all the papers surveyed in Tables 5,6, 7, 8 and 9.

 Paper                           Domain                    Training Code?   Analysis Code?   Checkpoints?   Metric Scores?
 Rosenfeld et al. (2019)         Vision, LM                N                N                N              N
 Mikami et al.                   Vision                    N                Y                Y              Y
 Schaeffer et al. (2023)         LM                        N                N                N              N
 Sardana & Frankle (2023)        LM                        N                N                N              N
 Sorscher et al. (2022)          Vision                    N                N                N              Y
 Caballero et al. (2022)         LM                        N                Y                N              Y
 Besiroglu et al. (2024)         LM                                         Y                N              Y
 Gordon et al. (2021)            NMT                       Y                Y                Y              Y
 Bansal et al. (2022)            NMT                       N                N                N              N
 Hestness et al. (2017)          NMT, LM, Vision, Speech   N                N                N              N
 Bi et al. (2024)                LM                        N                N                N              N
 Bahri et al. (2024)             Vision                    N                N                N              N
 Geiping et al. (2022)           Vision                    Y                Y                N              N
 Poli et al. (2024)              LM                        N                N                N              N
 Hu et al. (2024)                LM                        Y                N                N              N
 Hashimoto (2021)                NLP                       N                N                N              N
 Ruan et al. (2024)              LM                        Y                Y                N              Y
 Anil et al. (2023)              LM                        N                N                N              N
 Pearce & Song (2024a)           LM                        N                Y                N              N
 Cherti et al. (2023)            VLM                       Y                Y                Y              Y
 Porian et al. (2024)            LM                        Y                Y                N              Y
 Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)     LM, Vision                N                Y                Y              Y
 Gao et al. (2024)               NLP                       Y                Y                Y              N
 Muennighoff et al. (2024)       LM                        Y                Y                Y              N
 Rae et al. (2021)               LM                        N                N                N              N
 Shin et al. (2023)              RecSys                    N                N                N              N
 Hernandez et al. (2022)         LM                        N                N                N              N
 Filipovich et al. (2022)        LM                        N                N                N              N
 Neumann & Gros (2022)           RL                        Y                Y*               Y              N
 Droppo & Elibol (2021)          Speech                    N                N                N              N
 Henighan et al. (2020)          LM, Vision, Video, VLM    N                N                N              N
 Goyal et al. (2024)             LM, Vision, VLM           N                Y                N              Y
 Aghajanyan et al. (2023)        Multimodal LM             N                N                N              N
 Kaplan et al. (2020)            LM                        N                N                N              N
 Ghorbani et al. (2021)          NMT                       N                Y                N              N
 Gao et al. (2023)               RL/LM                     N                N                N              N
 Hilton et al. (2023)            RL                        N                N                N              N
 Frantar et al. (2023)           LM, Vision                N                N                N              N
 Prato et al. (2021)             Vision                    Y*               Y                Y              Y
 Covert et al. (2024)            LM                        Y                Y                N              N
 Hernandez et al. (2021)         LM                        N                N                N              N
 Ivgi et al. (2022)              NLP                       N                N                N              N
 Tay et al. (2022)               LM                        N                N                N              N
 Tao et al. (2024)               LM                        N                Y                N              Y
 Jones (2021)                    RL                        Y                Y                N              Y
 Zhai et al. (2022)              Vision                    Y                N                N              N
 Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)   LM                        N                N                N              N
 Dubey et al. (2024)             LM                        N                N                N              N
 Hoffmann et al. (2022)          LM                        N                N                N              N
 Ardalani et al. (2022)          RecSys                    N                N                N              N
 Clark et al. (2022)             LM                        N                Y                N              Y


Table 5: Details on domain of experiments and availability of code by category for each paper
surveyed.


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paper                             Power Law Form                                                                                                                Purpose Of Power Law (E.G., Performance Prediction, Optimal Ratio)    # Power Law Parameters     # Of Scaling Laws
Rosenfeld et al. (2019)           ϵ̃(m, n) = an−α + bm−β + c∞                                                                                                   Performance Prediction                                                5-6                        8
Mikami et al.                     L(n, s) = δ (γ + n−α ) s−β                                                                                                    Performance Prediction                                                4                          3
Schaeffer et al. (2023)           None                                                                                                                          N/A                                                                   NA                         NA
Sardana & Frankle (2023)          L(N, D) = E + NAα + DBβ ; N ∗ (ℓ, Dinf ) , Dtr∗ (ℓ, Dinf ) = arg minN,Dtr |L(N,Dtr )=ℓ                                        Performance Prediction                                                5                          4
Sorscher et al. (2022)            c · α−β , c · exp(−bα)                                                                                                        Performance Prediction                                                2                          34
                                                     Qn
                                                                1/fi  −ci ∗fi
Caballero et al. (2022)           y = a + (bx−c0 ) i=1 1 + dxi                                                                                                  Performance Prediction                                                5+                         100+
Besiroglu et al. (2024)           L(N, D) = E + NAα + DBβ                                                                                                       Performance Prediction                                                5                          1
                                                    αN             αD
                                                      αD
                                                  N
Gordon et al. (2021)              L(N, D) =       Nc      + DDc                                                                                                 Performance Prediction                                                4                          3
                                                         p
Bansal et al. (2022)              L(D) = α D−1 + C                                                                                                              Performance Prediction                                                3                          20
Hestness et al. (2017)            ε(m) ∼ αmβg + γ                                                                                                               Performance Prediction                                                3                          17
                                  Mopt = Mbase · C a ηopt = 0.3118 · C −0.1250
Bi et al. (2024)                                      ,                                                                                                         Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 2                          5
                                   Dopt = Dbase · C b Bopt = 0.2920 · C 0.3271
Bahri et al. (2024)               L(D) ∝ D−αK , L(P ) ∝ P −αK                                                                                                   Performance Prediction                                                2                          35
                                                                                                        −1
Geiping et al. (2022)             f (x) = ax−c + b, vEffective Extra Samples from Augmentations (x) = fref (faug (x)) − x                                       Performance Prediction                                                3                           50
Poli et al. (2024)                log N ∗ ∝ a log C and log D∗ ∝ b log C                                                                                        Performance Prediction                                                2
                                                     −α
Hu et al. (2024)                  L(N, D) = C  hN N     + CD D−β + L0                                   i              h              i                         Performance Prediction                                                5                          6
                                                                                                      2
Hashimoto (2021)                  minλ,α Eq̂,n̂ (log(R(n̂, q̂) − ϵ) − α log(n̂) + log (Cλ (q̂))) R(n̂, q̂) = E ℓ θ̂ (pn̂,q̂ ) ; x, y                            Performance Prediction                                                2+n(data mixes)            4
                                  Em ≈ hσ β ⊤ Sm + α

Ruan et al. (2024)                                                                                                                                              Performance Prediction                                                3
Anil et al. (2023)                N ⋆ (C) ≈ N0⋆ · C a                                                                                                           Performance Prediction                                                2                          1
                                     ∗       m
Pearce & Song (2024a)             N\E   = bC\E  L = bC m                                                                                                        Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 2                          1
Cherti et al. (2023)              E = βC α                                                                                                                      Performance Prediction                                                2                          8
Porian et al. (2024)              N ⋆ (C) ≈ N0⋆ · C a                                                                                                           Optimal Ratio                                                         2                          6
Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)       εx = βxc ; εx − ε∞ = βxc ; εx = β(x−1 + γ)−c ; εx = γ(x)(1 + γ(x))−1 ε0 + (1 + γ(x))−1 ε∞                                     Performance Prediction                                                2-4                         600
Gao et al. (2024)                 L(n, k) = exp (α + βk log(k) + βn log(n) + γ log(k) log(n)) + exp(ζ + η log(k))                                               Performance Prediction                                                2-6                        1
                                                                              A                                 B
Muennighoff et al. (2024)         L (UN , UD , RN , RD ) =                          −RN !!α +                        −RD !!β
                                                                                                                             +E                                 Performance Prediction                                                2 (+4)                     1
                                                                                         ∗                                   ∗
                                                                                ∗
                                                                        UN +UN RN   1−e RN                    ∗
                                                                                                      UD +UD RD      1−e RD

Rae et al. (2021)                 None                                                                                                                          Performance Prediction                                                N/A                        N/A
Shin et al. (2023)                None                                                                                                                          Scaling trend                                                         NA                         NA
Hernandez et al. (2022)           E = k ∗ Nα                                                                                                                    Optimal Ratio                                                         2                          1
                                                 α
Filipovich et al. (2022)          L(C) = (Cc C) C                                                                                                               Performance Prediction                                                2                          3
                                                  αopt
                                                   C
Neumann & Gros (2022)             Nopt (C) = CC0                     1
                                                        , Ei = 1+(Nj /N  α
                                                                       i) N
                                                                                                                                                                Performance Prediction                                                2                          3*2
                                                                             αD α

                                                    1             αN
Droppo & Elibol (2021)            L(N, D) = (L∞ ) α + NNC α + DDC α                                                                                             Performance Prediction                                                6                          3
                                                     α
                                  L(x) = L∞ + xx0
                                                       x
Henighan et al. (2020)                                                                                                                                          Performance Prediction                                                3                          36
                                                             bj
                                                Qk     nj
Goyal et al. (2024)               yk = a · nb11 j=2 nj−1        +d                                                                                              Performance Prediction                                                2+ 2*n(data mixes)         1
                                                            A            B                       L(N,Di )+L(N,Dj )            A              Bi,j
Aghajanyan et al. (2023)          L(N, Dj ) = Ej + N αjj + |D |jβj , L(N, Di , Dj ) = [                  2         ] − Ci,j + N αi,j
                                                                                                                                  i,j +
                                                                                                                                        |Di |+|Dj |βi,j
                                                                                                                                                                Performance Prediction                                                5                          14
                                                              j
                                                  αN           αD
                                                   αD
                                                N
Kaplan et al. (2020)              L(N, D) =    Nc       + DDc                                                                                                   Performance Prediction                                                4                           7
                                                                                                                                  pe                       pd
                                                                                                                 N̄e (pe +pd )           N̄d (pe +pd )
Ghorbani et al. (2021)            BLEU = cB L−pB , L̂opt (B) = α∗ B −(pd +pe ) + L∞ , α∗ ≡ α                           pe                     pd                Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 6                           8
                                  Rbon (d) = d (αbon − βbon d) ,
Gao et al. (2023)                                                                                                                                               Performance Prediction                                                2                          2
                                  RRL (d) = d (αRL − βRL    αElog d)
                                                 αN
Hilton et al. (2023)              I −β = NNc        + EEc                                                                                                       Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 5                          3
                                                                            b N        bD
                                  L(S, N, D) = aS (1 − S)bS + cS · N1           + aDD

Frantar et al. (2023)                                                                     +c                                                                    Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 7                          2
                                   Err(N ) = Err∞ +kN α ,
Prato et al. (2021)                                                                                                                                             Performance Prediction                                                3                          12
                                   Err(C) = Err∞ +kC α ,
Covert et al. (2024)              log |ψ k (z)| ≈ log |c(z)| − α(z) log(k)                                                                                      Performance Prediction                                                2                          Many
                                                                     αD
                                                 αN
Hernandez et al. (2021)           L ≈ NNC αD + k(DFD)αC(N )β                                                                                                    Performance Prediction                                                3                          1
Ivgi et al. (2022)                NS                                                                                                                            Performance Prediction                                                NA                         NA
Tay et al. (2022)                 None                       γ                                                                                                  Scaling trend                                                         NA                         NA
                                                      Nnv
Tao et al. (2024)                 Nvopt = Nv0 ∗        0
                                                      Nnv        , Lu = −E + NAα11 + NAα22 + DBβ                                                                Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 7                          2
                                                                                    nv       v

                                   plateau = mplateau
                                              boardsize · boardsize + c
                                                                       plateau

Jones (2021)                       incline  = mincline                  incline
                                               boardsize · boardsize + mflops · log flop + c
                                                                                            incline                                                             Performance Prediction                                                5                          1
                                       elo = incline.clamp ( plateau , 0)
Zhai et al. (2022)                E = α + β(C + γ)−µ                                                                                                            Performance Prediction                                                4                          3
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)     None                                                                                                                          Scaling trend                                                         NA                         NA
Dubey et al. (2024)               N ⋆ (C) = AC α .                                                                                                              Optimal Ratio                                                         2                          2
                                                        A     B
Hoffmann et al. (2022)            A3: L(N, D)
                                              = E + N α + Dβ                                                                                                    Optimal Ratio, Performance Prediction                                 5                          3
Ardalani et al. (2022)             αx−β + γ                                                                                                                     Performance Prediction                                                3                          3
Clark et al. (2022)               log L(N, E) ≜ +a log N + b log E + c log N log E + d                                                                          Performance Prediction                                                4                          3


                                                                Table 6: Details on power law for each paper surveyed.


Paper                           Training Runs / Law              Max. Training Flops     Max. Training Params               Max. Training Data                                   Data Described?   Hyperparameters Described?   How Are Model Params Counted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (E.G., W/ Or W/Out Embeddings)
Rosenfeld et al. (2019)         42-49                                                    0.7M-70M                           100M words / 1.2M images                             Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Mikami et al.                   7                                                        ResNet-101                         64k-1.28M images                                     Y                 Y                            NA
Schaeffer et al. (2023)         4                                                        1011                               NA                                                   Y                 NA                           Non-embedding
Sardana & Frankle (2023)        47                                                       150M-6B                            1.5B-1.25T tokens                                    N                 Y                            NA
Sorscher et al. (2022)           60                                                      86M (ViT)                          200 epochs                                           Y                 Y                            NA
Caballero et al. (2022)         3-40                                                     NS                                 NS                                                   N                 N                            NS
Besiroglu et al. (2024)         NA                               NA                      NA                                 NA                                                   Y                 NA                           Non-embedding
Gordon et al. (2021)            45-55                                                    56M                                28.3M-51.1M examples                                 Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Bansal et al. (2022)            10                                                       170M-800M                          500K-512M sentences (28B tokens)                     Y                 Y                            NS
Hestness et al. (2017)           9                                                       upto 193M                          219 − 228 tokens, upto 29 images, 2k audio hours     Y                 Y                            NS
Bi et al. (2024)                80                               1e17 − 3e20                                                                                                     Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Bahri et al. (2024)             8-27                                                     36.5M                              upto 78k steps; 100 epochs                           Y                 Y                            NS
Geiping et al. (2022)           13                                                       ResNet-18                          upto 7.6M images                                     Y                 Y                            NS
Poli et al. (2024)              500 total                        8.00E+19                70M-7B                                                                                  Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Hu et al. (2024)                36                                                       40M-2B                             400M-120B tokens                                     Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Hashimoto (2021)                                                                                                            upto 600k sentences                                  Y                 Y                            NA
Ruan et al. (2024)              27* -77*                                                 70B-180B                           3T-6T tokens                                         N/A               N/A                          N.S.
Anil et al. (2023)              12                               1.00E+22                15B                                4.00E+11                                             N                 N                            Non-embedding
Pearce & Song (2024a)           20 (simulated), 25 (real)                                1.5B (simulated), 4.6M (real)      23B (simulated), 500M (real) tokens                  Y                 Y                            w/ Embedding and Non-embedding considered separately
Cherti et al. (2023)            3* - 29                                                  214M                               34B (pretrain), 2B (finetune) examples               Y                 Y                            N.S
Porian et al. (2024)            16                               2.00E+19                901M                                                                                    Y                 Y                            w/ Embedding and Non-embedding considered separately
Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)     1*                                                       110M-1B                            1e6-1e10 ex / 3e11 tokens                            Mixed             N                            N/A
Gao et al. (2024)               N.S                              N.S                     N.S                                N.S                                                  N                 N                            N.S
Muennighoff et al. (2024)       142                                                      8,7B                               900B tokens                                          Y                 Y                            w/ embedding
Rae et al. (2021)               4                                6.31E+23                280B                                                                                    Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Shin et al. (2023)              17                                0.1 PF Days            160M                               500M-50B tokens                                      Y                 Y                            NA
Hernandez et al. (2022)         56                                                       1.5M-800M                          100B tokens                                          N                 N                            NS
Filipovich et al. (2022)        4                                                        57-509M                            30B token                                            Y                 N                            NS
Neumann & Gros (2022)           14                                                       5 ∗ 105                            104 steps                                            Y                 Y                            NS
Droppo & Elibol (2021)          5-21                                                     107                                134-23k hrs speech                                   Y                 Y                            NS
Henighan et al. (2020)          6-10                                                     101 1                              101 2 tokens                                         Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Goyal et al. (2024)             5                                                        CLIP L/14 - 300M +63M              32-640M samples                                      Y                 Y                            Embedding
Aghajanyan et al. (2023)        21                                                       8M-6.7B                            5-100B tokens                                        Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Kaplan et al. (2020)             40-150                                                  1.5B                               23B tokens                                           Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Ghorbani et al. (2021)          12-14                                                    191-3B                             NS                                                   Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Gao et al. (2023)               9                                                        3B                                 120-90k                                              N                 Y                            NS
Hilton et al. (2023)            NS                               1020                                                                                                            Y                 Y                            NS
Frantar et al. (2023)           48 and 112                                               0.66M-85M                          1.8B images, 65B tokens                              Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Prato et al. (2021)             5                                                                                           106 samples                                          Y                 N                            NA
Covert et al. (2024)            10                                                       NA                                 1000 samples for IMDB                                Y                 Y                            NA
Hernandez et al. (2021)         NS                               1021                    108                                                                                     Y                 N                            Non-embedding
Ivgi et al. (2022)              5-8                                                      104 − 108                          varies; 500k steps PT                                Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Tay et al. (2022)                                                                        16-30B                             21 9                                                 Y                 Y                            NA
Tao et al. (2024)               60                                                       33M-1.13B NV + 4-96k V             4.3B-509B Characters                                 Y                 Y                            Embedding and Non-embedding considered separately
Jones (2021)                    200                              1E+12-1E+17                                                4E+08-2E+09                                          Y                 Y                            NA
Zhai et al. (2022)              44                                                       5.4M-1.8B                          1-13M images                                         Y                 Y                            NA
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)   4                                                        19M-176B                           NA                                                   NA                Y                            NA
Dubey et al. (2024)             NS                               6 ∗ 1018 − 102 2        40M-16B                                                                                 Y*                Y                            NS
Hoffmann et al. (2022)           200-450                         6 ∗ 1018 − 3 ∗ 1021     16B                                5B-400B tokens                                       Y                 Y                            Non-embedding
Ardalani et al. (2022)          NS                               102 -106 TFlops                                             5M-5B samples                                       N                 N                            All are considered
Clark et al. (2022)             56                                                       15M-1.3B                           130B tokens                                          Y                 Y                            Non-embedding


                                                       Table 7: Details on training setup for each paper surveyed.


                                                                                                                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Paper                           Data Points Per Law?   Scaling Law Metric                   Modification Of Final Metric?                                                           Subsets Of Data Used
Rosenfeld et al. (2019)         42-49                  Loss / Top1 Error                    N                                                                                       N
Mikami et al.                   7                      Error Rate                           N                                                                                       N
Schaeffer et al. (2023)         NA                     Various downstream                   NA                                                                                      NA
Sardana & Frankle (2023)        NS                     Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Sorscher et al. (2022)           60                    Error Rate                           NA                                                                                      NA
Caballero et al. (2022)         3-40                   FID, Loss, Error Rate, Elo Score     N                                                                                       NS
Besiroglu et al. (2024)         245                    Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Gordon et al. (2021)            45-55                  Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Bansal et al. (2022)            NS                     Loss, BLEU                           NS                                                                                      NS
Hestness et al. (2017)          NS                     Token Error, CER, Error Rate, Loss   Median min. validation error across multiple training runs with separate random seeds   NS
Bi et al. (2024)                upto 80                Validation bits-per-byte             NS                                                                                      NS
Bahri et al. (2024)             upto 100               Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Geiping et al. (2022)            50                    Effective Extra Samples              Interpolation                                                                           NS
Poli et al. (2024)              NS                     Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Hu et al. (2024)                NS                     Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Hashimoto (2021)                NS                     Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Ruan et al. (2024)                                     Various downstream                   N                                                                                       N
Anil et al. (2023)              12                     Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Pearce & Song (2024a)           20, 5                  Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Cherti et al. (2023)            3-29                   Error Rate                           N                                                                                       N
Porian et al. (2024)            12                     Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)     N.S.                   Loss / Accuracy                      N                                                                                       N/A
Gao et al. (2024)               N.S                    MSE                                  N.S                                                                                     N.S
Muennighoff et al. (2024)       142                    Loss                                 N                                                                                       Outliers removed
Rae et al. (2021)               4                      Loss                                 N/A                                                                                     N/A
Shin et al. (2023)              NA                     Loss                                 NA                                                                                      NA
Hernandez et al. (2022)         NS                     Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Filipovich et al. (2022)        NS                     Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Neumann & Gros (2022)           238                    Elo Score                            N                                                                                       N
Droppo & Elibol (2021)          NS                     Loss                                 N                                                                                       N
Henighan et al. (2020)          NS                     Loss, Error Rate                     NS                                                                                      Drop smaller models
Goyal et al. (2024)             NS                     Error Rate                           N                                                                                       N
Aghajanyan et al. (2023)        NS                     Perplexity                           N                                                                                       N
Kaplan et al. (2020)            NS                     Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Ghorbani et al. (2021)          NS                     Loss, BLEU                           Median of last 50k steps
Gao et al. (2023)                90                    RM Score                             NS                                                                                      NS
Hilton et al. (2023)            NS                     Intrinsic Performance                Smoothing learning curve                                                                Exclude early checkpoints
Frantar et al. (2023)           48 and 112             Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Prato et al. (2021)             5                      Error Rate                           NS                                                                                      NS
Covert et al. (2024)            (1000-5000 )*10        Expectation                          NS                                                                                      N
Hernandez et al. (2021)         40-120                 Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Ivgi et al. (2022)              5-8                    Loss                                 N                                                                                       [2.5, 97.5] percentile
Tay et al. (2022)               NA                     Loss, Accuracy                       NA                                                                                      NA
Tao et al. (2024)               20*60                  Loss                                 Interpolation                                                                           NS
Jones (2021)                    2800                   Elo Score                            NS                                                                                      NS
Zhai et al. (2022)              NS                     Accuracy                             NS                                                                                      NS
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)   NA                     Accuracy                             NA                                                                                      NA
Dubey et al. (2024)              150                   Loss, Accuracy                       NS                                                                                      NS
Hoffmann et al. (2022)          upto 1500              Loss                                 N                                                                                       Lowest loss model of a FLOP count, last 15% of checkpoints
Ardalani et al. (2022)           130                   Loss                                 NS                                                                                      NS
Clark et al. (2022)              26*56                 Loss                                 Log                                                                                     NS


                                             Table 8: Details on data extraction for each paper surveyed.


Paper                                 Curve-Fitting Method                                        Loss Objective                   Hyperparameters Reported?            Initialization                      Are Scaling Laws Validated?
Rosenfeld et al. (2019)               Least Squares Regression                                    Custom error term                N/A                                  Random                              Y
Mikami et al.                         Non-linear Least Squares in log-log space                                                    N/A                                  N/A                                 Y
Schaeffer et al. (2023)               NA                                                          NA                               NA                                   NA                                  NA
Sardana & Frankle (2023)              L-BFGS                                                      Huber Loss                       Y                                    Grid Search                         N
Sorscher et al. (2022)                NA                                                          NA                               NA                                   NA                                  NA
Caballero et al. (2022)               Least Squares Regression                                    MSLE                             N/A                                  Grid Search, optimize one           Y
Besiroglu et al. (2024)               L-BFGS                                                      Huber Loss                       Y                                    Grid Search                         Y
Gordon et al. (2021)                  Least Squares Regression                                                                     N/A                                  N.S.                                N
Bansal et al. (2022)                  NS                                                          NS                               N                                    NS                                  N
Hestness et al. (2017)                NS                                                          RMSE                             N                                    NS                                  Y
Bi et al. (2024)                      NS                                                          NS                               N                                    NS                                  Y
Bahri et al. (2024)                   NS                                                          NS                               N                                    NS                                  N
Geiping et al. (2022)                 Non-linear Least Squares                                                                     NA                                   Non-augmented parameters            Y
Poli et al. (2024)                    NS                                                          NS                               N                                    NS                                  N
Hu et al. (2024)                      scipy curvefit                                              NS                               N                                    NS                                  N
Hashimoto (2021)                      Adagrad                                                     Custom Loss                      Y                                    Xavier                              Y
Ruan et al. (2024)                    Linear Least Squares                                        Various                          N/A                                  N/A                                 Y
Anil et al. (2023)                    Polynomial Regression (Quadratic)                           N.S.                             N                                    N.S.                                Y
Pearce & Song (2024a)                 Polynomial Least Squares                                    MSE on Log-loss                  N/A                                  N/A                                 N
Cherti et al. (2023)                  Linear Least Squares                                        MSE                              N/A                                  N/A                                 N
Porian et al. (2024)                  Weighted Linear Regression                                  weighted SE on Log-loss          N/A                                  N/A                                 Y
Alabdulmohsin et al. (2022)           Least Squares Regression                                    MSE                              Y                                    N.S.                                Y
Gao et al. (2024)                     N.S                                                         N.S                              N.S                                  N.S                                 N.S
Muennighoff et al. (2024)             L-BFGS                                                      Huber on Log-loss                Y                                    Grid Search, optimize all           Y
Rae et al. (2021)                     None                                                        None                             N/A                                  N/A                                 N
Shin et al. (2023)                    NA                                                          NA                               NA                                   NA                                  NA
Hernandez et al. (2022)               NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Filipovich et al. (2022)              NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Neumann & Gros (2022)                 NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Droppo & Elibol (2021)                NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Henighan et al. (2020)                NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Goyal et al. (2024)                   Grid Search                                                 L2 error                         Y                                    NA                                  Y
Aghajanyan et al. (2023)              L-BFGS                                                      Huber on Log-loss                Y                                    Grid Search, optimize all           Y
Kaplan et al. (2020)                  NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  N
Ghorbani et al. (2021)                Trust Region Reflective algorithm, Least Squares            Soft-L1 Loss                     Y                                    Fixed                               Y
Gao et al. (2023)                     NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  Y
Hilton et al. (2023)                  CMA-ES+Linear Regression                                    L2 log loss                      Y                                    Fixed                               Y
Frantar et al. (2023)                 BFGS                                                        Huber on Log-loss                Y                                    N Random Trials                     Y
Prato et al. (2021)                   NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Covert et al. (2024)                  Adam                                                        Custom Loss                      Y                                    NS                                  Y
Hernandez et al. (2021)               NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  Y
Ivgi et al. (2022)                    Linear Least Squares in Log-Log space                       MSE                              NA                                   NS                                  Y
Tay et al. (2022)                     NA                                                          NA                               NA                                   NA                                  NA
Tao et al. (2024)                     L-BFGS, Least Squares                                       Huber on Log-loss                Y                                    N Random Trials from Grid           Y
Jones (2021)                          L-BFGS                                                      NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Zhai et al. (2022)                    NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)         NA                                                          NA                               NA                                   NA                                  NA
Dubey et al. (2024)                   NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  Y
Hoffmann et al. (2022)                L-BFGS                                                      Huber on Log-loss                Y                                    Grid Search, optimize all           Y
Ardalani et al. (2022)                NS                                                          NS                               NS                                   NS                                  NS
Clark et al. (2022)                   L-BFGS-B                                                    L2 Loss                          Y                                    Fixed                               NS



                                               Table 9: Details on optimization for each paper surveyed.


                                                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D     R ECOMMENDATIONS
As seen in our analyses, many decisions in our checklist have a number of reasonable options, but
those reasonable choices lead to a wide range of scaling law fits, and the observed variations do not
follow any clear pattern. It is probable that variations would be even harder to predict when varying
model architectures or other design decisions, removing the possibility of a universal set of best
practices. However, it is certainly possible to determine that some scaling law fits are plausible or
highly implausible, and to observe the stability of the fitting procedure. With the caveat that following
any recommendations can not guarantee good scaling law fit, we can make some more concrete
recommendations based on these observations:

Scaling Law Hypothesis

       • Fitting fewer scaling law parameters at a time typically results in greater stability. In some
         cases, it may be beneficial to decompose the scaling law fitting problem into two separate
         procedures. Examples of this approach are the IsoFLOP procedure from Hoffmann et al.
         (2022), as well as fitting first the relation between L and C, then finding the optimal N and
         D for a C, as seen in Porian et al. (2024).

Training Setup

       • The trained models should include a wide range of input variables settings. For example,
         when the input variables to the scaling law are L, N , D, the included models should include
         a wide range of N and D values for each C, or equivalently, should include a wide range of
         D/N ratios. If the included settings do not include the true optimum, the procedure will
         struggle to fit to the optimum.
       • Sweeping for the optimal learning rate results in a less stable fit than fixing the learning
         rate. We hypothesize that this may be because the true optimal learning rate for each model
         and data budget size is not any of the options we consider, and thus, each model varies in
         the difference between its true and approximate optimal learning rate. This may introduce
         additional noise to the data. Due to resource constraints, we are unable to fully test this
         hypothesis, and it may not hold at significantly larger scale, but we recommend fixing the
         learning rate, or changing it according to, say, model size, according to a fixed formula.

Data Collection

       • Results across tasks or datasets should not be mixed. Neither performance predictions nor
         optimal D/N ratios are fixed across different evaluation settings for the same set of models.

Fitting Algorithm

       • Scaling law fitting is sensitive to initialization; most known optimization methods for scaling
         laws are only able, in practice, to the shift parameters near to their initialization values. Thus,
         a dense search over initialization values is necessary. If there is a strong hypothesis guiding
         the choice of one specific initialization, such as a previously fit and validated scaling law,
         this will also limit the set of possible final scaling law parameter values.
       • Different losses emphasize the contribution of errors from certain datapoints. The chosen
         loss should be suited to the distribution of datapoints and sources of noise.
       • A simple grid search is unlikely to result in a good scaling law fit. Additionally, optimizers
         designed to fit linear relations may make assumptions about the distribution of errors and
         should not be used to fit a power law.

D.1    E XAMPLE C HECKLIST

We provide one possible set of responses to our checklist, reflective of some recommendations
enumerated above, and loosely based on Hoffmann et al. (2022). These answers roughly correspond
to a subset of the experiments we run in §7.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


(M IS )F ITTING : S CALING L AW R EPRODUCIBILITY C HECKLIST
Scaling Law Hypothesis (§3)
• What is the form of the power law? L(N, D) = E + NAα + DBβ
• What are the variables related by (included in) the power law? N : the number of model parameters,
  D: the number of data tokens, and L: the model’s validation loss
• What are the parameters to fit? A, B, E, α, β
• On what principles is this form derived? This is taken from Hoffmann et al. (2022), who hypothesize
  this form on the basis of prior work in risk decomposition.
• Does this form make assumptions about how the variables are related? This form inherently
  assumes that N and D do not have any interaction in their effect on the scaling of L. For some
  experiments, we use the assumption α = β to simplify optimization.
Training Setup (§4)
• How many models are trained? Refer to Table 10
• At which sizes? Refer to Table 10
• On how much data each? On what data? Is any data repeated within the training for a model? Refer
  to Table 10.
• How are model size, dataset size, and compute budget size counted? For example, how are
  parameters of the model counted? Are any parameters excluded (e.g., embedding layers)? How is
  compute cost calculated? We include the results including and excluding embedding layers for both
  the total parameter count N and the total FLOP count C. We also include, for comparison, results
  using the estimate C = 6N D.
• Are code/code snippets provided for calculating these variables if applicable?
  https://github.com/hadasah/scaling_laws
• How are hyperparameters chosen (e.g., optimizer, learning rate schedule, batch size)? Do they
  change with scale? Most hyperparameters are chosen based on best practices in current literature;
  several are taken directly from the settings in Hoffmann et al. (2022). For learning rate, we conduct
  an extensive hyperparameter search across 2-3 orders of magnitude, multiplying by 2-2.5, and then
  conduct training at 3 learning rates, including the optimum, for nearly all (N , D) configurations.
• What other settings must be decided (e.g., model width vs. depth)? Do they change with scale?
  Refer to Table 10
• Is the training code open source? Yes


  Model size     # layers   Hidden Dim      # Attn Heads                     # Steps
  12M               5           448                7             {100, 200, 250, 360, 500, 750,
                                                                         1,000, 4,000}
  17M               7           448                7            {100, 200, 250, 500, 750, 1,000,
                                                                         1,250, 1,500}
  25M               8           512                8           {250, 360, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,500,
                                                                     2,000, 8,000, 16,000}
  35M               9           576                9            {200, 250, 360, 500, 750, 1,000,
                                                                  1,250, 1,500, 4,000, 16,000}
  50M               10          640               10          {250, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,250, 1,500,
                                                              1,800, 2,000, 2,500, 4,000, 16,000}
  70M               12          704               11          {250, 500, 750, 1,000, 1,250, 1,500,
                                                                  2,000, 2,500, 3,000, 5,000}
  100M              14          768               12            {250, 500, 1,000, 1,500, 2,000,
                                                              2,500, 3,000, 4,000, 6,000, 12,000}
  200M              18          960               15               {500, 1,500, 6,000, 9,000}
  300M              19          1152              18                         {4,000}
  400M              20          1280              20                     {3,000, 6,000}
  1B                26          1792              28                        {20,000}

               Table 10: Architecture and Data budget details for models trained in §7

                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Data Collection(§5)
• Are the model checkpoints provided openly? Yes, at
  https://github.com/hadasah/scaling_laws
• How many checkpoints per model are evaluated to fit each scaling law? Which ones, if so?
  Unless clearly denoted otherwise, one checkpoint per model is evaluated; the last checkpoint.
  By default, no mid-training checkpoints are used, i.e., from before the termination of the cosine
  learning rate schedules.
• What evaluation metric is used? On what dataset? We use cross-entropy loss, measured on a
  held-out validation subset of the Common Crawl (Raffel et al., 2020) dataset.
• Are the raw evaluation metrics modified? Some examples include loss interpolation, centering
  around a mean or scaling logarithmically. No.
• If the above is done, is code for modifying the metric provided? Yes.
Fitting Algorithm (§6)
• What objective (loss) is used? We try various loss objectives (1) log-Huber loss, (2) MSE, (3)
  MAE and (4) Huber loss
• What algorithm is used to fit the equation? Mainly L-BFGS, but we also experiment with
  BFGS, non-linear least squares and grid search.
• What hyperparameters are used for this algorithm? Thresholds of {1e − 4, 1e − 6, 1e − 8},
  exact gradient
• How is this algorithm initialized? We initialize with 4500 initializations similar to Hoffmann
  et al. (2022).
• Are all datapoints collected used to fit the equations? For example, are any outliers dropped?
  Are portions of the datapoints used to fit different equations? No outliers are dropped in
  general, but we do show some results on specific subsets of models. For example, we compare
  the result of a scaling law fit when using only models trained at a peak learning rate of 1e − 4
  or 4e − 4.
• How is the correctness of the scaling law considered? Extrapolation, Confidence Intervals,
  Goodness of Fit? Currently, we do not evaluate the correctness beyond comparing to results in
  literature (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Kaplan et al., 2020).


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E                                 F ULL A NALYSIS P LOTS


                                                                                                                      Hoffmann Form
                                                                                                                      Hoffmann w/ alpha=beta
                                                                                                      1013            Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                                      Kaplan (reported)                                                                         N: 1T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                D: 5T


                                                                       Power law optimal parameters
                                                                                                                      Chinchilla (reported)
                                                                                                      1012            GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                                                                                                      Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                N: 100B
                                                                                                                                                                                             D: 800B                    N: 500B
                                                                                                      1011                                                                                                              D: 10T
                                                                                                                                                                                                 N: 60B
                                                                                                                                        N: 3B                                                    D: 2T
                                                                                                      1010
                                                                                                                                        D: 50B
                                                                                                      109                                     N: 2B
                                                                                                                                              D: 60B

                                                                                                      108

                                                                                                         1018         1019      1020      1021 1022 1023                                         1024         1025      1026
                                                                                                                                         Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                       Hoffmann et al. (2022); Besiroglu et al. (2024)



                                         Hoffmann Form                                                                                                                                                 Hoffmann Form
                                         Hoffmann w/ alpha=beta                                                                                                                                        Hoffmann w/ alpha=beta
                               1013      Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                          1013             IsoFLOP (weighted)                                      N: 3T
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                                                             Hoffmann (reported)                                     D: 2T
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                       Power law optimal parameters
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                                                                 N: 400B                                                                 Kaplan (reported)
                               1012      GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                               D: 10T                                                 1012             Chinchilla (reported)                   N: 200B
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                                                                       GPT-2 (est. on reports)                 D: 500B
                                                                                                             N: 50B                                                                                    Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N: 400B
                               1011                                                                          D: 2T                     N: 200B                                        1011                                                                             D: 10T
                                                                                                                                       D: 40T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N: 50B
                                                                                                                 N: 30B                                                                                                  N: 5B                      D: 2T
                               1010                      N: 2B                                                   D: 4T                                                                1010                               D: 30B
                                                         D: 70B
                               109                           N: 1B                                                                                                                    109                                      N: 2B
                                                             D: 100B                                                                                                                                                           D: 70B
                               108                                                                                                                                                    108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021     1022                              1023       1024        1025      1026                                              1018          1019      1020      1021 1022 1023           1024     1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                         Training compute (FLOP)

                                                    Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                                                         Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                               N: 100T
                                         Hoffmann Form                                                                         D: 60B                                                                  Hoffmann Form
                               1014      Hoffmann w/ alpha=beta                                                                                                                                        Hoffmann w/ alpha=beta                                  N: 4T
                                         IsoFLOP (weighted)                                                                                                                           1013             IsoFLOP (weighted)                                      D: 2T
                               1013      Hoffmann (reported)                                                 N: 3T                                                                                     Hoffmann (reported)
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                       Power law optimal parameters


                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                   D: 30B                                                                                    Kaplan (reported)                       N: 300B
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                                                                                                                        1012             Chinchilla (reported)                   D: 300B
                               1012      GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                                                                       GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                                                                       Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                                       N: 500B                                        1011
                               1011                                                                                                    D: 10T
                                                         N: 10B                                                                                                                                                          N: 6B
                                                         D: 10B                                                  N: 60B                                                               1010                               D: 30B                                        N: 30B
                               1010                                                                              D: 2T                                                                                                                                                 D: 200T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N: 8B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D: 10T
                               109                           N: 2B                                                                                                                    109
                                                             D: 60B                                                                                                                                                            N: 1B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D: 100B
                               108                                                                                                                                                    108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                              1018          1019      1020      1021 1022 1023           1024     1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                         Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                   Ours                                                                                                                                          Ours (all checkpoints)

(a) §3, §7.1 Using data from both Besiroglu et al. (2024) (left) and our own models (right), we compare the
effects of fitting to the power law form used in Approach 3 of Hoffmann et al. (2022) with the variant used by
Muennighoff et al. (2024), which assumes that the exponents α, β are equal – equivalently, that N ∗ (C) and
D∗ (C) scale about linearly with each other. When using only the performance of final checkpoints from both
Besiroglu et al. (2024) and our own experiments, taking this assertion results in a law much closer to the one
reported by Hoffmann et al. (2022). On our own models, we also show results when using the IsoFLOP approach
from Hoffmann et al. (2022). As we are using only results from final model checkpoints, the size of the data
input to the IsoFLOP approach in this case is reduced.


                                                                                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                               N: 100T
                                         Sweep Learning Rate (LR)                              D: 60B                                                       Sweep Learning Rate (LR)
                               1014      Fixed LR = 1e-3                                                                                                    Fixed LR = 1e-3                                       N: 4T
                                         Fixed LR = 2e-3                                                                                          1013      Fixed LR = 2e-3                                       D: 2T
                               1013      Fixed LR = 4e-3                       N: 3T                                                                        Fixed LR = 4e-3
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                   Power law optimal parameters
                                         Use all LRs                           D: 30B                                                                       Use all LRs                           N: 300B
                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                      1012      Hoffmann (reported)                   D: 300B
                               1012      Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                  Kaplan (reported)
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                                                                                              Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                    N: 400B                                       1011      GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                               1011      Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                          N: 10B                                    D: 20T                                                  Llama 3 405B (reported)                                       N: 70B
                                                         D: 10B                                                                                                             N: 6B                                         D: 90T
                                                                                    N: 50B                                                        1010                      D: 30B                     N: 10B
                               1010                                                 D: 2T                                                                                                              D: 7T
                               109                           N: 2B                                                                                109
                                                                                                                                                                                N: 1B
                                                             D: 80B                                                                                                             D: 100B
                               108                                                                                                                108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024     1025   1026                                             1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024     1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                            Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                    Ours                                                                                             Ours (all checkpoints)
(b) §4, §7.2 With our models, we simulate the effects of not sweeping the learning rate. As a baseline, (1) we
sweep at each (N , D) pair for the optimal learning rate over a range of values at most a multiple of 2 apart. Next,
(2) we use a learning rate of 1e-3 for all N , the optimal for our 1 billion parameter models, and do the same for
(3) 2e-3 and (4) 4e-3, which is optimal for our 12 million parameter models. Lastly, we use all models across all
learning rates at the same N and D. Results vary dramatically across these settings. Somewhat surprisingly,
using all learning rates results in a very similar power law to sweeping the learning rate, whereas using a fixed
learning rate of 1e-3 or 4e-3 yields the lowest optimization loss or closest match to the Hoffmann et al. (2022)
power laws, respectively.


                                                                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                      All models
                                                                                                                      N <= 100M                                                                                   N: 3T
                                                                                                      1013            N <= 400M                                                                                   D: 2T
                                                                                                                      D/N <= 18


                                                                       Power law optimal parameters
                                                                                                                      D/N >= 22
                                                                                                      1012            Hoffmann (reported)                                                      N: 300B
                                                                                                                      Kaplan (reported)                                                        D: 400B
                                                                                                                      Chinchilla (reported)
                                                                                                      1011            GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                             N: 200B
                                                                                                                      Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                             D: 40T
                                                                                                                                        N: 5B                                                      N: 30B
                                                                                                      1010                              D: 30B                                                     D: 4T

                                                                                                      109                                      N: 1B
                                                                                                                                               D: 100B
                                                                                                      108

                                                                                                         1018         1019      1020       1021 1022 1023                                          1024         1025      1026
                                                                                                                                          Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                                      Hoffmann et al. (2022); Besiroglu et al. (2024)



                                         All models                                                                                                                                                      All models
                               1013      N <= 100M                                                                                                                                                       N <= 100M
                                         N <= 400M                                                                                                                                      1013             N <= 400M                                               N: 3T
                                         D/N <= 18                                                                                                                                                       D/N <= 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D: 2T
                                                                                                                               N: 400B
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters
                               1012      D/N >= 22                                                                             D: 20T                                                   1012             D/N >= 22
                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                                             Hoffmann (reported)                     N: 200B
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                   N: 50B                                                                                      Kaplan (reported)                       D: 500B
                               1011      Chinchilla (reported)                                               D: 2T                                                                      1011             Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                                                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                                                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)
                               1010                      N: 2B                                                                                                                                                             N: 4B                                         N: 30B
                                                         D: 60B                                                                                                                         1010                               D: 40B                                        D: 200T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N: 8B
                               109                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D: 10T
                                                                                                                                       N: 1B                                            109
                                                                                                                 N: 400M               D: 6000T                                                                                  N: 900M
                               108                                                                               D: 200T                                                                                                         D: 200B
                                                             N: 90M                                                                                                                     108
                                                             D: 2T
                               107
                                 1018    1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                                1018          1019      1020      1021 1022 1023           1024     1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                           Training compute (FLOP)

                                                     Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                                                          Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                               N: 300T                                                                                                                           N: 300T
                               1015      All models                                                                            D: 20B                                                   1015             All models                                              D: 20B
                                         N <= 100M                                                                                                                                                       N <= 100M
                               1014      N <= 400M                                                                                                                                      1014             N <= 400M
                                         D/N <= 18                                                           N: 8T                                                                                       D/N <= 18                               N: 9T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D: 10B
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters


                                         D/N >= 22                                                           D: 10B                                                                                      D/N >= 22
                               1013      Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                                        1013             Hoffmann (reported)
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                                                               Kaplan (reported)
                               1012      Chinchilla (reported)                                                                                                                          1012             Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                       N: 1T                                                             GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                                          N: 20B                                                                       D: 6T                                                                              N: 30B
                               1011      Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                                                        1011             Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D: 5B
                                                         D: 6B                                                   N: 100B
                                                                                                                 D: 800B
                               1010                                                                                                                                                     1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N: 10B
                                                             N: 4B                                                                                                                                                                                    N: 5B              D: 600T
                               109                           D: 30B                                                                                                                     109                                      N: 2B                D: 20T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D: 80B
                               108                                                                                                                                                      108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                                1018          1019      1020      1021 1022 1023           1024     1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                           Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                   Ours                                                                                                                                            Ours (all checkpoints)

(c) §4, §7.2 From all 3 datasets, we choose subsets with (N , D) values which fit a particular method one might
have of setting up training. We fit with (1) all models, which for our dataset, ranges from 12 million to 1 billion
parameters, then with (2) only models of up to about 100 million parameters or (3) up to 400 million parameters.
We also compare the effects of a higher or lower hypothesis about the optimal D/N ratio, including (4) only
models with D/N ≤ 18 or (5) D/N ≥ 22. These ranges are designed to exclude D/N = 20, the rule of thumb
based on Hoffmann et al. (2022). The minimum or maximum D/N ratio tested does skew results; above 1022
FLOPs, (4) and (5) fit to optimal ratios D/N < 18 and D/N > 22, respectively. Removing our largest models
in (2) also creates a major shift in the predicted optimal D/N .


                                                                                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                  1014                                                              N: 40T
                                         N, C w/ embed                                         N: 9T                                                         N, C w/ embed                                          D: 200B
                                         N w/o embed                                           D: 700B                                                       N w/o embed
                               1013      C w/o embed                                                                                                         C w/o embed
                                         N, C w/o embed
                                                                                                                                                  1013       N, C w/o embed
                                                                               N: 400B                                                                                                             N: 1T
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                   Power law optimal parameters
                               1012      C=6ND approximation                   D: 200B                                                                       C=6ND approximation                   D: 70B
                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                      1012       Hoffmann (reported)                                         N: 3T
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                   Kaplan (reported)                                           D: 2T
                               1011      Chinchilla (reported)                                      N: 200B                                                  Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                    D: 40T                                        1011       GPT-2 (est. on reports)                    N: 200B
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                             Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                              N: 8B                     D: 500B
                               1010                       N: 4B                     N: 30B                                                                                   D: 20B
                                                         D: 40B                     D: 4T                                                         1010
                               109                                                                                                                                               N: 4B
                                                             N: 1B                                                                                109                            D: 40B
                                                             D: 100B
                               108                                                                                                                108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024     1025   1026                                             1018    1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025   1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                             Training compute (FLOP)

                                                     Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                   Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                               1015                                                            N: 300T                                            1015                                                              N: 300T
                                         N, C w/ embed                                         D: 20B                                                        N, C w/ embed                                          D: 30B
                                         N w/o embed                                                                                                         N w/o embed
                               1014      C w/o embed                                                                                              1014       C w/o embed
                                         N, C w/o embed                        N: 6T                N: 100T                                                  N, C w/o embed                        N: 6T
                                                                                                    D: 60B
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                   Power law optimal parameters


                               1013      C=6ND approximation                   D: 20B                                                             1013       C=6ND approximation                   D: 20B
                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                 Hoffmann (reported)
                               1012      Kaplan (reported)                          N: 3T                                                                    Kaplan (reported)                                           N: 4T
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                      D: 30B                                                        1012       Chinchilla (reported)                                       D: 2T
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                             GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                               1011      Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                          N: 10B                                                                                  1011       Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                              N: 20B                    N: 300B
                                                         D: 10B                                                                                                              D: 9B                      D: 300B
                               1010                           N: 10B                                                                              1010
                                                              D: 10B                                                                                                             N: 6B
                               109                                                                                                                109                            D: 30B
                               108                                                                                                                108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024     1025   1026                                             1018    1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025   1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                             Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                   Ours                                                                                               Ours (all checkpoints)

(d) §4, §7.2 With our own data and those from Porian et al. (2024), we fit power laws to the same sets of models,
while varying the ways we count N and C. We compare (1) including embeddings, which is our baseline, with
(2) excluding embeddings only in N , (3) excluding embeddings only in C, (4) excluding embeddings in both N
and C. We also compare to using the C = 6N D approximation, including embedding parameters. Throughout
this work, we calculate the FLOPs in a manner similar to Hoffmann et al. (2022), and we open source the code
for these calculations. With both datasets, the exclusion of embeddings in FLOPs has very little impact on
the final fit. Similarly, using the C = 6N D approximation has no visible impact. For the Porian et al. (2024)
models, the exclusion of embedding parameters in the calculation of N results in scaling laws which differ
substantially, and with increasing divergences at large scales.


                                                                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                              N: 100T
                                                                       Final checkpoint only                                  D: 60B
                                                            1014       All checkpoints
                                                                       10%+ training done
                                                            1013       20%+ training done                    N: 3T
                             Power law optimal parameters



                                                                       50%+ training done                    D: 30B
                                                                       Hoffmann (reported)
                                                            1012       Kaplan (reported)                                           N: 3T
                                                                       Chinchilla (reported)                                       D: 2T
                                                                       GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                                            1011       Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                        N: 10B                    N: 200B
                                                                                       D: 10B                     D: 500B
                                                            1010
                                                                                           N: 4B
                                                            109                            D: 40B

                                                            108

                                                               1018    1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025   1026
                                                                                        Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                      Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                              N: 100T
                                                                       Final checkpoint only                                  D: 60B
                                                            1014       All checkpoints
                                                                       10%+ training done
                                                            1013       20%+ training done                    N: 3T
                             Power law optimal parameters


                                                                       50%+ training done                    D: 30B
                                                                       Hoffmann (reported)                                         N: 4T
                                                            1012       Kaplan (reported)                                           D: 2T
                                                                       Chinchilla (reported)
                                                                       GPT-2 (est. on reports)                    N: 300B
                                                            1011       Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                        N: 10B                    D: 300B
                                                                                       D: 10B
                                                            1010
                                                                                           N: 6B
                                                            109                            D: 30B

                                                            108

                                                               1018    1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025   1026
                                                                                        Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                Ours (all checkpoints)

(e) §5, §7.3 With models from Porian et al. (2024) and our own dataset, we compare (1) fitting a power law
using only the final checkpoint with (2) using all mid-training checkpoints (3) using all checkpoints, starting
10% through training, (4) the same, starting 20% through training, and (5) the same again, starting 50% through
training. We observe that (2)-(5) consistently yields power laws more similar to that reported by Hoffmann
et al. (2022), so we also repeat all analyses in Figures 2a-2d. Using mid-training checkpoints sometimes results
in more stable fits which are similar to the Hoffmann et al. (2022) scaling laws, but the effect is noisy and
dependent on other decisions


                                                                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                    Optimize Full Grid
                                                                                                    Search Grid, Optimize 1
                                                                                         1013       Search Grid, Optimize 1000
                                                                                                    Optimize 100 Random                                                                        N: 1T
                                                                                                                                                                                               D: 5T


                                                          Power law optimal parameters
                                                                                                    Initialize from Chinchilla
                                                                                         1012       Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                    Kaplan (reported)                              N: 100B
                                                                                                    Chinchilla (reported)
                                                                                                                                                   D: 800B                                             N: 300B
                                                                                         1011       GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                            D: 20T
                                                                                                    Llama 3 405B (reported)                            N: 40B
                                                                                         1010                       N: 3B                              D: 2T
                                                                                                                    D: 50B
                                                                                         109                               N: 2B
                                                                                                                           D: 70B
                                                                                         108

                                                                                            1018    1019     1020      1021 1022 1023                  1024                               1025         1026
                                                                                                                      Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                         Hoffmann et al. (2022); Besiroglu et al. (2024)

                                          Optimize Full Grid                                                                                                                                             Optimize Full Grid
                                          Search Grid, Optimize 1                                                                                                                                        Search Grid, Optimize 1
                                1013      Search Grid, Optimize 1000                                                                                                                    1013             Search Grid, Optimize 1000                             N: 3T
                                          Optimize 100 Random                                                                    N: 1T                                                                   Optimize 100 Random                                    D: 2T
                                                                                                                                 D: 5T
 Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters
                                1012      Initialize from Chinchilla
                                                                                                                                                                                        1012             Initialize from Chinchilla                                     N: 3T
                                          Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                                            Hoffmann (reported)                   N: 200B                  D: 2T
                                          Kaplan (reported)                                                  N: 100B                                                                                     Kaplan (reported)                     D: 500B
                                          Chinchilla (reported)                                              D: 900B                                                                                     Chinchilla (reported)
                                1011                                                                                                     N: 200B                                        1011                                                        N: 200B
                                          GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                                                                        GPT-2 (est. on reports)                    D: 500B
                                          Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                        D: 40T                                                          Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                1010                            N: 3B                                               N: 20B                                                              1010                             N: 4B
                                                                D: 60B                                              D: 4T                                                                                                D: 40B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N: 4B
                                109                                                       N: 1B                                                                                         109                                   D: 40B
                                                                                          D: 100B
                                108                                                                                                                                                     108

                                   1018   1019     1020                         1021 1022 1023                      1024      1025       1026                                              1018          1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                                               Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                    Training compute (FLOP)

                                                      Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                                                         Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                                 N: 100T
                                          Optimize Full Grid                                                                     D: 60B                                                                  Optimize Full Grid
                                1014      Search Grid, Optimize 1
                                                                                                                                                                                        1013             Search Grid, Optimize 1                                N: 4T
                                          Search Grid, Optimize 1000                                                                                                                                     Search Grid, Optimize 1000                             D: 2T
                                1013      Optimize 100 Random                                                N: 3T                                                                                       Optimize 100 Random
 Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters


                                          Initialize from Chinchilla                                         D: 30B                                                                                      Initialize from Chinchilla            N: 300B                  N: 3T
                                          Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                           1012             Hoffmann (reported)                                            D: 2T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D: 300B
                                1012      Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                                                              Kaplan (reported)
                                          Chinchilla (reported)                                                                          N: 1T                                          1011             Chinchilla (reported)                      N: 300B
                                          GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                        D: 7T                                                           GPT-2 (est. on reports)                    D: 400B
                                1011      Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                            N: 20B                                                                                                                                       Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                D: 10B                                              N: 100B                                                                                              N: 6B
                                                                                                                    D: 900B                                                             1010                             D: 30B
                                1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N: 5B
                                                                                          N: 3B                                                                                         109                                   D: 30B
                                109                                                       D: 50B
                                108                                                                                                                                                     108

                                   1018   1019     1020                         1021 1022 1023                      1024      1025       1026                                              1018          1019     1020     1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                                               Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                    Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                                Ours                                                                                                              Ours (all checkpoints)


(f) §6, §7.4 We fit to data from all 3 datasets to experiment with the initialization of parameters in the power
law. We start with (1) optimizing every point in a grid search of 6x6x5x5x5=4500 initializations (Hoffmann
et al., 2022), (2) randomly sampling from only a single initialization in this grid, (3) searching for the lowest
loss initialization point (Caballero et al., 2022), (4) randomly sampling 100 points, and (5) initializing with the
coefficients found in Hoffmann et al. (2022), as Besiroglu et al. (2024) does. With the Besiroglu et al. (2024)
data, (5) yields a fit nearly identical to that reported by Hoffmann et al. (2022), although (1) results in the lowest
fitting loss. With the Porian et al. (2024) data, all approaches except (2) yield a very similar fit, which gives a
recommended D/N ratio similar to that ofHoffmann et al. (2022). However, using our data, (2) optimizing over
only the most optimal initialization yields the best match to the Hoffmann et al. (2022) power laws, followed
by (5) initialization from the reported Hoffmann et al. (2022) scaling law parameters. Optimizing over the full
grid yields the power law which diverges most from the Hoffmann et al. (2022) law, suggesting the difficulty of
optimizing over this space, and the presence of many local minima.



                                                                                                                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                      Log-Huber
                                                                                                                      Huber                                                                                     N: 3T
                                                                                                      1013            MSE                                                                                       D: 2T
                                                                                                                      MAE


                                                                       Power law optimal parameters
                                                                                                                      Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                      1012            Kaplan (reported)                                                      N: 200B                    N: 1T
                                                                                                                      Chinchilla (reported)                                                  D: 400B                    D: 5T
                                                                                                                      GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                                                                                      1011            Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                    N: 100B
                                                                                                                                                                                                 D: 800B
                                                                                                      1010                              N: 4B
                                                                                                                                        D: 40B
                                                                                                                                              N: 3B
                                                                                                      109                                     D: 50B

                                                                                                      108

                                                                                                         1018         1019      1020      1021 1022 1023                                         1024         1025      1026
                                                                                                                                         Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                                      Hoffmann et al. (2022); Besiroglu et al. (2024)



                                         Log-Huber                                                                                                                                                     Log-Huber
                                         Huber                                                                                                                                                         Huber
                               1013      MSE                                                                                                                                          1013             MSE                                                       N: 3T
                                         MAE                                                                                                                                                           MAE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D: 2T
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                       Power law optimal parameters

                               1012      Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                          1012             Hoffmann (reported)
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                     N: 200B                                                                 Kaplan (reported)                        N: 200B                  N: 1T
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                                                                 D: 40T                                                                  Chinchilla (reported)                    D: 500B                  D: 6T
                               1011      GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                             N: 30B                                                                   1011             GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                             D: 4T                                                                                     Llama 3 405B (reported)                       N: 100B
                                                                                                                                       N: 50B                                                                                                        D: 1T
                               1010                                                                                                    D: 100T                                        1010                               N: 4B
                                                         N: 1B                                                   N: 10B                                                                                                  D: 40B
                                                         D: 100B                                                 D: 10T
                               109                                                                                                                                                    109                                       N: 3B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D: 60B
                                                             N: 700M
                                                             D: 200B
                               108                                                                                                                                                    108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                              1018          1019      1020       1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                          Training compute (FLOP)

                                                     Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                                                        Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                               N: 100T
                                         Log-Huber                                                                             D: 60B                                                                  Log-Huber                                                 N: 8T
                               1014      Huber
                                                                                                                                                                                      1013             Huber                                                     D: 800B
                                         MSE                                                                                                                                                           MSE
                                         MAE                                                                 N: 3T                     N: 30T                                                          MAE
                               1013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N: 4T
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                       Power law optimal parameters


                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                 D: 30B                    D: 200B                                                         Hoffmann (reported)                      N: 500B
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                                            1012             Kaplan (reported)                        D: 200B                  D: 2T
                               1012      Chinchilla (reported)                                                                                                                                         Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                 N: 1T                                                                                 GPT-2 (est. on reports)                       N: 300B
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                                                                                 D: 70B                                                               1011             Llama 3 405B (reported)                       D: 300B
                               1011                      N: 20B                                                                                                                                                          N: 7B
                                                         D: 10B                                                                                                                       1010                               D: 20B
                               1010
                                                             N: 9B                                                                                                                                                              N: 5B
                                                             D: 20B                                                                                                                   109                                       D: 30B
                               109

                               108                                                                                                                                                    108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                              1018          1019      1020       1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                          Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                   Ours                                                                                                                                          Ours (all checkpoints)

(g) §6, §7.4 We fit a power law to data from from all 3 datasets, minimizing different objective functions: (1) the
baseline log-Huber loss, (2) MSE, (3) MAE, and (4) the Huber loss. The resulting power laws are less disparate
than when varying many of the other factors discussed above and generally fall near the power law parameters
reported by Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022), but this is still a wide range of recommended
optimal parameter counts for each compute budget. Overall, the loss function behavior is not predictable, given
the differences between loss functions when looking at the power laws resulting from these three sources of data.


                                                                                                                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                             N: 2e+11T
                                                                                                      1024            LBFGS                                                                                  D: 30
                                                                                                                      LBFGS (high tol)                                                         N: 4e+09T
                                                                                                      1022            LBFGS (gradient)
                                                                                                                                                                                               D: 30
                                                                                                                      BFGS             N: 8e+06T


                                                                       Power law optimal parameters
                                                                                                      1020            Nonlinear Least Squares
                                                                                                                                       D: 20
                                                                                                                      Grid Search
                                                                                                      1018            Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                                      Kaplan (reported)
                                                                                                      1016            Chinchilla (reported)
                                                                                                                      GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                                                                                      1014            Llama 3 405B (reported)

                                                                                                      1012
                                                                                                      1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                   N: 2B             N: 4B
                                                                                                      108                                     N: 500M                                              D: 50T            D: 1000T
                                                                                                                                              D: 300B
                                                                                                         1018         1019      1020       1021 1022 1023                                         1024 1025          1026
                                                                                                                                          Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                                                      Hoffmann et al. (2022); Besiroglu et al. (2024)



                                         LBFGS                                                                                                                                                       LBFGS
                               1013      LBFGS (high tol)                                                                                                                                            LBFGS (high tol)                                        N: 3T
                                         LBFGS (gradient)                                                                                                                               1013         LBFGS (gradient)                                        D: 2T
                                         BFGS                                                                                                                                                        BFGS
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters
                               1012      Nonlinear Least Squares                                                                                                                                     Nonlinear Least Squares                N: 300B                  N: 3T
                                         Grid Search                                                                           N: 200B                                                  1012         Grid Search                                                     D: 3T
                                                                                                                               D: 40T                                                                                                       D: 300B
                                         Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                                         Hoffmann (reported)
                               1011      Kaplan (reported)                                                   N: 30B                                                                     1011         Kaplan (reported)                           N: 200B
                                         Chinchilla (reported)                                               D: 4T                                                                                   Chinchilla (reported)                       D: 500B
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                                                                                      N: 10B
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                               1010                                                                                                                                                                                   D: 10B
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                          N: 1B                                                                                                                         1010         Llama 3 405B (reported)
                                                         D: 100B
                                                                                                                                       N: 3B                                                                                N: 4B
                               109                                                                                                     D: 2000T                                                                             D: 40B
                                                                                                                 N: 1B                                                                  109
                                                                                                                 D: 100T
                               108                           N: 200M
                                                             D: 1T                                                                                                                      108

                                  1018   1019     1020     1021 1022 1023                                        1024        1025      1026                                                1018      1019     1020      1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                      Training compute (FLOP)

                                                     Porian et al. (2024)                                                                                                                          Porian et al. (2024) (all checkpoints)


                                                                                                                               N: 100T                                                                                                                       N: 50T
                                         LBFGS                                                                                 D: 60B                                                   1014         LBFGS                                                   D: 100B
                               1014      LBFGS (high tol)                                                    N: 3T                                                                                   LBFGS (high tol)
                                         LBFGS (gradient)                                                    D: 30B                                                                                  LBFGS (gradient)                       N: 2T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D: 50B
                               1012      BFGS                                                                                                                                                        BFGS
                                                          N: 20B                                                                                                                        1012
Power law optimal parameters


                                                                                                                                                         Power law optimal parameters


                                         Nonlinear Least Squares                                                                                                                                     Nonlinear Least Squares
                                         Grid Search D: 10B                                                                                                                                          Grid Search N: 20B
                               1010      Hoffmann (reported)                                                                                                                                         Hoffmann (reported)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D: 10B
                                         Kaplan (reported)                                                                                                                                           Kaplan (reported)
                               108       Chinchilla (reported)                                                                                                                          1010         Chinchilla (reported)
                                         GPT-2 (est. on reports)                                                                                                                                     GPT-2 (est. on reports)
                                         Llama 3 405B (reported)                                                                                                                                     Llama 3 405B (reported)
                               106
                                                                                                                                                                                        108
                               104                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N: 20M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N: 6M               D: 300000T
                                                                                                                                                                                        106                                                      D: 20000T
                               102                                                                                                                                                                                          N: 700k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D: 200T
                                                              N: 9                                                N: 10                N: 10
                                  1018   1019     1020     10D:
                                                              21 2e+07T
                                                                    1022 1023                                     D:249e+09T
                                                                                                                 10       1025         D:106e+11T
                                                                                                                                            26                                             1018      1019     1020      1021 1022 1023           1024      1025      1026
                                                          Training compute (FLOP)                                                                                                                                      Training compute (FLOP)

                                                                   Ours                                                                                                                                       Ours (all checkpoints)
(h) §6, §7.4 We fit a power law to data from all 3 datasets using various optimizers, beginning with the original
(1) L-BFGS. L-BFGS and BFGS implementations have an early stopping mechanism, which conditions on the
stability of the solution between optimization steps. We set this threshold for L-BFGS to a (2) higher value 1e-4
(stopping earlier). We found that using any higher or lower values resulted in the same solutions or instability
for all three datasets. L-BFGS and BFGS also have the option to use the true gradient of the loss, instead of an
estimate, which is the default. In this figure, we include this setting, (3) using the true gradient for L-BFGS.
We compare these L-BFGS settings to (4) BFGS. We test the same tolerance value and gradient settings, and
find that none of these options change the outcome of BFGS in our analysis, and omit them from this figure for
legibility. Finally, we compare to (5) non-linear least squares and (6) pure grid search, using a grid 5 times more
dense along each axis as we used initialization with other optimizers. This density is chosen to approximately
match the runtime of L-BFGS. Many of these optimizers do converge to similar solutions, but this depends on
the data, and the settings which diverge from this majority do not follow any immediately evident pattern.


                                                                                                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: (§7) We study the effects of various decisions in the fitting of a power law, as outlined in our
checklist (Appendix B) and detailed in §3-§6. For each set of analyses, we the scaling laws found by
(Kaplan et al., 2020) and (Hoffmann et al., 2022) for comparison. We also include markers indicating
3 existing models for comparison purposes: Llama 3 405B (Dubey et al., 2024), the Chinchilla model
(Hoffmann et al., 2022), and an estimate of the 1.5B GPT-2 model (Radford et al., 2019), for which
we know details of the dataset storage size and word count, but not an exact count of data BPE tokens,
which we estimate at 100B. We additionally annotate, at the compute budget C for each of these 3
reference points, the maximum and minimum predicted (i.e. extrapolated) optimal model parameter
count Nopt and data budget Dopt from the fitted power laws. We use a thicker, solid line for the
method in each plot which achieves the lowest optimization loss, with the exception of the plots
comparing power law form, those comparing loss functions and those comparing optimizers, for
which this would be nonsensical. We find overall, throughout our analyses, that all of the decisions
we explore have an impact on the final fit of the power law, supporting our conclusion that more
thorough reporting of these decisions is critical for scaling law reproducibility.


                                                   32
