Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


O PTIMISTIC G AMES
FOR C OMBINATORIAL BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION
WITH A PPLICATION TO P ROTEIN D ESIGN

 Melis Ilayda Bal 1∗, Pier Giuseppe Sessa2 , Mojmír Mutný3 , Andreas Krause3
 1
   Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
 2
   Google DeepMind 3 ETH Zürich
 mbal@tuebingen.mpg.de, piergs@google.com
 mmutny@inf.ethz.ch, krausea@ethz.ch



                                              A BSTRACT

            Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful framework to optimize black-box
            expensive-to-evaluate functions via sequential interactions. In several important
            problems (e.g. drug discovery, circuit design, neural architecture search, etc.),
            though, such functions are defined over large combinatorial and unstructured
            spaces. This makes existing BO algorithms not feasible due to the intractable
            maximization of the acquisition function over these domains. To address this
            issue, we propose G AME O PT, a novel game-theoretical approach to combinatorial
            BO. G AME O PT establishes a cooperative game between the different optimization
            variables, and selects points that are game equilibria of an upper confidence bound
            acquisition function. These are stable configurations from which no variable has an
            incentive to deviate – analog to local optima in continuous domains. Crucially, this
            allows us to efficiently break down the complexity of the combinatorial domain
            into individual decision sets, making G AME O PT scalable to large combinatorial
            spaces. We demonstrate the application of G AME O PT to the challenging protein
            design problem and validate its performance on four real-world protein datasets.
            Each protein can take up to 20X possible configurations, where X is the length of a
            protein, making standard BO methods infeasible. Instead, our approach iteratively
            selects informative protein configurations and very quickly discovers highly active
            protein variants compared to other baselines.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Many scientific and engineering problems such as drug discovery (Negoescu et al., 2011), neural
architecture search (Kandasamy et al., 2018), or circuit design (Lyu et al., 2018) require optimization
of expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions over combinatorial unstructured spaces involving
binary, integer-valued, and categorical variables. As a concrete example, consider the protein
design problem, i.e., finding the optimal amino acid sequence to maximize the functional capacity
(fitness) of the protein. Such fitness functions are highly complex, one can, in most cases, only
be elucidated from real-world protein synthesis experiments. Moreover, exhaustive exploration is
infeasible for both traditional lab methods and computational techniques (Romero et al., 2013) due
to combinatorial explosion: a typical protein has 300 amino acid sites, each to be filled with one
of twenty natural amino acids, yielding 20300 candidate variants.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is an established framework for optimizing black-box functions with
the goal of minimizing the number of evaluations needed to certify optimality (Mockus, 1974). BO
constructs a probabilistic surrogate model as a representation of the underlying black-box function,
e.g., using Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen et al., 2006). Then, it iteratively selects the next
evaluations typically by maximizing a designated acquisition function. The BO framework has
proven to be very powerful and successful in a variety of real-world problems including material
discovery (Frazier & Wang, 2015), adaptive experimental design (Greenhill et al., 2020), or drug
    ∗
        Corresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/melisilaydabal/gameopt.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                      EQUILIBRIUM
                                                                            ROUNDS
                                                                      k=1     …K
      Player 1   Player 2   Player 3   Player 4


                      GAME

                                                                                      EQUILIBRIUM
Figure 1: Illustration of G AME O PT. G AME O PT defines a game among the decision variables, where
game rewards are represented by the upper confidence bound (UCB) function. This decouples the
combinatorial decision space into individual decision sets and allows G AME O PT to tractably compute
game equilibria. These can be thought of as local optima of the AF in unstructured domains.
discovery (Korovina et al., 2020; Stanton et al., 2022). When considering combinatorial domains,
however, standard BO methods are intractable since maximizing the acquisition function requires an
exhaustive search over the whole combinatorial space (e.g. of size 20300 in the context of proteins)
without further assumptions.
To address this challenge, we propose G AME O PT, a novel game-theoretical framework for combina-
torial BO. To circumvent the intractable maximization of an acquisition function, G AME O PT defines
a cooperative game between the discrete domain variables and, at each interaction round, selects
informative points to be game equilibria of the acquisition function. These are stable configurations
from which no player (variable) has the incentive to deviate. They can be thought of as a formalization
of a notion of local optima of the acquisition function in unstructured domains (i.e., domains lacking
a lattice structure). Crucially, these can be computed employing well-known equilibrium finding
subroutines, effectively simulating a repeated game among the players. In this work, we utilize the
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function, which represents an optimistic estimate of the
underlying objective and was shown to efficiently balance exploration with exploitation (Srinivas
et al., 2009). For an overview of the method, see Figure 1.
Contributions We make the following main contributions:
• We propose G AME O PT, a novel game-theoretical BO framework for large combinatorial and
  unstructured search spaces. G AME O PT computes informative evaluation points as the equilibria
  (i.e., local optima) of a cooperative game between the discrete variables. This overcomes the
  scalability issues of maximizing acquisition functions over combinatorial domains and provides a
  tractable optimization. G AME O PT is a flexible procedure where the resulting per-iteration game
  can be solved by any readily available game strategy or solver.
• Under common kernel regularity assumptions, we bound the sample complexity of G AME O PT,
  quantifying the gap between the computed equilibria (of the surrogate UCB function) and those of
  the underlying unknown objective. Given target accuracy level ϵ, G AME O PT returns ϵ-approximate
  equilibria after T = Ω(γT ϵ−2 ) iterations, where γT is the kernel-dependent maximum information
  gain (Srinivas et al., 2009).
• We apply G AME O PT to the challenging protein design problem, involving search spaces of
  categorical inputs. There, G AME O PT advances the protein design process by mimicking natural
  evolution via a game between protein sites. We experimentally validate its performance on
  several real-world protein design problems based on human binding protein GB1 (Wu et al., 2016;
  Olson et al., 2014), iron-dependent halogenase (Büchler et al., 2022) and green-fluorescent protein
  (Prasher et al., 1992; Biswas et al., 2021). G AME O PT converges consistently faster, i.e., it requires
  fewer BO iterations to identify highly binding protein variants compared to baseline methods such
  as classical directed evolution.

2    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND BACKGROUND
Problem statement We consider the problem of optimizing a costly-to-evaluate, black-box function
f : X → R over a combinatorial unstructured space X without a lattice form. Suppose each element
x ∈ X can be represented by n discrete variables (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) (n-dimensional), where each
xi takes values from a set X (i) , this makes the domain of n ≥ 1 variables X = X (1) × . . . X (n) .


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 G AME O PT
 1: Input: GP prior GP 0 (µ0 , k(·, ·)), initial data D0 = {(xi , yi = f (xi ) + ϵ)}, batch size B ∈ N,
    M ∈ N > B, parameter β.
 2: for iteration t = 1, 2, . . . , T do                             Qn
 3:   Construct game with reward function UCB(GP t−1 , β, ·) : i=1 X (i) → R
 4:   Compute M equilibria {xt,i }M      i=1 of the above.           */ Equilibrium-finding subroutine
                                                                           t−1
 5:   Select batch of top B equilibria {xt,i }B   i=1 according to UCB(GP      , β, ·).    */ Filtering
 6:   Obtain evaluations yt,i = f (xt,i ) + ϵt,i , ∀i = 1, . . . , B
 7:   Update Dt ← Dt−1 ∪ {(xt,i , yt,i )}B     i=1
 8:   Posterior update of model GP t with Dt .
 9: end for


Assuming |X (i) | = d, ∀i, the size of the combinatorial space X is dn . However, the proposed
G AME O PT framework can also operate under varying |X (i) | sizes, as we detail in Appendix E.7.
As a concrete motivating example, consider the protein design problem (Section 5). There, f (x)
represents the fitness value of the designed protein sequence x. The search space size is |X | = 20n ,
with n protein sites and |X (i) | = 20 amino acid choices per site. Moreover, a (noisy) evaluation
f (x) is a labor-intensive process, requiring extensive efforts and specialized laboratory equipment.

Gaussian Processes (GPs) Bayesian Optimization (Mockus, 1974) is a versatile framework for
optimizing complex, noisy, and expensive-to-evaluate functions. BO leverages Bayesian inference to
model the underlying function with a surrogate, e.g., a Gaussian Process (GP) and iteratively selects
evaluation points that are the most informative in terms of reducing uncertainty or enhancing model
performance.
Formally, a Gaussian Process GP(µ(·), k(·, ·)) over domain X is specified by a prior mean
function µ(x) : X → R and a covariance function k(x, x′ ) : X × X → R, denoted by
f (x) ∼ GP(µ(x), k(x, x′ )), where f (x) represents the function value at input x.
Given a set of observed data points Xt up to iteration t and their corresponding vector of noisy
observations Yt = f (Xt ) + ϵt with Gaussian noise ϵt ∼ N (0, σt2 ), and a GP prior defined by
GP(µt (x), kt (x, x′ )), the posterior distribution of the GP at iteration t + 1 given new observa-
                                                                      2
tions X† is again Gaussian p(ft+1 | Xt , X† , Yt ) = N (µt+1 , σt+1      ) with posterior mean and
variance (Rasmussen et al., 2006).
Bayesian Optimization (BO) To maximize f , BO algorithms iteratively select evaluation points
so as to balance exploration and exploitation. At each iteration the method selects the maximizer of
an acquisition function, for example, the widely-adopted Upper-Confidence Bound (UCB) (Srinivas
et al., 2009) function. Given a GP model at iteration t, the UCB function is defined as
                                 UCBt (GP, x) = µt (x) + βt σt (x),                                 (1)
where µ(x) and σ(x) are the posterior mean and standard deviation at point x according to GP, and
βt ∈ R is a confidence parameter influencing the width of the set that can be selected to ensure the
validity of the confidence set. The UCB function defines an optimistic estimate of the underlying
objective f , and can effectively balance exploration (i.e., favoring points with large uncertainty
σt (x)) with exploitation (i.e., selecting points with large posterior mean µt (x)).
While standard BO methods can efficiently optimize UCB(GP, ·) in efficiently enumerable or
continuous domains, they become very soon intractable in the case of combinatorial unstructured
domains, such as the space of possible amino acid sequences. In the next section, we propose
G AME O PT, a novel BO approach that circumvents such prohibitive difficulty.

3    G AME O PT ALGORITHM
In a nutshell, the proposed G AME O PT (Optimistic Games) approach circumvents the combinatorial
optimization of the UCB function by defining a cooperative game among the n input variables
and computes the associated equilibria as candidate evaluation points. Formally, at each iteration
t, G AME O PT defines a cooperative game (Fudenberg & Tirole, 1991) involving N = {1, . . . , n}


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


players, each player i taking actions in the discrete set X (i) . In such a game,
                                                                               Qnthe players’ interests
are aligned towards the goal of maximizing the function UCB(GP t , ·) : i=1 X (i) → R, where
GP t is the current GP estimate at iteration t. Thus, it can be interpreted as an optimistic game with
respect to the true unknown f . In such a game, the goal of the players is to compute game (Nash)
equilibria, defined as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Nash equilibrium (Nash, 1951)). Let ri : X → R be the reward function of
each player i, defined over joint configuration x. A joint strategy profile xeq = (x1eq , . . . , xneq ) is
a Nash equilibrium if, for every player i ∈ N , ri (xieq , x−i           i i   −i      i
                                                               eq ) ≥ r (x , xeq ), ∀x ∈ X
                                                                                           (i)
                                                                                                , where
         i    −i         −i
xeq = (xeq , xeq ), and xeq is the joint equilibrium strategy of all players except i.

The existence of such equilibrium point(s) is guaranteed since players and actions are finite (Fu-
denberg & Tirole, 1991). Moreover, because players’ reward functions are aligned and coincide
with UCB(GP t , ·), efficient polynomial-time equilibrium-finding methods can be employed, such
as Iterative Best-Response (IBR), where players update their actions sequentially, or simultaneous
multiplicative weights updates such as the H EDGE (Freund & Schapire, 1997) algorithm. We report
these two possible strategies in Algorithms 2 and 3 in Section 3.1. Intuitively, equilibria are computed
by breaking down the complex decision space into individual decision sets, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Mathematically, we refer to this operation as arg eq, returns the joint configuration(s) which form
equilibria according to UCB,
                         xeq = arg eqxi ∈X (i) ;i∈N UCB(GP t , (x1 , . . . , xn )).                     (2)

Our overall approach is summarized in Algorithm 1. In practice, we compute M > 1 equilibria and
subselect a batch of top B < M equilibria according to the UCB(GP t , ·) criterion. Subsequently,
such a batch is evaluated by f , the GP model is updated accordingly, and a new game with an
updated reward function is defined at the next iteration based on the updated posterior.

A form of local optimality Within G AME O PT, each player strategically selects actions to
maximize their collective payoff, much like seeking local optima in a continuous multi-dimensional
function (see Figure 1). In continuous optimization, a local optimum is a point, where there is no
direction that leads to an improvement, similarly, as in our framework there is not a player that can
unilaterally improve the value of the collective pay-off. In essence, seeking equilibria is analogous
to seeking local optima of a continuous acquisition function, and our game-based approach allows us
to effectively pinpoint them within an unstructured combinatorial space. We remark that G AME O PT
computes equilibria of the current UCB(GP t , ·) function which, as we show in Section 5, are better
and better approximations of equilibria of the unknown objective f .
Price of Anarchy But how good are equilibria compared to the global optimum? The quality of
equilibria (also known as the efficiency of the game) can be quantified via the game-theoretic notion of
Price of Anarchy (PoA) (Christodoulou & Koutsoupias, 2005), defined as the ratio between the worst
equilibrium and the global optimum, i.e., PoA := minx∈E f (x)/maxx f (x) where E is the set of all
equilibria of f . PoA has been extensively studied for various classes of games and can sometimes be
upper-bounded given further assumptions on f . As an example, in case f is a submodular function
(over binary, integer, or continuous domains), PoA is guaranteed to be at least 0.5 (Vetta, 2002; Sessa
et al., 2019b). Although such a PoA guarantee does not readily apply to our setting, we believe
similar ones could be proved for the case of unstructured domains — though this is beyond the scope
of our work. In practice, given an unknown function f (such as the protein’s fitness function in our
experiments of Section 5), not all equilibria may achieve high function values (i.e. PoA can be very
low). Nevertheless, G AME O PT computes multiple equilibria (M > 1) at each iteration and selects
only the top B according to their UCB value. We believe this is a key form of robustness that can
effectively filter out suboptimal equilibria and empower G AME O PT’s experimental performance.
3.1   E QUILIBRIUM FINDING SUBROUTINES
We present a set of established algorithms for finding an equilibrium of the game introduced in Eq. (2).

Iterative best responses One possible subroutine for Algorithm 1 is Iterative Best Response (IBR)
procedure as provided in Algorithm 2. Concretely, under the cooperative game setting outlined in
Section 3 and given GP-predicted UCB function, each player iteratively selects the response that
maximizes the value of the game given that the other players play the joint strategy from the previous


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Iterative Best Response (IBR) Algorithm 3 Simultaneous H EDGE
                                                                             Qn
 1: Input: Domain X , payoff (reward)           1: Input: Domain X = i=1 X (i) with | X (i) |=
    r : X → R, players N .                         W , payoff r : X → R, players N , parameter η.
 2: xbr                                 br
      0 ← random joint strategy, x0 ∈ X .       2: Initialize weights w 1 ← W    1
                                                                                   [1, . . . , 1] ∈ R|N |×W
 3: for round kn = 1, . . . , K do */ BR game 3: for round k = 1, . . . K do              */ Compute CCE
 4:    Xkbr ← (xi,br , x−i,br
                            k−1 ), such that
                                                4:    Sample xik ∼ wi1 , ∀i ∈ N
                                           on   5:    Set joint strategy xk ← {xik }i∈N
       xi,br = arg max r(x, x−i,brk−1    )      6:    for player i ∈ N do                */ Players’ payoff
                  x∈X (i)                   i=1
                                                                       j,−i
              br                                7:       ℓ  −i ← [r(x       )]          , where
 5:    Play x ← arg max
              k              xk ∈Xk br [r(xk )]           x  k
                                                                       k      ∀j∈X  (i)
                                                                            ′
 6: end for                                             xj,−i
                                                         k    = j ∪ {xik }i′ ∈N \{i} , ∀j ∈ X (i)
 7: return xbr
            K                   */ Equilibrium 8:       Set wik+1 ∝ wik exp(ηℓx−i )
                                                                                   k
                                                9:   end for
                                               10: end for
                                               11: return Uniform{x1 , . . . , xK }      */ Equilibrium


round. Each player is sequentially selected to play their best response in a round-robin fashion.
Because action space is finite, this procedure is guaranteed to converge to a local maximum of the
UCB function i.e., an equilibrium of the underlying game (Fudenberg & Tirole, 1991).

Multiplicative weights updates Alternatively, we can compute game equilibria letting players
simultaneously act according to a multiplicative weights update algorithm such as H EDGE (Freund &
Schapire, 1997), see Algorithm 3. We can cast equilibrium computation as an instance of adversarial
online learning among multiple learners (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). Here, each player selects
a strategy based on their available options and, after observing the joint payoff, players’ strategies
are re-weighted based on past performance. Through repeated rounds of play and re-weighting, the
empirical frequency of play forms a coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) (a weaker notion of Nash
equilibrium), see e.g. (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006), while convergence to pure Nash equilibria
is also guaranteed in some cases (Kleinberg et al., 2009; Palaiopanos et al., 2017).

3.2   R ELATED WORK
While there exist rather few works in the area (Papenmeier et al., 2023), existing combinatorial BO
methods either target surrogate modeling with discrete variables (Baptista & Poloczek, 2018; Oh
et al., 2019; Garrido-Merchán & Hernández-Lobato, 2020; Kim et al., 2021; Deshwal et al., 2023)
or optimizing acquisition function within discrete spaces (Baptista & Poloczek, 2018; Deshwal et al.,
2020; 2021a;b; Khan et al., 2023). However, they often require a parametric surrogate model with
higher-order interaction specifications for combinatorial structures (Baptista & Poloczek, 2018) or
domain-specific knowledge (Deshwal et al., 2020). In contrast, G AME O PT relies on a non-parametric
surrogate model, without the need for domain-specific knowledge.
Closest to ours is (Daulton et al., 2022), which also targets optimizing the acquisition function
in high-cardinality discrete/mixed search spaces via a probabilistic reparameterization (PR) that
maximizes the expectation of the acquisition function. However, PR fails at being tractable since
it requires evaluating the expectation over the joint distribution of all decision variables, requiring
combinatorially many elements to be summed. An accurate estimate would require extensive sampling
without special structural assumptions. In contrast, G AME O PT treats each variable independently
(potentially in parallel) within the game, keeping the values of the remaining variables fixed during
each strategy update. We use PR as a baseline to evaluate our approach in Section 5, and demonstrate
improved performance of our method on protein design problems.
Further, a body of research has focused on BO over continuous (latent) spaces (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Eriksson et al., 2019; Tripp et al., 2020; Deshwal & Doppa, 2021; Maus et al., 2022;
Stanton et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). These methods learn continuous sequence embeddings
and optimize with gradient-based techniques by utilizing deep generative models. However, the
primary problem we address in our study is the intractable acquisition function optimization over
large combinatorial search spaces, specifically tackling the challenge of exhaustive exploration. In
line with this, we select our baselines accordingly and include a comparison with some latent space
optimizers only as additional experimental evaluation for insight.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Recently, a line of works has explored the interplay between BO & game theory (Sessa et al., 2019a;
Dadkhahi et al., 2020; Han et al., 2024), and coordinated exploration (Sessa et al., 2022; Bal et al.,
2024) for various domains, but their connection with combinatorial BO is novel.

4    S AMPLE -C OMPLEXITY G UARANTEES
In this section, we derive sample-complexity guarantees for G AME O PT. Namely, we characterize
the number of interaction rounds T required to reach approximate equilibria (i.e., local optima) of
the true function f . For simplicity, we assume G AME O PT is run with batch size B = 1, though our
results can be generalized to larger B.
The obtained guarantees are based on standard regret bounds of Bayesian optimization adapted to
our equilibrium finding goal. These are characterized by the widely utilized notion of maximum
information gain (Srinivas et al., 2009):
                                             1
                                      γt =     log It + σ −1 K t .                                     (3)
                                             2
This is a kernel-dependent (K t ) quantity that quantifies the maximal uncertainty reduction about
f after t observations. Further, to characterize our sample complexity, we define the notion of
ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium.
Definition 4.1 (ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium). A strategy profile x̃eq is a ϵ-approximate (Nash)
equilibrium of f if, for each i ∈ N , f (x̃eq ) ≥ f (xi , x̃−i          i
                                                            eq ) − ϵ, ∀x ∈ X
                                                                             (i)
                                                                                 .

In the next main theorem, we provide a lower bound on the number of iterations T to reach approxi-
mate equilibria. After T rounds, we assume G AME O PT returns xT ⋆ with:
                   T ⋆ := arg min max    UCB(GP t , xi , x−i           t

                                     i
                                                          t ) − LCB(GP , xt ) ,
                               t∈[T ] i,x

where LCB is the lower confidence bound function LCB(GP t , x) = µt (x) − βt σt (x). That is, among
the selected points x1 , . . . , xT , xT ⋆ is the one that guarantees the minimum worst-case single-player
deviation. The deviation above is computed according to the UCB and with respect to the LCB, thus
representing an upper bound on the actual deviation in terms of f . We can affirm the following.
Theorem 4.2 (Sample complexity of G AME O PT). Assume f satisfies       the regularity  assumptions
                                                                                                    of
                                                                                    t2 π 2
Section 2, and G AME O PT is run with confidence width βt = 2n log supi∈N |Xi | 6δ . Then, with
probability at least 1 − δ and for a given accuracy ϵ ≥ 0, the strategy xT ⋆ returned by G AME O PT is
a ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium when

                                                   βT γ T
                                          T ≥Ω              .                                      (4)
                                                     ϵ2
An equivalent interpretation of the above result is as follows: After T iterations, G AME O PT returns
                                                                                      1√
an ϵT -approximate Nash equilibrium of f , with approximation factor ϵT ≤ O(T − 2 βT γT ). Note
that the latter bound is the typical rate of convergence of BO algorithms (Srinivas et al., 2009) to the
global maximizer. Instead, in our combinatorial BO setup –where global optimization is intractable–
it corresponds to the rate of convergence to equilibria. A more explicit convergence guarantee can be
obtained by employing existing bounds for γT which are known for commonly used kernels (Srinivas
et al., 2009). E.g., for squared exponential kernels γT = O(log(T )nd ) where d is the dimension of
each input space X (i) for each player i ∈ N , with |N | = n.

5    A PPLICATION TO P ROTEIN D ESIGN
In this section, we specialize the G AME O PT framework to protein design, a problem defined over the
space of possible amino acid sequences. Note that such domains are highly combinatorial (their size
grows exponentially with the sequence length) and unstructured (i.e. they lack a lattice structure). In
this context, computing game equilibria follows the natural principle of promoting beneficial mutants
and mirrors the proteins’ mutation and selection process. In Algorithms 4 and 5 (Appendix B), we
provide a detailed elaboration of G AME O PT for protein design using equilibrium-finding methods.
We showcase its performance in four real-world protein datasets.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In the protein design context, G AME O PT establishes a cooperative game among the different protein
sites i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where n is the length of the protein sequence. Each site i chooses an amino acid
from the set with | X (i) |= 20, where the switching between amino acid choices can be thought of as
biological mutation. The joint objective of the players is to converge to a highly rewarding protein
sequence, as measured by the GP-predicted optimistic score for the fitness function. This mirrors the
selection phase in evolutionary search, providing a directed approach to protein optimization. Below,
we discuss related work in the area.
Related work on evolutionary search. A considerable line of works (Arnold, 1998; Hansen,
2006; Romero & Arnold, 2009; Yang et al., 2019; Deshwal et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2022; Low
et al., 2023) centers around evolutionary search algorithms for optimizing black-box functions.
Within combinatorial amino-acid sequence spaces, the highly regarded technique, directed evolution
(Arnold, 1998; Romero & Arnold, 2009), draws inspiration from natural evolution and identifies
local optima through a series of repeated random searches, characterized by controlled iterative
cycles of mutation and selection. Expanding upon this, machine learning-guided variants (Yang
et al., 2019; Wittmann et al., 2021; Romero et al., 2013; Angermueller et al., 2020) mitigate the
sample-inefficiency and intractability concerns associated with directed evolution. In general, these
methods are not data-driven in the sense that they do not use the whole extent of the past data and
focus on the best variant found so far or a selection thereof and propose a random search from
thereon. Alternatively, even if allowed to adapt to the past outcomes, they tend to restrict themselves
to very small search spaces (Büchler et al., 2022). Instead, our approach uses all past data to create
a UCB estimate of the fitness landscape and utilize it to simulate a cooperative evolution in problems
where even the whole sequence of the protein can be optimized. Moreover, compared to such
methods, G AME O PT mimics evolution within each interaction using the surrogate UCB function.

5.1   DATASETS

We empirically evaluate G AME O PT on real-world protein design problems, specifically focusing
on the following instances: protein G domain B1, GB1, binding affinity to an antibody IgG-FC
(KA), examined on two distinct datasets, GB1(4) (Wu et al., 2016) and GB1(55) (Olson et al., 2014),
characterized by sequence lengths of 4 and 55, respectively; three critical amino acid positions in
an iron/α-ketoglutarate-dependent halogenase with sequence length 3 (Büchler et al., 2022); and
Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein (GFP) of length 238 (Prasher et al., 1992; Biswas et al.,
2021). The former GB1 dataset is fully combinatorial, i.e., covering fitness measurements of 204
variants. Here, each protein site is treated as a player in the G AME O PT. The latter is non-exhaustive,
including only 2-point mutations of GB1. Thus, an MLP having R2 = 0.93 on a test set is trained
and treated as the ground truth fitness for the fully combinatorial dataset. For GB1(55), we also
consider a modified setup where “only” 10 sites can be mutated. Similarly, Halogenase and GFP are
also non-exhaustive involving fitness measurements for 605 and 35, 584 unique variants, respectively.
To obtain the complete protein fitness landscape, we once again construct oracles for these datasets,
utilizing MLPs achieving R2 = 0.96 and R2 = 0.90 on their respective test sets. In the case of the
Halogenase dataset, each protein site is treated as a player, while for the GFP dataset, 6 and 8 sites
are designated as players. Further experimental details are in Appendix D.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In all experiments, we use a GP surrogate with an RBF kernel for GP-based methods. The RBF
specifies lengthscales for each input variable separately – sometimes known as ARD kernels
(Rasmussen et al., 2006). To handle categorical inputs to the GP surrogate, we employ feature
embeddings as representations for these inputs using the ESM-1v transformer protein language
model by (Meier et al., 2021). The prior mean for the GP is pre-defined as the average log fitness
value over the whole dataset. Kernel hyperparameters are optimized prior to the start of optimization
and remain fixed throughout the BO iterations; specifically, lengthscales are optimized over the
training set at the start of each replication using Bayesian evidence, and the outputscale is fixed to
the difference between the maximum fitness value observed in the dataset & mean. In other words,
we also fit a prior mean. A consistent observation noise of 0.0004 is maintained for each training
example. Moreover, we use batch size B = 5. In Appendix D, we provide the (hyper)parameter
settings (see Table 1) and the detailed setup for the experiments.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


               LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                     LogFitness (best so far)
3.5                                              1.0
3.0                                                                                               6.2
2.5                                              0.8
                                                                                                  6.0
2.0
1.5                                              0.6                                              5.8
1.0
                                                 0.4                                              5.6
0.5
       0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50               0     5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50         0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                        Iterations                                          Iterations                                   Iterations
      (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                        (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                    (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.
               LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                     LogFitness (best so far)
6.6                                                                                                5
                                                     2
6.4                                                                                                4
6.2                                                  1                                             3
6.0                                                                                                2
                                                     0                                             1
5.8
                                                                                                   0
5.6
                                                     1                                             1
       0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50               0    5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50          0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                        Iterations                                          Iterations                                   Iterations
           (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                  (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
           GameOpt-IBR               GameOpt-Hedge                 IBR-Fitness           PR   GP-UCB              Random              Best strategy

Figure 2: Convergence speed of methods in terms of log fitness value of the best-so-far protein across
BO iterations, under batch size B = 5. Results are averaged over replications initiated with different
training sets: 100 protein variants for Halogenase and GB1(4), and 1000 protein variants for other
domains. Error bars are interquartile ranges averaged over replications. In all experiments G AME O PT
with I BR and H EDGE subroutines discover better protein sequences at a much faster rate.
5.3        BASELINES

We benchmark G AME O PT against the following baselines:

 1. GP-UCB (Srinivas et al., 2009) selecting –at each iteration– the best B points in terms of UCB
    value. Note that this is feasible (though computationally expensive) only for the GB1(4) and
    Halogenase datasets, while it is prohibitive for GB(55) and GFP
 2. IBR-F ITNESS, which mimics directed evolution (Arnold, 1998) through a series of local searches
    on the fitness landscape, iteratively selecting the B best-responses based on log fitness criterion
 3. PR (Daulton et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art discrete/mixed BO approach picking B points using
    the expected UCB criterion
 4. R ANDOM baseline randomly sampling B random sequences at each iteration.

Further details and pseudo codes of such baselines are in Appendix C.
We assess our method using two key metrics: convergence speed and sampled batch diversity w.r.t.
past, (i.e., the degree of distinctiveness among newly acquired samples in comparison to the original
data point particularly in the context of the input space) for BO evaluation. The latter can also be
regarded as the measure of exploration. Convergence speed is tracked by the log fitness value of the
best-so-far discovered protein variant across BO iterations. We monitor the diversity of the sampled
batch concerning the past across BO iterations through (1) the average Hamming distance between
the executed variant and the proposed variant from the previous iteration (pairwise distance) and (2)
the average Hamming distance of the executed variant from the nearest initial training point.
In Appendix E, we provide additional performance metrics such as the fraction of global optima
discovered, the fraction of discovered solutions above a fitness threshold, cumulative maximum, and
mean pairwise Hamming distances. Moreover, we compare with discrete local search methods (Ba-
landat et al., 2020) in Appendix E.3 and report their respective runtimes in Appendix E.4.
5.4 R ESULTS
G AME O PT, with I BR and H EDGE equilibrium computation subroutines, consistently outperform
baselines across all experiments, discovering higher fitness protein sequences faster (see Figure 2).
Results for Halogenase. While initially surpassed by IBR-F ITNESS, PR, and GP-UCB, G AME O PT
variants converge faster to higher log fitness proteins than baselines. Notably, IBR-F ITNESS performs


                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                 Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                  Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
3.0                                                              4                                                            6
2.5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                 3
2.0                                                                                                                           4
1.5                                                              2                                                            3
1.0                                                                                                                           2
                                                                 1
0.5                                                                                                                           1
0.0                                                              0                                                            0
        0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                       0    5    10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50           0    5    10    15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                      Iterations
      (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                                      (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                                      (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.
         Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                     Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                 Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
8                                                                10
                                                                                                                              50
6                                                                 8
                                                                                                                              40
                                                                  6                                                           30
4
                                                                  4                                                           20
2                                                                 2                                                           10
0                                                                 0                                                               0
    0       5       10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50        0     5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50           0     5   10    15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                      Iterations
            (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                                   (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
                GameOpt-IBR                  GameOpt-Hedge                      IBR-Fitness               PR             GP-UCB                      Random               Best strategy

Figure 3: Sampled batch diversity relative to past, measured via mean Hamming distance between
executed and proposed variants from the previous iteration (pairwise distance), under batch size
B = 5. Results are averaged over replications, and error bars show interquartile ranges. In all
experiments G AME O PT consistently samples a rather diverse batch of evaluation points w.r.t.
past proposed variants. This enhanced exploration of the search space contributes to its strong
performance compared to the baseline methods.


best-responses on the true log fitness function, whereas G AME O PT-I BR simulates best-response
dynamics directly on the UCB model, allowing to compute equilibria at each iteration. Additionally,
although GP-UCB performs comparably, it incurs higher computational demands. Furthermore,
PR and R ANDOM perform poorly in the Halogenase setting.
Results for GB1(4). Similarly, G AME O PT approaches steadily surpass PR and GP-UCB while
exploring superior protein sequences efficiently. Initially trailing IBR-F ITNESS, G AME O PT
approaches prove more adept at exploring and sampling diverse points (see Figure 4 in Appendix E).
The baseline PR is not very competitive and also comes with higher computational demands. As
highlighted in Section 3.2, PR relies on the expected UCB as the acquisition function, requiring
expectation computation across players set and amino acid choices. This makes its performance
contingent on accurately estimating expected UCB through combinatorially many sequence samples.
In contrast, G AME O PT efficiently finds stable outcomes by breaking down the combinatorial search
space into individual decision sets, resulting in a more manageable process.
Finally, of particular observation is the subpar performance of GP-UCB and R ANDOM. A detailed
analysis of GP-UCB’s performance is presented in Appendix E.2, where it is observed that the
efficacy of GP-UCB heavily relies on the quality of the initial GP surrogate. In contrast, G AME O PT
demonstrates robustness in overcoming the limitations of a model initialized with a limited amount
of data, thereby enhancing its sample efficiency. Further discussion on the performance of methods
can be found in Appendix E.
Results for GFP. The complexity of the problem positively correlates with the performance gap
between G AME O PT and baselines. In the protein search space with 6 and 8 amino acid decisions,
G AME O PT with either subroutine excels in identifying high-log fitness protein sequences even from
the start. Figure 3 further demonstrates G AME O PT’s consistent exploration of diverse batches and
Figure 4 in Appendix E.1 shows its high rate of exploration.
Results for GB1(55).       In both versions of the most complex problem domain, G AME O PT
demonstrates superior performance. As the decision flexibility (i.e., the number of players) increases
from 10 to 55, the performance gap against baselines widens. Furthermore, G AME O PT achieves
incomparable batch diversity concerning past, both with respect to the initial training and previously
executed protein sequences, as shown in Figures 3 and 4 in Appendix E.1.

                                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.5   F URTHER DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
In our experiments, we compare to IBR-F ITNESS, which simulates currently employed strategies
in the iterative protein optimization literature. This is by no means the only methodology applied
in this field, and a comprehensive comparison is beyond the scope of this work.

Batch size. Similar to the previous point, in the experiments presented in Section 5.4, we use a
batch size of B = 5. While we acknowledge this is a restrictive setup given the technological needs of
common screenings, nevertheless, our results should be transferable and applicable irrespective of the
batch size which differs to each laboratory setting. To support this, we include batch size ablations,
B = {1, 3, 5, 10, 50}, in Appendix E.8 (Figure 12), demonstrating that G AME O PT variations consis-
tently outperform baseline methods in discovering better protein sequences across various batch sizes.

Learning rate. In Appendix E.9, we detail learning rate ablations for G AME O PT-H EDGE.

Efficient vs better optimization of the acquisition function. The primary benefit of G AME O PT is
its ability to efficiently optimize the acquisition function by adopting a game-theoretical perspective.
Unlike GP-UCB, our focus is on tractable optimization in large combinatorial spaces rather than
improving optimization. This efficiency is vital for navigating such spaces, where G AME O PT exploits
game equilibria to enhance exploration. Appendix E.10 (see Figure 15) provides an analysis of UCB
values over BO iterations. While G AME O PT is initially outperformed by GP-UCB in collecting
higher UCB-valued batches, its exploration strategy ultimately leads to more efficient optimization.

Different acquisition functions. We design the G AME O PT framework using UCB as the
acquisition function (also the game reward function), with its sample complexity derived accordingly.
To assess broader applicability, we also evaluate G AME O PT with alternative acquisition functions,
such as expected improvement (Jones et al., 1998). As shown in Appendix E.11, Figure 16, our
empirical comparison with GP-based methods reveals that G AME O PT consistently outperforms these
baselines across all performance metrics.

Comparison with latent space optimizers. In line with the primary focus of this study, we
compare G AME O PT to baselines that employ acquisition function optimizers operating directly on
large combinatorial search spaces (Dreczkowski et al., 2024), addressing the challenge of exhaustive
exploration. As discussed in Section 3.2, another line of work follows BO over continuous spaces
by learning a latent representation via deep generative models. While a comprehensive comparison
with these methods is beyond our scope, we provide additional insights in Appendix E.12, where we
empirically compare G AME O PT against Naïve LSBO-(L-BFGS-B) (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018),
using a second-order gradient-based optimizer, and LADDER (Deshwal & Doppa, 2021). The results
highlight G AME O PT’s effectiveness— not only in finding higher-fitness sequences tractably but also
in bypassing the limitations of latent space optimizers, particularly their dependency on a decoder.

Sequence-based kernels. To show the applicability of G AME O PT under various kernel choices, we
provide additional analysis using string kernels (Moss et al., 2020) in Appendix E.12. Specifically, we
consider a structure-coupled kernel designed by combining an RBF kernel with a sub-sequence string
kernel (Moss et al., 2020). In this setting, G AME O PT demonstrates faster convergence to higher log
fitness protein sequences, further emphasizing its adaptability across different kernel configurations.


6     C ONCLUSIONS
We introduced G AME O PT, a novel tractable game-theoretical approach to combinatorial BO that
leverages game equilibria of a cooperative game between discrete inputs of a costly-to-evaluate
black-box function to tractably optimize the acquisition function over combinatorial and unstructured
spaces, and select informative points. Empirical analysis on challenging protein design problems
showed that G AME O PT surpassed baselines in terms of convergence speed, consistently identifying
better protein variants more quickly, thereby being more resource-efficient. G AME O PT is a versatile
framework, allowing for exploration with different acquisition functions or mixed equilibrium
concepts. As for future work, an adaptive grouping of players could be further investigated.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
MIB acknowledges the support of the Max Planck Graduate Center for Computer and Information
Science. The preliminary experiments were made possible through the support of the Max Planck
Institute for Software Systems compute cluster.

R EFERENCES
Christof Angermueller, David Belanger, Andreea Gane, Zelda Mariet, David Dohan, Kevin Murphy,
  Lucy Colwell, and D Sculley. Population-based black-box optimization for biological sequence
  design. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 324–334. PMLR, 2020.
Frances H Arnold. Design by directed evolution. Accounts of chemical research, 31(3):125–131,
  1998.
Melis Ilayda Bal, Cem Iyigun, Faruk Polat, and Huseyin Aydin. Population-based exploration
 in reinforcement learning through repulsive reward shaping using eligibility traces. Annals of
 Operations Research, pp. 1–33, 2024.
Maximilian Balandat, Brian Karrer, Daniel R. Jiang, Samuel Daulton, Benjamin Letham, An-
 drew Gordon Wilson, and Eytan Bakshy. BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo
 Bayesian Optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 2020.
Ricardo Baptista and Matthias Poloczek. Bayesian optimization of combinatorial structures. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 462–471. PMLR, 2018.
Surojit Biswas, Grigory Khimulya, Ethan C Alley, Kevin M Esvelt, and George M Church. Low-n
  protein engineering with data-efficient deep learning. Nature methods, 18(4):389–396, 2021.
Johannes Büchler, Sumire Honda Malca, David Patsch, Moritz Voss, Nicholas J Turner, Uwe T
  Bornscheuer, Oliver Allemann, Camille Le Chapelain, Alexandre Lumbroso, Olivier Loiseleur,
  et al. Algorithm-aided engineering of aliphatic halogenase welo5* for the asymmetric late-stage
  functionalization of soraphens. Nature Communications, 13(1):371, 2022.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, Learning, and Games. 01 2006.
Lixue Cheng, Ziyi Yang, Changyu Hsieh, Benben Liao, and Shengyu Zhang. Odbo: Bayesian
  optimization with search space prescreening for directed protein evolution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.09548, 2022.
George Christodoulou and Elias Koutsoupias. On the price of anarchy and stability of correlated
  equilibria of linear congestion games. In Gerth Stølting Brodal and Stefano Leonardi (eds.),
 Algorithms – ESA 2005, 2005.
Hamid Dadkhahi, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Jesus Rios, Payel Das, Samuel C Hoffman, Troy David
  Loeffler, and Subramanian Sankaranarayanan. Combinatorial black-box optimization with expert
  advice. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1918–1927, 2020.
Samuel Daulton, Xingchen Wan, David Eriksson, Maximilian Balandat, Michael A Osborne, and
  Eytan Bakshy. Bayesian optimization over discrete and mixed spaces via probabilistic reparame-
  terization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:12760–12774, 2022.
Aryan Deshwal and Jana Doppa. Combining latent space and structured kernels for bayesian
  optimization over combinatorial spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  8185–8200, 2021.
Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, Janardhan Doppa, and Alan Fern. Optimizing discrete spaces via
  expensive evaluations: A learning to search framework. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 34:3773–3780, 04 2020.
Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Bayesian optimization over hybrid
  spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2632–2643. PMLR, 2021a.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Mercer features for efficient combina-
  torial bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(8):
  7210–7218, May 2021b.

Aryan Deshwal, Sebastian Ament, Maximilian Balandat, Eytan Bakshy, Janardhan Rao Doppa,
  and David Eriksson. Bayesian optimization over high-dimensional combinatorial spaces via
  dictionary-based embeddings. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 7021–7039. PMLR, 2023.

Kamil Dreczkowski, Antoine Grosnit, and Haitham Bou Ammar. Framework and benchmarks
  for combinatorial and mixed-variable bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

David Eriksson, Michael Pearce, Jacob Gardner, Ryan D Turner, and Matthias Poloczek. Scalable
  global optimization via local bayesian optimization. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.

Peter I Frazier and Jialei Wang. Bayesian optimization for materials design. In Information science
  for materials discovery and design, pp. 45–75. Springer, 2015.

Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an
  application to boosting. Journal of computer and system sciences, 55(1):119–139, 1997.

Drew Fudenberg and Jean Tirole. Game theory. MIT press, 1991.

Eduardo C Garrido-Merchán and Daniel Hernández-Lobato. Dealing with categorical and integer-
  valued variables in bayesian optimization with gaussian processes. Neurocomputing, 380:20–35,
  2020.

Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous
  representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.

Stewart Greenhill, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Pratibha Vellanki, and Svetha Venkatesh. Bayesian
  optimization for adaptive experimental design: A review. IEEE access, 8:13937–13948, 2020.

Minbiao Han, Fengxue Zhang, and Yuxin Chen. No-regret learning of nash equilibrium for black-box
 games via gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08318, 2024.

Nikolaus Hansen. The cma evolution strategy: a comparing review. Towards a new evolutionary
  computation: Advances in the estimation of distribution algorithms, pp. 75–102, 2006.

Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive
  black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization, 13:455–492, 1998.

Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabas Poczos, and Eric P Xing.
  Neural architecture search with bayesian optimisation and optimal transport. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Asif Khan, Alexander I Cowen-Rivers, Antoine Grosnit, Philippe A Robert, Victor Greiff, Eva
  Smorodina, Puneet Rawat, Rahmad Akbar, Kamil Dreczkowski, Rasul Tutunov, et al. Toward
  real-world automated antibody design with combinatorial bayesian optimization. Cell Reports
  Methods, 3(1), 2023.

Jungtaek Kim, Michael McCourt, Tackgeun You, Saehoon Kim, and Seungjin Choi. Bayesian
  optimization with approximate set kernels. Machine Learning, 110:857–879, 2021.

Robert Kleinberg, Georgios Piliouras, and Éva Tardos. Multiplicative updates outperform generic
  no-regret learning in congestion games. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM symposium
  on Theory of computing, pp. 533–542, 2009.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Ksenia Korovina, Sailun Xu, Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Barnabas Poczos, Jeff
  Schneider, and Eric Xing. Chembo: Bayesian optimization of small organic molecules with syn-
  thesizable recommendations. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 3393–3403. PMLR, 2020.
Andre KY Low, Flore Mekki-Berrada, Aleksandr Ostudin, Jiaxun Xie, Eleonore Vissol-Gaudin,
 Yee-Fun Lim, Abhishek Gupta, Qianxiao Li, Yew Soon Ong, Saif A Khan, et al. Evolution-guided
  bayesian optimization for constrained multi-objective optimization in self-driving labs. ChemRxiv,
  2023.
Wenlong Lyu, Fan Yang, Changhao Yan, Dian Zhou, and Xuan Zeng. Batch bayesian optimization
 via multi-objective acquisition ensemble for automated analog circuit design. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3306–3314. PMLR, 2018.
Natalie Maus, Haydn Jones, Juston Moore, Matt J Kusner, John Bradshaw, and Jacob Gardner.
  Local latent space bayesian optimization over structured inputs. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:34505–34518, 2022.
Joshua Meier, Roshan Rao, Robert Verkuil, Jason Liu, Tom Sercu, and Alex Rives. Language models
  enable zero-shot prediction of the effects of mutations on protein function. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:29287–29303, 2021.
Jonas Mockus. On bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. In Optimization Techniques, 1974.
Henry Moss, David Leslie, Daniel Beck, Javier Gonzalez, and Paul Rayson. Boss: Bayesian
  optimization over string spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15476–
 15486, 2020.
J.F. Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of Mathematics, 54(2):286–295, 1951.
Diana M Negoescu, Peter I Frazier, and Warren B Powell. The knowledge-gradient algorithm for
  sequencing experiments in drug discovery. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 23(3):346–363,
  2011.
Changyong Oh, Jakub Tomczak, Efstratios Gavves, and Max Welling. Combinatorial bayesian
  optimization using the graph cartesian product. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
C Anders Olson, Nicholas C Wu, and Ren Sun. A comprehensive biophysical description of pairwise
  epistasis throughout an entire protein domain. Current biology, 24(22):2643–2651, 2014.
Gerasimos Palaiopanos, Ioannis Panageas, and Georgios Piliouras. Multiplicative weights update
  with constant step-size in congestion games: Convergence, limit cycles and chaos. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Leonard Papenmeier, Luigi Nardi, and Matthias Poloczek. Bounce: Reliable high-dimensional
  bayesian optimization for combinatorial and mixed spaces. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:1764–1793, 2023.
Patrick C Phillips. Epistasis—the essential role of gene interactions in the structure and evolution of
  genetic systems. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(11):855–867, 2008.
Douglas C Prasher, Virginia K Eckenrode, William W Ward, Frank G Prendergast, and Milton J
  Cormier. Primary structure of the aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein. Gene, 111(2):
  229–233, 1992.
Carl Edward Rasmussen, Christopher KI Williams, et al. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 1. Springer, 2006.
Philip A. Romero and Frances H. Arnold. Exploring protein fitness landscapes by directed evolution.
  Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 10:866–876, 2009.
Philip A Romero, Andreas Krause, and Frances H Arnold. Navigating the protein fitness landscape
  with gaussian processes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(3):E193–E201,
  2013.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Ilija Bogunovic, Maryam Kamgarpour, and Andreas Krause. No-regret learning
  in unknown games with correlated payoffs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019a.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Maryam Kamgarpour, and Andreas Krause. Bounding inefficiency of equilibria
  in continuous actions games using submodularity and curvature. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2017–2027. PMLR, 2019b.
Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Maryam Kamgarpour, and Andreas Krause. Efficient model-based multi-agent
  reinforcement learning via optimistic equilibrium computation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 19580–19597. PMLR, 2022.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process opti-
  mization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.3995,
  2009.
Samuel Stanton, Wesley Maddox, Nate Gruver, Phillip Maffettone, Emily Delaney, Peyton Greenside,
  and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Accelerating bayesian optimization for biological sequence design
  with denoising autoencoders. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 20459–20478.
  PMLR, 2022.
Austin Tripp, Erik Daxberger, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Sample-efficient optimization in
  the latent space of deep generative models via weighted retraining. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:11259–11272, 2020.
Adrian Vetta. Nash equilibria in competitive societies, with applications to facility location, traffic
  routing and auctions. In The 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
 2002. Proceedings., pp. 416–425. IEEE, 2002.
Bruce J Wittmann, Kadina E Johnston, Zachary Wu, and Frances H Arnold. Advances in machine
  learning for directed evolution. Current opinion in structural biology, 69:11–18, 2021.
Nicholas C. Wu, Lei Dai, Anders Olson, James O. Lloyd-Smith, and Ren Sun. Adaptation in protein
  fitness landscapes is facilitated by indirect paths. eLife, 5, 2016.
Zachary Wu, S. B. Jennifer Kan, Russell D. Lewis, Bruce J. Wittmann, and Frances H. Arnold.
  Machine learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial libraries. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 116(18):8852–8858, 2019.
Kevin K Yang, Zachary Wu, and Frances H Arnold. Machine-learning-guided directed evolution for
  protein engineering. Nature methods, 16(8):687–694, 2019.
Fengxue Zhang, Jialin Song, James C Bowden, Alexander Ladd, Yisong Yue, Thomas Desautels,
  and Yuxin Chen. Learning regions of interest for bayesian optimization with adaptive level-set
  estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 41579–41595. PMLR, 2023.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Proof of Theorem 4.2                                                                       16

     B G AME O PT for Protein Design                                                              16

     C Baselines                                                                                  16

     D Experiment Details                                                                         17

     E Additional Experimental Results                                                            20
       E.1 Sample batch diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
       E.2 Comparison with GP-UCB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
       E.3 Comparison with Discrete Local Search methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21
       E.4 Computational costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
       E.5 Additional analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    22
       E.6 Exploring players’ grouping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
       E.7 Exploring players’ with different action set sizes (dimensions) . . . . . . . . . .    26
       E.8 Batch size ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
       E.9 Learning rate (η) ablations for G AME O PT-H EDGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28
       E.10 UCB values of the sampled batches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
       E.11 Expected Improvement acquisition function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
       E.12 Comparison with latent space optimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We gather here the technical proofs, the details on G AME O PT’s application to protein design, and
additional experiment results complementing the main paper.

A      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2
The proof relies on the main confidence lemma (Srinivas
                                                            et al., 2009,    Lemma 5.1) which states

                                                                    t2 π 2                    2 2
                                                                                     Qn
that, when the confidence width is set as βt = 2n log supi∈[n] |Xi | 6δ ≥ 2 log | i=1 Xi | t 6δπ ,
then with probability at least (1 − δ),
                  µt (x) − βt σt (x) ≤ f (x) ≤ µt (x) + βt σt (x),   ∀x ∈ X ,    ∀t ≥ 1.               (5)
                             t                      t
In other words, UCB(GP , ·) and LCB(GP , ·) are upper and lower bound functions with high
probability. For simplicity, we will use the notation UCBt (·) and LCBt (·) for UCB(GP t , ·) and
LCB(GP t , ·), respectively.
Next, we show that after T iterations the strategy reported by G AME O PT: xT ⋆ , with T ⋆ =
arg mint∈[T ] maxi,xi UCBt (xi , x−i
                                  t ) − LCBt (xt ), is a ϵT -approximate Nash equilibrium of f with
               √
ϵT ≤ O(T −0.5 γT ). The theorem statement then follows by a simple inversion of the aforemen-
tioned bound.
By definition, xT ⋆ is a ϵT -approximate Nash equilibrium of f when ϵT = maxi,xi f (xi , x−iT⋆) −
f (xT ⋆ ), i.e. ϵT upper bounds all possible single-player deviations. We can bound the worst-case
single-player deviation with probability (1 − δ) by the following chain of inequalities:


    ϵT = max
           i
             f (xi , x−i
                      T ⋆ ) − f (xT ⋆ ) ≤ max
                                            i
                                              UCBT ⋆ (xi , x−i
                                                            T ⋆ ) − LCBT ⋆ (xT ⋆ )                     (6)
          i,x                             i,x
                                                T
                                          1X
                                      ≤        max UCBt (xi , x−i
                                                               t ) − LCBt (xt )                        (7)
                                          T t=1 i,xi
                                           T                                      T
                                        1X              i   −i                 2X
                                      =      max UCBt (x , xt ) − UCBt (xt ) +       βt σt (xt )
                                        T t=1 i,xi                             T t=1
                                                                                               (8)
                                                T
                                          2X                          p
                                      ≤         βt σt (xt ) ≤ O(T −0.5 βT γT ).                        (9)
                                          T t=1
The first inequality follows from the confidence lemma (5). The second one, by the fact that
maxi,xi UCBT ⋆ (xi , x−i                                             i   −i
                        T ⋆ ) − LCBT ⋆ (xT ⋆ ) ≤ maxi,xi UCBt (x , xt ) − LCBt (xt ), ∀t, by definition
of T ⋆ . The last inequality holds because, at each iteration t, xt is an equilibrium of the UCBt function.
Finally, the last inequality is from (Srinivas et al., 2009, Lemma 5.4).

B      G AME O PT FOR P ROTEIN D ESIGN
The core concept of the G AME O PT framework is inspired by the principles of natural evolution. In
protein design, achieving equilibrium of a cooperative game over protein sites mirrors the iterative
mutation and selection process in evolution. Where it converges to beneficial mutant sequences, can
be thought of as equilibrium of the game. Given that protein search spaces align well with the domain
G AME O PT works on, we introduce a specialized version of G AME O PT, tailored for protein design
applications.

C      BASELINES
In Section 5, we empirically evaluate G AME O PT against existing baselines which we detail next.
These include IBR-F ITNESS, inspired by directed evolution (Algorithm 6), R ANDOM (Algorithm 7),
which samples evaluation points randomly, and PR, an optimizer of expected UCB (Daulton et al.,
2022). We further compared G AME O PT with discrete local search methods in Appendix E.3.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 G AME O PT-I BR for Protein Design
 1: Input: GP prior GP 0 (µ0 , k(·, ·)), initial data D0 = {(xi , yi = f (xi ) + ϵ)}, protein sites N ,
      batch size B ∈ N, M ∈ N > B, parameter β.
 2: for iteration t = 1, 2, . . . , T do                      Qn
 3:   Construct game with reward function UCB(GP t−1 , β, ·) : i=1 X (i) → R
 4:   for m = 1, 2, . . . , M do
 5:       xbr                                      br
            0 ← random starting protein sequence, x0 ∈ X
 6:       for round kn = 1, 2, . . . , K do                                              on */ BR game
 7:         Xkbr ← (xi,br , x−i,br
                             k−1   ), such  that x i,br
                                                        = arg max x∈X (i) UCB(x, x−i,br
                                                                                  k−1   )
                                                                                          i=1
 8:         Play xbr
                  k  ← arg  max xk ∈Xk br [UCB(x   k )]
 9:      end for
10:      Collect equilibrium protein sequence xt,m ← xbr   K
11:   end for
                                                                                          t−1
12:   Select batch of top B equilibrium protein sequences {xt,i }Bi=1 according to UCB(GP     , β, ·).
      */ Filtering
13:   Obtain fitness evaluations yt,i = f (xt,i ) + ϵt,i , ∀i = 1, . . . , B
14:   Update Dt ← Dt−1 ∪ {(xt,i , yt,i )}B i=1
15:   Posterior update of model GP t with Dt
16: end for


Algorithm 5 G AME O PT-H EDGE for Protein Design
 1: Input: GP prior GP 0 (µ0 , k(·, ·)), initial data D0 = {(xi , yi = f (xi ) + ϵ)}, protein sites N ,
      batch size B ∈ N, M ∈ N > B, parameters β, η.
 2: for iteration t = 1, 2, . . . , T do                            Qn
 3:   Construct game with reward function UCB(GP t−1 , β, ·) : i=1 X (i) → R
 4:   for m = 1, 2, . . . , M do
 5:       Initialize weights w1 ← W      1
                                           [1, . . . , 1] ∈ R|N |×W
 6:       for round k = 1, 2, . . . , K do                             */ Simultaneous Hedge
 7:          Sample xik ∼ wi1 , ∀i ∈ N
 8:          Set joint strategy xk ← {xik }i∈N
 9:          for player i ∈ N do                                            */ Players’ payoff
10:             ℓx−i ← [v(xj,−i
                              k     )]∀j∈X  (i) , where
                 k
                                ′
               xj,−i
                k    = j ∪ {xik }i′ ∈N \{i} , ∀j ∈ X (i)
11:            Set wik+1 ∝ wik exp(ηℓx−i )
                                          k
12:         end for
13:      end for
14:      Collect equilibrium protein sequence xt,m ← xK
15:   end for
                                                                                          t−1
16:   Select batch of top B equilibrium protein sequences {xt,i }Bi=1 according to UCB(GP     , β, ·).
      */ Filtering
17:   Obtain fitness evaluations yt,i = f (xt,i ) + ϵt,i , ∀i = 1, . . . , B
18:   Update Dt ← Dt−1 ∪ {(xt,i , yt,i )}B    i=1
19:   Posterior update of model GP t with Dt
20: end for



D      E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

We set the (hyper)parameters for the experiments as in Table 1.

GB1(4) The dataset (Wu et al., 2016) is fully combinatorial, i.e., encompassing fitness measurements
of 204 variants with 4 sites. In this context, each protein site is treated as a player in the cooperative
game of G AME O PT, with N = {1, . . . , 4}. Additionally, we also analyzed the effect of player
grouping inspired by epistasis phenomenon in protein design and provided the analysis in Appendix E.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 6 I TERATIVE B EST R ESPONSE -F ITNESS (I BR -F ITNESS )
 1: Input: Domain X , fitness function f : X → R, players N , initial data D0 = {(xi , yi =
    f (xi ) + ϵ)}, batch size B ∈ N.
 2: xbr
      0 ← random joint strategy, x0 ∈ X
                                         br

 3: for iteration t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 4:    Randomly selected B players ∈ N generates BRs {xt,i }B                    br
                                                                     i=1 w.r.t. xt−1 based on f (·)
 5:    Obtain evaluations yt,i = f (xt,i ) + ϵt,i , ∀i = 1, . . . , B
 6:    Update Dt ← Dt−1 ∪ {(xt,i , yt,i )}B      i=1
 7:    Play xbr
              t ← arg maxxt,i ∈{xt,i }B     i=1
                                                yt,i
 8: end for
 9: return x⋆T ← arg max(x,y)∈DT y                                                          */ Best-so-far


Algorithm 7 R ANDOM
 1: Input: Domain X , f : X → R, initial data D0 = {(xi , yi = f (xi ) + ϵ)}, batch size B ∈ N.
 2: for iteration t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 3:   Randomly generate batch of B points {xt,i }B  i=1 , ∀xt,i ∈ X
 4:   Obtain evaluations yt,i = f (xt,i ) + ϵt,i , ∀i = 1, . . . , B
 5:   Update Dt ← Dt−1 ∪ {(xt,i , yt,i )}B i=1
 6: end for
 7: return x⋆T ← arg max(x,y)∈DT y                                                   */ Best-so-far



We train the GP surrogate by utilizing a small portion of the dataset, specifically 0.0625%, consisting
of 100 protein variants. Since existing literature does not provide common ground feature embeddings
as representations for the GB1(4) variants, we use chemical descriptors (Wu et al., 2019) to extract
60 feature embeddings using a training set of size 1000 protein variants with LASSO method. We
apply k-fold cross-validation with k = 18 different train/test dataset partitions. Following this, we
evaluate the performance of our approach over 18 replications. In each replication, we initialize the
GP surrogate-based baseline methods with the same initial GP model as our approach. We also use
the same initial protein sequence for comparison within that replicate but employ different initial
points across replications. We set the starting joint strategy as the protein sequence having the highest
log fitness value in the training set. The prior mean of the GP is fixed at 1.0162. For the kernel
hyperparameters, 60 lengthscales are defined for each feature dimension and optimized offline at the
beginning of a replication; outputscale is set to 0.02169.


GB1(55) We experiment on the non-exhaustive dataset GB1(55) that only includes 2-point mutations
throughout the entire 55 residues of the GB1 protein resulting in 535, 917 variants (Olson et al., 2014)
and consider two settings: 55 and 10 number of players.


GB1(55) with 55 Players In this context, we treat each protein site as a player in the G AME O PT,
thus, N = {1, . . . , 55}.
As the dataset is not completely combinatorial, we do not have access to measured fitness values
for all 2055 variants. To overcome this, we employ a Deep Neural Network-based (DNN) oracle to
predict fitness scores using feature embeddings associated with the protein sequences. We again opt
to feature embeddings as the representation for categorical input of GP surrogate. Unlike GB1(4), we
utilize the ESM-1v protein language model from esm introduced by Meier et al. (2021), specifically
designed for predicting protein variant effects and can be used to extract embeddings. With ESM-1v,
we represent a sequence through a 1280 dimensional feature embedding vector. We train the oracle
with supervised learning, using the training set having (477 854×1280, 477 854) feature & label pairs.
Obtaining the exhaustive version of the GB1(55) dataset, we train the GP surrogate using ESM-1v
feature embeddings of 1000 randomly generated protein variants and corresponding oracle-predicted
fitness scores for 10 replications.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                           Table 1: Hyperparameter values.

  Symbol    Hyperparameter                                  Value
    T       The number of active learning (BO) iterations   50
    K       The number of game rounds                       40 for GFP, 200 for Halogenase and GB1(55), and 400 for GB1(4);
                                                            50 for G AME O PT-I BR in GB1(55) & n = 10 domain
                                                            100 for G AME O PT-I BR in GB1(55) & n = 55 domain
 n =| N |   The number of players                           3 for Halogenase, 4 for GB1(4), 6 and 8 for GFP, 10 and 55 for GB1(55)
  | D0 |    The number of samples in training set           100 for Halogenase and GB1(4), and 1000 for GFP and GB1(55)
    η       Learning rate                                   Optimized over the set {0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}
     ϵ      Observation noise for each training example     0.0004
     l      RBF kernel lengthscale                          Optimized offline
    β       The UCB tuning parameter                        2
    B       Batch size per BO iteration                     5


GB1(55) with 10 players To further analyze the performance of G AME O PT compared to the other
baselines, we consider the setting where among the 55 sites, only 10 most significant protein sites
can be mutated.
We employ the same protein language model for        embeddings and oracle to predict fitness scores.
However, the choice of 10 players among 55       10 possibilities is a strategic decision that affects
the design performance. For this, we define the significance of a protein site considering the
average variation in the fitness scores in the dataset. Concretely, we use Algorithm 8 and select
N = {21, 24, 35, 39, 41, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50} sites as the players. We treat the rest of the protein
sequence, i.e., sites that do not correspond to players as fixed.

Algorithm 8 C OMPUTE M OST S IGNIFICANT S ITES
 1: Input: Dataset D = (xi , yi )N   i=1 , players K, protein sequence length L, amino acids set A.
 2: Initialize players ← ∅, site_scoreka ← ∅ and site_var k ← 0, ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , L}, a ∈ A
 3: for each pair (xi , yi ) ∈ D do
 4:    for each site k ∈ {1, . . . , L} do
 5:       Set amino acid in site k as a ← xki
 6:       Append site_scoreka ← site_scoreka ∪ {yi }
 7:    end for
 8: end for
 9: site_scorek ← {site_scoreka }a∈A , ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , L}
10: site_var k ← stdev(site_scorek ), ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , L}
11: return K sites having highest site_score as players


Halogenase Halogenase is a non-exhaustive dataset involving fitness measurements for 605 unique
variants. To obtain the complete protein fitness landscape, we again construct an oracle, i.e., an MLP
having R2 = 0.96 on a test set and experiment on a setting where each protein site is a player.

GFP with 6 players The Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein dataset only includes fitness
measurements of 35, 584 variants corresponding to mixed mutations of some positions on a 238
length sequence. For the fully combinatorial protein fitness landscape, we construct an oracle, i.e., an
MLP with test R2 = 0.90 and choose 6 positions: N = {10, 18, 22, 37, 67, 78} that have the largest
number of mutations in the original dataset as the players of the G AME O PT.

GFP with 8 players To set the players in this setting, we identified 8 positions that have the largest
number of mutations in the original dataset: N = {10, 18, 22, 37, 67, 78, 196, 112}.


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E           A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS


E.1             S AMPLE BATCH DIVERSITY

We also evaluate our method against baselines in terms of performance metric: sampled batch
diversity concerning the past. It is measured via the mean Hamming distance of executed points at
each BO iteration to the (1) closest initial training point and (2) the proposed point at the previous
iteration (pairwise distance).
The results depicted in Figure 4 underscore that G AME O PT explores at a faster rate compared to
baselines except for R ANDOM. Notably, even in the initial iterations, G AME O PT demonstrates the
capability to discover points beyond the trust region of its GP prior. Furthermore, it consistently
upholds the sampled batch diversity compared to previously executed strategies. As also illustrated
in Figure 3, G AME O PT explores effectively at the beginning and gradually converges to a region
conducive to exploitation. This enhanced exploration across the search space contributes to its
outperforming performance in identifying high fitness-valued protein sequences.
On the other hand, the exploration strategy employed by R ANDOM relies on the generation of
B best responses through random selection, a method that does not consistently ensure a diverse
sampled batch in the input space. Furthermore, IBR-F ITNESS shows a moderate sampled batch
diversity concerning the past, attributed to its more exploitative nature—specifically, the sampling of
B best responses based on true log fitness values in comparison to other baseline methods. While
PR manages to maintain a diverse sampled batch concerning the past in the context of GB1(4),
its performance falters when applied to other settings. Additionally, the sampling process of PR
involves computing the expected UCB across all potential strategy combinations of players, making
its performance, and consequently its sampled batch diversity, highly reliant on an accurate estimate
of this expectation.


    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point
3.0                                                              4                                                            6
2.5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                 3
2.0                                                                                                                           4
1.5                                                              2                                                            3
1.0                                                                                                                           2
                                                                 1
0.5                                                                                                                           1
0.0                                                              0                                                            0
        0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                       0    5    10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50           0    5    10    15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                      Iterations
    (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                                     (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                                    (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.
    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point
8                                                                10
                                                                                                                              50
6                                                                 8
                                                                                                                              40
                                                                  6                                                           30
4
                                                                  4                                                           20
2                                                                 2                                                           10
0                                                                 0                                                               0
    0       5       10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50        0     5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50           0     5   10    15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                      Iterations
            (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                                   (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
                GameOpt-IBR                  GameOpt-Hedge                      IBR-Fitness               PR             GP-UCB                      Random               Best strategy

Figure 4: Performance results for the sampled batch diversity w.r.t past measured via mean Hamming
distance between the executed variant and the closest initial point from the training set, under batch
size B = 5. Each point on each line is the average of multiple replications initiated with different
training sets having 100 variants for GB1(4) & Halogenase and 1000 for GB1(55) & GFP. Similarly,
error bars are interquartile ranges averaged over replications. In all experiments, G AME O PT explores
significantly faster than the baseline methods.


                                                                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   C OMPARISON WITH GP-UCB

We further analyzed the saturating behavior exhibited by GP-UCB in the GB1(4) setting. As depicted
in Figure 5, our investigation focused on the influence of the initial GP surrogate model, considering
different training set sizes, specifically with 100 and 500 training points.
Our findings underscore that the efficacy of GP-UCB heavily relies on the quality of the initial GP
surrogate model. Particularly, an initial GP surrogate trained with only 100 data points proves insuffi-
cient for GP-UCB to effectively identify high-log fitness protein sequences. Given that GP-UCB
optimizes the UCB globally and selects the B best points in each iteration, the limited informativeness
of sampled batch points under this GP surrogate constrains the algorithm. Therefore, GP-UCB ends
up converging to a point where further improvement is impeded. In contrast, employing a potentially
more informative GP model with 500 training points enables GP-UCB to perform comparably to
G AME O PT. Our proposed approach, however, exhibits robustness by overcoming the constraints
associated with a model initialized with limited data. Through computing evaluation points as the
equilibria of cooperative game-playing, it consistently gathers diverse and informative batches to
guide the GP, thereby enhancing sample efficiency.
                                  LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)
                    1.0                                                1.0

                    0.8                                                0.9

                    0.6                                                0.8

                    0.4                                                0.7
                          0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                0   5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                           Iterations                                          Iterations
                              (a) 100 training points.                            (b) 500 training points.
      GameOpt-IBR             GameOpt-Hedge             IBR-Fitness              PR           GP-UCB         Random   Best strategy

Figure 5: The effect of training set size on the performance under setting GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.
GP-UCB mitigates saturating behavior when leveraging a more informative initial GP surrogate
model. In contrast, G AME O PT showcases resilience in overcoming the limitations associated with a
GP model trained with a limited amount of data.


E.3   C OMPARISON WITH D ISCRETE L OCAL S EARCH METHODS

We further compared G AME O PT against Discrete Local Search baselines DLS and DLS_B EST
(Balandat et al., 2020) that perform a discrete local search by exploring k-Hamming distance neigh-
borhood. While DLS employs random initialization, DLS_B EST starts the local search from the
best-discovered sequence. In our experiments, we set their neighborhood size as 2-Hamming distance
and let the baselines greedily select B sequences at each iteration. For a fair comparison against
DLS_B EST, we also run the best-discovered sequence initialization version of our approach, called
G AME O PT-I BR _B EST.
We remark that DLS and DLS_B EST can be seen as constrained versions of G AME O PT that
require a prior definition of the neighborhood (thus, unlike our approach, they require a notion of
distance too). Moreover, being centralized, they are subject to a higher computational complexity
which grows exponentially with the neighborhood size. For a sequence of length n (players) with
| X (i) |= d many amino acid choices, G AME O PT reduces the intractable optimization of acquisition
function (i.e., O(dn )) to O(nd) complexity. Instead, DLS & DLS_B EST search over k-distance
neighborhoods yielding O(C(n, k)dk ) complexity, where C denotes the combination operation and
k is the Hamming distance. We observe G AME O PT performs comparably to DLS baselines (see
Figures 6, 7, 8, and additional analyses below), but requiring a significantly lower compute cost, as
shown in Appendix E.4.


                                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4   C OMPUTATIONAL COSTS

We report the total compute amount (measured in hours) for the experiments with T = 50 BO
iterations in Table 2. We conduct the experiments on an internal compute cluster equipped with
NVIDIA A100 80 GB tensor-core GPUs. For smaller domains (with short protein sequences), we
were able to execute replications concurrently without encountering memory errors. However, in
configurations necessitating the generation of embeddings for numerous evaluation points with
longer protein sequences in each iteration, parallel execution was not feasible, thus necessitating
a per-replication computation time report. Specifically, we present the total compute amount for
all replications across domains Halogenase, GB1(4), and GFP; whereas we report per replication
compute amount accompanied by its standard deviation for the two largest GB1(55) domains.
Referring to Table 2, G AME O PT variations provide tractable acquisition function optimization. Their
computational demand predominantly hinges on the number of sequences they evaluate per BO
iteration. This is also influenced by the number of game rounds–which we intentionally set to a higher
value to guarantee convergence to game equilibrium (see Table 1 for the exact values). Nevertheless,
our observations reveal that game equilibrium is often reached well before the rounds are completed.
Consequently, the computational times reported for G AME O PT can be considered to be within the
worst-case scenario.
Table 2: Total compute amount (in hours) required for experiments with T = 50 BO iterations. Each
entry with ± represents the average per-replication computation time, accompanied by their standard
deviation, whereas the others show the total compute time for all replications. We run 18 replications
for Halogenase, GB1(4), and 10 replications for the other domains. In all domains, particularly for
the larger search spaces, G AME O PT provides tractable acquisition function optimization.

                                                           Domain
 Method
                      Halogenase   GB1(4)   GFP, n = 6   GFP, n = 8   GB1(55), n = 10   GB1(55), n = 55
  G AME O PT-I BR        0.19       0.30       1.02         2.74       1.61 ± 0.46       11.25 ± 3.19
  G AME O PT-H EDGE      2.44        1.95   2.05 ±0.02   2.60 ±0.09     3.85 ±0.39        20.13 ±1.04
  GP-UCB                 0.63       29.56        -            -              -                 -
  DLS                    0.29        1.10   2.90 ±0.33   4.94 ±0.24     4.10 ±2.36       102.86 ±27.42



E.5   A DDITIONAL ANALYSES

We performed further analyses to assess the effectiveness of our G AME O PT framework against
baselines in terms of: (1) fraction of global optima discovered, (2) fraction of solutions found above a
fitness threshold, (3) cumulative maximum for sequences proposed and (4) mean pairwise Hamming
distance between proposed sequences.
We evaluated the fraction of global optima discovered under the GB1(4) setting, as depicted in Table 3.
For this fully combinatorial dataset, we identify the global optimizer sequence by exhaustive search.
Our findings revealed that G AME O PT-IBR successfully identified the global optimum sequence in
33.33% of cases out of 18 replications, highlighting its superior convergence against baselines.
Additionally, given the difficulty of identifying global optima in non-fully combinatorial datasets,
we examined the fraction of optima found above a fitness threshold, fτ = 0.8. Table 4 demonstrates
that across all problem domains (excluding best cumbersome initialization versions), the G AME O PT
framework consistently samples batches containing a higher number of optimal sequences compared
to baseline methods. Its effectiveness is highlighted more as the search space size gets higher. In the
most complex domain, GB1(55) with 55 players, its best cumbersome initialization version performs
comparably to DLS_B EST. However, it is essential to also acknowledge the comparison w.r.t the
computational complexity associated with that configuration as discussed in Appendix E.4.
Regarding the cumulative maximum for proposed sequences (see Table 5), our framework demon-
strates notable performance by consistently proposing protein variants with higher fitness values.
Moreover, its superior convergence speed, illustrated in Figure 6, underscores its effectiveness against
baselines including DLS. The discrete local search with best initialization, DLS_B EST, converges
relatively slower, particularly in small domains, yet performs comparably against G AME O PT _B EST
in finding high log fitness valued variants. However, it does not provide tractable optimization as
detailed in Appendix E.4.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Furthermore, we analyzed the performance of methods considering the mean pairwise Hamming
distance between the sequences proposed at each BO iteration (see Table 6 and Figure 7) which is
an indicator for sampled batch diversity. The results indicate that G AME O PT explores moderately,
however, it balances exploration and exploitation to prevent over-exploring seen in R ANDOM and
DLS, as well as over-exploiting observed in G AME O PT _B EST, DLS_B EST and PR.
Lastly, the mean Hamming distance between the proposed variant and the closest initial point from
the training set (see Figure 8) showcases that G AME O PT explores the solution space faster than the
baseline methods, except for R ANDOM and DLS.

Table 3: Fraction of global optima found for the GB1(4) dataset. Each entry is the average of 18
replications. G AME O PT variations are able to sample global optimum sequence (AHCA) more
frequently compared to other baselines. Entries of the outperforming methods are denoted in bold.
The results show that G AME O PT-IBR converges to the best strategy more frequently compared to
the baselines.

                          Method                     % best strategy (AHCA) found
                          G AME O PT-I BR                        33.33
                          G AME O PT-H EDGE                       16.67
                          IBR-F ITNESS                            16.67
                          PR                                       0.00
                          GP-UCB                                   0.00
                          R ANDOM                                  0.00
                          DLS                                      0.00
                          DLS_B EST                               11.11
                          G AME O PT-I BR _B EST                  11.11


Table 4: Percentage of computed candidates that are above a threshold of fτ = 0.8∗(maximum fitness
value). Each entry is the average of 18 replications for Halogenase and GB1(4) settings, and 10
replications for the others. Entries of the outperforming methods are denoted in bold. Results indicate
the effectiveness of G AME O PT variations on sampling more optima than the baseline methods.

                                                                 Domain
 Method
                           Halogenase   GB1(4)   GFP, n = 6     GFP, n = 8   GB1(55), n = 10   GB1(55), n = 55
 G AME O PT-I BR            100.00      21.20      28.52          50.96          11.60              1.96
 G AME O PT-H EDGE           94.44       14.62     26.68          61.72           9.48              2.12
 IBR-F ITNESS                72.22        7.46     18.96          35.32           0.36              0.00
 PR                          38.89        2.05     15.96          15.32           0.00              0.04
 GP-UCB                      72.22        4.82        -              -              -                 -
 R ANDOM                      0.00        0.29      0.76           1.60           0.00              0.00
 DLS                         94.44        7.46     22.60          36.48           0.16              0.00
 DLS_B EST                   88.89       19.88     16.80          45.92           2.64             52.24
 G AME O PT-I BR _B EST      44.44       17.40     12.32          42.64           1.68             48.64


Table 5: Cumulative maximum for sequences proposed at the end of the BO iterations. Each entry is
the average of 18 replications for Halogenase and GB1(4) settings, and 10 replications for the others.
Entries of the outperforming methods are denoted in bold. G AME O PT variations show superior
performance in proposing higher fitness-valued protein variants.

                                                                 Domain
 Method
                           Halogenase   GB1(4)     GFP, n = 6   GFP, n = 8   GB1(55), n = 10   GB1(55), n = 55
 G AME O PT-I BR              3.51       0.93        6.17         6.37            1.94              4.72
 G AME O PT-H EDGE            3.45       0.94        6.15         6.34            1.69              4.66
 IBR-F ITNESS                 3.10       0.86        6.08         6.21            0.97              2.99
 PR                           2.08       0.81        6.06         6.07            0.90              1.18
 GP-UCB                       2.98       0.82           -            -              -                 -
 R ANDOM                      1.15       0.68        5.92         5.97           -0.08             -0.66
 DLS                          3.51       0.89        6.09         6.14            1.70              1.35
 DLS_B EST                    3.40       0.93        6.15         6.33            2.11              7.87
 G AME O PT-IBR_B EST         2.28       0.93        6.14         6.33            1.91              7.25


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Mean pairwise Hamming distance between the sequences proposed at each iteration. Each
entry is the average of 18 replications for Halogenase and GB1(4) settings, and 10 replications for
the others. In all problem domains, R ANDOM baseline consistently samples a rather diverse batch
of evaluation points w.r.t. past proposed variants. Although this shows enhanced exploration, one
drawback is the lack of exploitation. Hence, as illustrated in Figure 3, G AME O PT balances these two
successfully and shows a moderate sampled batch diversity.

                                                                                          Domain
  Method
                                     Halogenase         GB1(4)         GFP, n = 6        GFP, n = 8       GB1(55), n = 10                   GB1(55), n = 55
  G AME O PT-I BR                       1.40             2.94            3.08              4.11                7.32                             50.93
  G AME O PT-H EDGE                     2.13             2.91            2.93              4.23                3.98                             45.89
  IBR-F ITNESS                          0.86             0.88            0.85              0.89                0.86                              0.89
  PR                                    1.61             1.57            1.61              1.67                1.69                              1.60
  GP-UCB                                0.77             2.41               -                 -                  -                                 -
  R ANDOM                               2.85              3.8            5.69              7.64                9.51                             52.34
  DLS                                   1.13             3.36            5.13              7.13                9.38                             52.19
  DLS_B EST                             0.68             2.56            1.18              2.36                1.55                              3.57
  G AME O PT-IBR_B EST                  0.33             2.64            1.48              2.78                0.57                              3.12


               LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                                 LogFitness (best so far)
3.5                                               1.0
3.0                                                                                                   6.2
2.5                                               0.8
                                                                                                      6.0
2.0
1.5                                               0.6                                                 5.8
1.0
                                                  0.4                                                 5.6
0.5
       0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50               0     5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                  0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                        Iterations                                          Iterations                                                Iterations
      (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                        (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                            (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.

               LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                                 LogFitness (best so far)
6.6                                                3                                                  8
6.4                                                                                                   6
                                                   2
6.2
                                                   1                                                  4
6.0
                                                                                                      2
5.8                                                0
5.6                                                                                                   0
                                                   1
       0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50               0    5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50              0       5       10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                        Iterations                                          Iterations                                                Iterations
           (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                          (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
                      GameOpt-IBR                 IBR-Fitness                 GP-UCB            DLS                              GameOpt-IBR_Best
                      GameOpt-Hedge               PR                          Random            DLS_Best                         Best strategy

Figure 6: Convergence speed of methods in terms of log fitness value of the best-so-far protein
throughout BO iterations, under batch size B = 5. Each point is the average of multiple replications
initiated with different training sets having 100 protein variants for Halogenase and GB1(4), and 1000
protein variants for the rest of the problem domains. Similarly, error bars are interquartile ranges
averaged over replications.


                                                                             24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                 Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                  Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
3.0                                                              4                                                            6
2.5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                 3
2.0                                                                                                                           4
1.5                                                              2                                                            3
1.0                                                                                                                           2
                                                                 1
0.5                                                                                                                           1
0.0                                                              0                                                            0
        0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                       0    5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50           0    5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                  Iterations                                                      Iterations
      (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                                      (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                                      (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.
         Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                     Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance                                 Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
8                                                                10
                                                                                                                              50
6                                                                 8
                                                                                                                              40
                                                                  6                                                           30
4
                                                                  4                                                           20
2                                                                 2                                                           10
0                                                                 0                                                               0
    0       5       10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50        0     5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50           0     5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                  Iterations                                                      Iterations
            (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                                   (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
                              GameOpt-IBR                        IBR-Fitness                   GP-UCB                   DLS                           GameOpt-IBR_Best
                              GameOpt-Hedge                      PR                            Random                   DLS_Best                      Best strategy

Figure 7: Sampled batch diversity w.r.t past measured via mean Hamming distance between the
executed variant and the proposed variant from the previous iteration (pairwise distance), under
batch size B = 5. Each point on each line is the average of multiple replications initiated with
different training sets having 100 variants for GB1(4) & Halogenase and 1000 for GB1(55) & GFP.
Similarly, error bars are interquartile ranges averaged over replications. In all experiments G AME O PT
consistently samples a rather diverse batch of evaluation points w.r.t. past proposed variants. This
enhanced exploration of the search space contributes to its strong performance compared to the
baseline methods.
    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point
3.0                                                              4                                                            6
2.5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                 3
2.0                                                                                                                           4
1.5                                                              2                                                            3
1.0                                                                                                                           2
                                                                 1
0.5                                                                                                                           1
0.0                                                              0                                                            0
        0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                       0    5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50           0    5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                  Iterations                                                      Iterations
    (a) Halogenase, n = 3, 18 reps.                                     (b) GB1(4), n = 4, 18 reps.                                    (c) GFP, n = 6, 10 reps.
    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                    Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point
8                                                                10
                                                                                                                              50
6                                                                 8
                                                                                                                              40
                                                                  6                                                           30
4
                                                                  4                                                           20
2                                                                 2                                                           10
0                                                                 0                                                               0
    0       5       10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50        0     5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50           0     5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                               Iterations                                                  Iterations                                                      Iterations
            (d) GFP, n = 8, 10 reps.                                      (e) GB1(55), n = 10, 10 reps.                                   (f) GB1(55), n = 55, 10 reps.
                              GameOpt-IBR                        IBR-Fitness                   GP-UCB                   DLS                           GameOpt-IBR_Best
                              GameOpt-Hedge                      PR                            Random                   DLS_Best                      Best strategy

Figure 8: Performance results for the sampled batch diversity w.r.t past measured via mean Hamming
distance between the executed variant and the closest initial point from the training set, under batch
size B = 5. Each point on each line is the average of multiple replications initiated with different
training sets having 100 variants for GB1(4) & Halogenase and 1000 for GB1(55) & GFP. Similarly,
error bars are interquartile ranges averaged over replications. In all experiments, G AME O PT explores
faster than the baseline methods, except for R ANDOM and DLS.


                                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.6         E XPLORING PLAYERS ’ GROUPING

Until this juncture, we have exclusively examined scenarios where a G AME O PT player is responsible
for only a single site within the protein sequence. In light of the epistasis (Phillips, 2008) phenomenon
in protein design, which underscores how the effect of a mutation on fitness can be influenced by the
presence of other mutations within the same protein, we now explore the concept of grouping protein
sites together, i.e., having players being responsible for more than one site. This is because modeling
protein sites independently may yield different fitness outcomes than finding equilibria among groups
of several sites. To this end, we conduct a preliminary investigation into whether this phenomenon
alters G AME O PT’s performance.
We experiment on GB1(4) with {0, 1, 2, 3} protein sites and N = {1, 2} players, considering 3
possible player & site groupings: {(01, 23), (02, 13), (03, 12)}. For instance, setting (01, 23) means
that the first player is responsible for sites {0, 1} and the other one for {2, 3}.
Our evaluations with G AME O PT-I BR and G AME O PT-H EDGE using the same performance measures
(Figures 9 and 10) showed that there is no significant performance difference between individual
players and grouping settings as they all discover the high log fitness valued protein variants at
a similar rate while collecting batches of diverse evaluation points. Nevertheless, an in-depth
examination of this phenomenon on larger datasets remains a subject for future investigation.

                 LogFitness (best so far)                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                                Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
                                                            4                                                               3.0
1.0
                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                            3
0.8                                                                                                                         2.0
                                                            2                                                               1.5
0.6                                                                                                                         1.0
                                                            1
                                                                                                                            0.5
0.4
                                                            0                                                               0.0
      0      5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                      0     5   10   15    20    25   30   35   40    45   50             0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                          Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                           Iterations
             (a) Convergence speed                                    (b) Sample diversity w.r.t (1)                                  (c) Sample diversity w.r.t (2)
          GameOpt-IBR       GameOpt-IBR-groups{(0,1),(2,3)}             GameOpt-IBR-groups{(0,2),(1,3)}          GameOpt-IBR-groups{(0,3),(1,2)}                 GP-UCB             Best strategy

Figure 9: G AME O PT-I BR performance for player grouping, under GB1(4) setting, 18 reps. There is
no significant performance difference between individual players and player grouping settings under
this domain.


                 LogFitness (best so far)                        Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                                Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
                                                            4
1.0
                                                            3                                                               3
0.8
                                                            2                                                               2
0.6
                                                            1                                                               1
0.4
                                                            0                                                               0
      0      5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                      0     5   10   15    20    25   30   35   40    45   50         0       5       10   15   20   25     30     35   40   45   50
                          Iterations                                                   Iterations                                                           Iterations
             (a) Convergence speed                                    (b) Sample diversity w.r.t (1)                                  (c) Sample diversity w.r.t (2)
      GameOpt-Hedge          GameOpt-Hedge-groups{(0,1),(2,3)}          GameOpt-Hedge-groups{(0,2),(1,3)}         GameOpt-Hedge-groups{(0,3),(1,2)}                   GP-UCB         Best strategy


Figure 10: G AME O PT-H EDGE performance for player grouping, under GB1(4) setting, 18 reps. No
significant performance difference exists between individual players and player grouping settings
under this domain.


E.7         E XPLORING PLAYERS ’ WITH DIFFERENT ACTION SET SIZES ( DIMENSIONS )

In our main experiments presented in Section 5.4, as well as the grouping of players explored in
Appendix E.6, we exclusively examined scenarios where G AME O PT players have an equal number of
actions, i.e. | X (i) | are same for all i. In the context of protein design, this corresponds to the setting
where players are responsible for an equal number of sites. However, G AME O PT can also be applied
to the setting where players have different numbers of actions, i.e. | X (i) | differ among players.


                                                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To demonstrate the generalizability of G AME O PT to such settings, we further experiment on settings
with player groupings, where each group is responsible for a different number of protein sites.
Particularly, we consider site groupings: {(0, 12), (1, 02), (2, 01)} for the Halogenase problem
domain. Whereas we consider groupings: {(0, 123), (1, 023), (2, 013), (3, 012)} for the GB1(4)
domain. For instance, the setting (0, 12) means that the first player is responsible for site {0} and the
other one for {1, 2}, which makes their action size as X (i=1) = 20, X (i=2) = 202 .
The experiment results presented in Figure 11 show that there is no significant performance difference
between individual players and player grouping settings with varying action set sizes, however, in
most of the settings G AME O PT groupings outperform GP-UCB baseline. This clearly demonstrates
the applicability of G AME O PT framework under problem domains with unequal action set sizes.

                                               LogFitness (best so far)                                        LogFitness (best so far)
                         1.0                                                                     1.0

                         0.8                                                                     0.8

                         0.6                                                                     0.6

                         0.4                                                                     0.4
                                   0       5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                             0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                            Iterations                                                    Iterations
                             (a) G AME O PT-H EDGE on GB1(4).                                          (b) G AME O PT-IBR on GB1(4).
      GameOpt-Hedge          GameOpt-Hedge_(0_123)               GameOpt-Hedge_(1_023)            GameOpt-Hedge_(2_013)      GameOpt-Hedge_(3_012)   GP-UCB      Best strategy



   GameOpt-IBR            GameOpt-IBR_(0_123)                   GameOpt-IBR_(1_023)              GameOpt-IBR_(2_013)        GameOpt-IBR_(3_012)      GP-UCB      Best strategy


                                               LogFitness (best so far)                                        LogFitness (best so far)
                                                                                                 3.5
                         3                                                                       3.0
                                                                                                 2.5
                         2                                                                       2.0
                                                                                                 1.5
                         1                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                 0.5
                               0       5       10   15     20   25   30   35   40     45    50         0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                           Iterations                                                     Iterations
                         (c) G AME O PT-H EDGE on Halogenase. (d) G AME O PT-IBR on Halogenase.
                      GameOpt-Hedge                      GameOpt-Hedge_(0_12)              GameOpt-Hedge_(1_02)             GameOpt-Hedge_(2_01)        GP-UCB


                      GameOpt-IBR                        GameOpt-IBR_(0_12)                GameOpt-IBR_(1_02)               GameOpt-IBR_(2_01)         GP-UCB

Figure 11: G AME O PT-H EDGE and G AME O PT-I BR performance under player groupings with differ-
ent action sizes, on GB1(4) and Halogenase domains, 18 reps. There is no significant performance
difference between individual players and player grouping settings, however, in most of the settings
G AME O PT groupings outperform the GP-UCB baseline. The results support that G AME O PT is also
effective under problem settings with varying action (dimension) sizes.


E.8      BATCH SIZE ABLATIONS

We present additional results on the GB1(4) dataset using higher batch sizes, B = 10 and B = 50.
The results in Figure 12 show that G AME O PT variations still outperform baselines by discovering
higher log fitness-valued protein sequences at a faster rate due to sampling diverse sets of batches.
When batch size increases, G AME O PT-H EDGE becomes dominant in discovering the best protein
sequence. This shows that irrespective of the batch size, G AME O PT is effective in large combinatorial
BO settings.
We further present additional analysis using more restrictive batch sizes, B = 1 and B = 3 on
the GB1(4) and Halogenase datasets. The results in Figure 13 demonstrate that even under a more
restricted setting on both problem domains, G AME O PT variations achieve superior performance
compared to the baselines. Although initially surpassed by GP-UCB under batch size B = 1,


                                                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        LogFitness (best so far)                                LogFitness (best so far)
                          1.0                                                    1.0

                          0.8                                                    0.8

                          0.6                                                    0.6

                          0.4                                                    0.4
                                0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                    0   5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                 Iterations                                              Iterations
                                             (a) B = 10.                                             (b) B = 50.

          GameOpt-IBR               GameOpt-Hedge                 IBR-Fitness              PR           GP-UCB              Random              Best strategy

Figure 12: Performance comparison on the GB1(4) dataset using batch sizes B = 10 and B = 50.



G AME O PT’s better exploration compared to the GP-UCB’s exploitative behavior avoids ending up at
points with lower fitness values. As the batch size increases, G AME O PT’s optimistic game approach
benefits from parallelism and collects diverse local optima, hence, G AME O PT performs significantly
better against baselines.


              LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                                LogFitness (best so far)
                                                    3.5                                                     3.5
2.0                                                 3.0                                                     3.0
                                                    2.5                                                     2.5
1.5
                                                    2.0                                                     2.0
1.0                                                 1.5                                                     1.5
                                                    1.0                                                     1.0
0.5                                                 0.5                                                     0.5
      0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                 0   5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                    0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                       Iterations                                          Iterations                                              Iterations
          (a) Halogenase, B = 1.                              (b) Halogenase, B = 3.                                  (c) Halogenase, B = 5.
              LogFitness (best so far)                            LogFitness (best so far)                                LogFitness (best so far)
1.0                                                 1.0                                                     1.0

0.8                                                 0.8                                                     0.8

0.6                                                 0.6                                                     0.6

0.4                                                 0.4                                                     0.4
      0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                 0   5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                    0   5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                       Iterations                                          Iterations                                              Iterations
              (d) GB1(4), B = 1.                                   (e) GB1(4), B = 3.                                      (f) GB1(4), B = 5.

          GameOpt-IBR               GameOpt-Hedge                 IBR-Fitness              PR           GP-UCB              Random              Best strategy

Figure 13: Performance comparison on the Halogenase and GB1(4) datasets using batch sizes
B = {1, 3, 5}. The results show that G AME O PT outperforms baselines even under more restrictive
batch size settings. Although initially surpassed by GP-UCB under batch size B = 1, G AME O PT’s
better exploration compared to the GP-UCB’s exploitative behavior avoids ending up at points with
lower fitness values.


E.9       L EARNING RATE (η) ABLATIONS FOR G AME O PT-H EDGE

To select the learning rate (η) hyperparameter for the G AME O PT-H EDGE algorithm, we performed
a hyperparameter sweep and tuned it accordingly. Figure 14 illustrates this process, showcasing
the impact of different η values on the game convergence. Based on this, we selected the optimal
performing value. In particular, Figure 14b shows how varying η influences the convergence
to different equilibria at a BO iteration t. The results demonstrate that the chosen η facilitates
equilibrium convergence within a finite number of rounds, ensuring practical game convergence.


                                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                        LogFitness (best so far)                             UCB Values vs Game Rounds
                         1.0
                                                                                   1.8
                         0.8                                                       1.6


                                                                                UCB
                         0.6                                                       1.4

                                                                                   1.2
                         0.4
                               0    5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                          0        100      200           300        400
                                                 Iterations                                                  Rounds
                                        (a) LogFitness (BSF).                                (b) Convergence of games.

   GameOpt_Hedge_lr0.1         GameOpt_Hedge_lr0.5        GameOpt_Hedge_lr1.0            GameOpt_Hedge_lr1.5             GameOpt_Hedge_lr2.0   GameOpt_Hedge_lr2.5

Figure 14: Performance of G AME O PT-H EDGE under different learning rate (η) values. The final
value is set to ensure equilibrium convergence within a given number of rounds. As an example, we
show in (14b) the convergence of different games to equilibria when η = 2.0.


E.10      UCB VALUES OF THE SAMPLED BATCHES

As discussed in Sections 1 and 5.5, the novel insight and the main cause of benefit of the G AME O PT
framework lies in its ability to provide efficient (tractable) acquisition function optimization by
adopting a game-theoretical perspective.
When comparing the methods based on the UCB values over BO iterations in the GB1(4) domain, as
demonstrated in Figure 15, we observe that G AME O PT initially selects points with lower UCB values
compared to GP-UCB. However, in later iterations, G AME O PT identifies points with higher UCB
values. This improvement is driven by the framework’s leverage of equilibrium points, leading to
superior exploration of the search space and ultimately more efficient optimization.

                                        UCB of Executed Points                           UCB of BSF Discovered Points
                         1.75                                                    1.75
                         1.50                                                    1.50
                         1.25                                                    1.25
                         1.00                                                    1.00
                         0.75                                                    0.75
                         0.50                                                    0.50
                         0.25 0     5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                      0       5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                 Iterations                                                 Iterations
                                        (a) Executed points.                          (b) BSF logfitness valued point.

                                   GameOpt-IBR                    GameOpt-Hedge                               PR                   GP-EI
                                                                                                                                   GP-UCB          Best strategy
Figure 15: UCB value of the (a): executed point (max UCB), and (b): best-so-far (BSF) logfitness
valued point over iterations under GB1(4) domain. Although initially G AME O PT variations executed
points with smaller UCB values compared to GP-UCB, its better exploration helps to identify higher
UCB valued points quickly.


E.11      E XPECTED I MPROVEMENT ACQUISITION FUNCTION

Although G AME O PT is designed using the UCB acquisition function with a sample complexity
guarantee, we provide a further empirical analysis across GP-based methods using a different
acquisition function: expected improvement (EI) (Jones et al., 1998). As demonstrated by the results
on the GB1(4) dataset in Figure 16, G AME O PT variations show superior performance compared to
other GP-based baselines. They sample more diverse batches, as given in plots for (16c) sample batch
diversity with respect to past and (16d) previously executed points.

E.12      C OMPARISON WITH LATENT SPACE OPTIMIZERS

Our baselines involve acquisition function optimizers which directly operate on large combinatorial
search spaces. While there is a body of work employing latent space optimizers (Gómez-Bombarelli
et al., 2018; Tripp et al., 2020; Deshwal & Doppa, 2021; Maus et al., 2022; Stanton et al., 2022), our


                                                                            29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                     LogFitness (best so far)                                      EI of Executed Points
                                                                                   1.75
                 0.7
                                                                                   1.50
                 0.6                                                               1.25
                 0.5                                                               1.00
                                                                                   0.75
                 0.4
                                                                                   0.50
                         0       5        10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                      0    5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                 Iterations                                                Iterations
                       (a) Convergence speed (BSF).                                            (b) EI of executed points.
                     Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                                Avg. Pairwise Hamming Distance
                 4                                                                 4.0
                                                                                   3.5
                 3
                                                                                   3.0
                 2                                                                 2.5
                                                                                   2.0
                 1
                                                                                   1.5
                 0                                                                 1.0
                     0       5       10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50          0    5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                 Iterations                                               Iterations
                         (c) Batch diversity (w.r.t. past).                               (d) Batch diversity (pairwise).

                             GameOpt-IBR                            GameOpt-Hedge                            PR            GP-EI   Best strategy
Figure 16: Performance comparison of GP-based methods on the GB1(4) dataset using expected
improvement (EI) acquisition function and batch size B = 5. In all experiments G AME O PT with I BR
and H EDGE subroutines discover better and more diverse protein sequences at a much faster rate.


primary focus in this study is to tractably optimize the acquisition function directly on combinatorial
search spaces, addressing the challenge of exhaustive exploration.
However, to provide insight, we compare G AME O PT against Naïve LSBO-(L-BFGS-B) with second-
order gradient-based optimizer (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) and LADDER (Deshwal & Doppa,
2021) methods. The comparison, presented in Figure 17, is performed using the (17a,17c) RBF kernel
and (17b,17d) a structure-coupled kernel. The structure-coupled kernel is designed using an RBF
kernel and a sub-sequence string kernel (Moss et al., 2020). Results indicate that G AME O PT variations
perform significantly better than the considered latent space optimizers. A notable limitation of latent
space optimizers is their dependence on a decoder. In our experiments, we trained a transformer-based
decoder using ESM-1v feature embeddings (Meier et al., 2021), employing beam search for sequence
generation. In contrast, our G AME O PT approach does not require such an additional decoder and
directly optimizes over the sequence space efficiently.


                                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    LogFitness (best so far)                                           LogFitness (best so far)
               1.0                                                                 1.0

               0.8                                                                 0.8

               0.6                                                                 0.6

               0.4                                                                 0.4
                        0       5        10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                        0       5        10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                                                Iterations                                                         Iterations
                                          (a) RBF kernel.                                      (b) Structure-coupled kernel.
                   Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point                           Avg. Hamming Distance w.r.t Initial Point
               4                                                                   4

               3                                                                   3

               2                                                                   2

               1                                                                   1

               0                                                                   0
                    0       5       10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50        0       5       10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                Iterations                                                         Iterations
                                          (c) RBF kernel.                                      (d) Structure-coupled kernel.

      GameOpt-IBR                   GameOpt-Hedge                  PR             GP-UCB                      Naive-LSBO              LADDER         Best strategy

Figure 17: Performance comparison of G AME O PT against latent space optimizers: Naïve LSBO-
(L-BFGS-B) (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018) and LADDER (Deshwal & Doppa, 2021) methods
under GB1(4) domain with batch size B = 5, using kernels: RBF and structure-coupled kernel (Moss
et al., 2020). Latent space optimizers perform poorly mainly because they rely on a decoder, which
G AME O PT variations eliminate and directly (tractably) optimize over combinatorial space.


                                                                              31
