Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EVISITING I N - CONTEXT L EARNING I NFERENCE
C IRCUIT IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Hakaze Cho 1,✩           Mariko Kato1          Yoshihiro Sakai1                     Naoya Inoue1,2
 1
  Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 2 RIKEN
 ✩
   Primary Contributor, Correspondence to: yfzhao@jaist.ac.jp



                                               A BSTRACT

           In-context Learning (ICL) is an emerging few-shot learning paradigm on
           Language Models (LMs) with inner mechanisms un-explored. There are already
           existing works describing the inner processing of ICL, while they struggle to cap-
           ture all the inference phenomena in large language models. Therefore, this paper
           proposes a comprehensive circuit to model the inference dynamics and try to ex-
           plain the observed phenomena of ICL. In detail, we divide ICL inference into 3
           major operations: (1) Input Text Encode: LMs encode every input text (in the
           demonstrations and queries) into linear representation in the hidden states with
           sufficient information to solve ICL tasks. (2) Semantics Merge: LMs merge the
           encoded representations of demonstrations with their corresponding label tokens
           to produce joint representations of labels and demonstrations. (3) Feature Re-
           trieval and Copy: LMs search the joint representations of demonstrations similar
           to the query representation on a task subspace, and copy the searched represen-
           tations into the query. Then, language model heads capture these copied label
           representations to a certain extent and decode them into predicted labels. Through
           careful measurements, the proposed inference circuit successfully captures and
           unifies many fragmented phenomena observed during the ICL process, making it
           a comprehensive and practical explanation of the ICL inference process. More-
           over, ablation analysis by disabling the proposed steps seriously damages the ICL
           performance, suggesting the proposed inference circuit is a dominating mecha-
           nism. Additionally, we confirm and list some bypass mechanisms that solve ICL
           tasks in parallel with the proposed circuit.


1        I NTRODUCTION

In-Context Learning (ICL) (Radford et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2022) is an emerging few-shot learning
paradigm: given the demonstrations {(xi , yi )}ki=1 consisting of [input text]-[label token] pairs and
a query xq , Language Models (LMs) take the sequence [x1 ][s1 ][y1 ] . . . [xk ][sk ][yk ][xq ][sq ]1 (Fig. 1)
as input and then predicts the label for xq by causal language modeling operation. Typically, the
label tokens yi are preceded by and also predicted on forerunner tokens si (e.g., the colon in “Label:
”). ICL has aroused widespread interest, but its underlying mechanism is still unclear.
There have been theoretical or empirical trials to characterize and explain the inference process of
ICL (Xie et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023a; Jeon et al., 2024;
Zheng et al., 2024). However, to capture all the operating dynamics and many fragmented observed
interesting phenomena of ICL in Large Language Models2 (LLMs), a more comprehensive char-
acterization is still necessary. Therefore, this paper tries to propose a unified inference circuit and
measures various properties in LLMs for a conformation to the observed ICL phenomena.
In detail, as shown in Fig. 1, we decompose ICL dynamics into 3 atomic operations on Transformer
layers. Step 1: I NPUT T EXT E NCODE: LMs encode each input text xi into linear representations
in the hidden state of its corresponding forerunner token si . Step 2: S EMANTICS M ERGE: For
     1
     In this paper, we denote tokenization as [·], and token concatenating as [·][·].
     2
     Large refers to scaled LMs trained by natural language data, such as Llama 3 (AI@Meta, 2024), contrast
to simplified work that uses simple models trained and test on well-embedded input in toy models.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


demonstrations, LMs merge the encoded representations of si with the hidden state of the corre-
sponding label tokens yi . Step 3: F EATURE R ETRIEVAL AND C OPY: LMs retrieve the similar
semantics-merged label representations y1:k (from Step 2) to the query representation sq in a task-
relevant subspace, then copy them into the query’s forerunner token representation. Finally, LM
heads predict the label for xq using the label-attached query representation sq . Steps 2 and 3 form a
typical induction circuit, which is a key mechanism of ICL but only examined in synthetic scenar-
ios (Elhage et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2024b; Reddy, 2024).
We empirically find evidence for the existence
of each proposed step in LLMs, and conduct
more fine-grained measurements to gain in-
sights into some phenomena observed in ICL
scenarios, such as (1) positional bias: the pre-
diction is more influenced by the latter demon-
stration (Zhao et al., 2021), (2) noise robust-
ness: the prediction is not easy to be affected by
demonstrations with wrong (noisy) labels (Min
et al., 2022), while larger models are less ro-
bust to label noise (Wei et al., 2023), and
(3) demonstration saturation: the accuracy im-           Figure 1: The 3-phase inference diagram of ICL.
provements plateau when sufficient demonstra-            Step 1: LMs encode every input text into repre-
tions are given (Agarwal et al., 2024; Bertsch           sentations, Step 2: LMs merge the encoded text
et al., 2024), etc. (discussed in §5.3). More-           representations of demonstrations with their cor-
over, we find multiple bypass mechanisms for             responding label semantics, Step 3: LMs retrieve
ICL conducted by residual connections, while             merged label-text representations similar to the
the 3-phase dynamics remain dominant.                    encoded query, and copy the retrieved represen-
Our contributions can be summarized as:                  tations into the query representation.
(1) We propose a comprehensive 3-step inference circuit to characterize the inference process of
ICL, and find empirical evidence of their existence in LLMs. (2) We conduct careful measurements
for each inference step and successfully capture a large number of interesting phenomena observed
in ICL, which enhances the practicality of the proposed circuit. (3) Our ablation analysis suggests
that the proposed circuit dominates, but some bypass mechanisms exist in parallel to perform ICL,
and we introduce some of these bypasses along with their empirical existence evidence.

2     P REPARATION
2.1    BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORKS

In-context Learning. Discovered by Radford et al. (2019), ICL is an emerging few-shot learning
paradigm with only feed-forward calculation in LMs. Given demonstrations {(xi , yi )}ki=1 composed
of input-label pairs and a query xq , typical ICL creates an input [x1 ][s1 ][y1 ] . . . [xk ][sk ][yk ][xq ][sq ],
with some structural connectors (e.g. “Label: ”) including forerunner token si (e.g. “: ”), as shown
in Fig. 1. LMs receive such inputs and return the next token distribution, where the label token
with the highest likelihood is chosen as the prediction. Explaining the principle of ICL is an open
question, although there have been some efforts on the relationship between ICL capacity and
pre-training data (Li & Qiu, 2023; Singh et al., 2024b;a; Gu et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023b; Chan
et al., 2022), the feature attribution of inputs (Min et al., 2022; Yoo et al., 2022; Pan, 2023; Kossen
et al., 2024), and reduction to simpler processes (Zhang et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023; Xie et al.,
2021; Han et al., 2023a). However, a comprehensive and unified explanation on real-world LMs is
still needed to capture the operating dynamics of ICL.
Induction Circuit. Introduced by Elhage et al. (2021), an induction circuit is a pair of two cooper-
ating attention heads from two transformer layers, where the “previous token head” writes informa-
tion about the previous token to each token, and the “induction head” uses the wroten information to
identify a token that should follow each token. Concretely, such a function is implemented by two
atomic operations in attention calculations: (1) copy the representation of the previous token [A] to
the next token [B], and (2) retrieve and copy similar representations on [B] (copied from [A]) to the
current token [A′ ]. Concisely, it performs inference in the form of [A][B] . . . [A′ ] ⇒ [B], which is
similar to the ICL diagram. Therefore, the induction circuit has been widely used to explain the in-


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ference dynamics of ICL (Wang et al., 2023) and the emergence of ICL during pre-training (Olsson
et al., 2022; Reddy, 2024; Singh et al., 2024b). Despite their valuable insights, these experiments
rely on a synthetic setting: using simplified models and well-embedded (linearly separable) inputs,
which differs from the practical ICL scenario using real-world LMs with many layers and compli-
cated inputs: we believe these synthetic works indicate the potential of Transformers or a locally
optimal behavior, and can not demonstrate that their observation exists in scaled LLMs trained on
wild data. So, in this paper, we try to bridge the gap between the synthetic and real-world settings
with more detailed observations for the inference of ICL on real-world LLMs.

2.2   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Models. We mainly conduct experiments on 4 modern LLMs: Llama 3 (8B, 70B) (AI@Meta, 2024),
and Falcon (7B, 40B) (Almazrouei et al., 2023). Unless specified, we report the results on Llama 3
70B, since its deep and narrow structure (80 layers, 64 heads) makes it easier to show hierarchical
inference dynamics (discussed in §5.2). The results of other models can be found in Appendix H.2.
Datasets. We build ICL-formed test inputs from 6 real-world sentence classification datasets, and
unless specified, we report the average results on them: SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013), MR (Pang &
Lee, 2005), Financial Phrasebank (Malo et al., 2014), SST-5 (Socher et al., 2013), TREC (Li &
Roth, 2002; Hovy et al., 2001), and AGNews (Zhang et al., 2015).
Others. Unless specified, we use k = 4 demonstrations in ICL inputs. For each dataset, we
randomly sample 512 test data points and assign one fixed demonstration sequence for each test
sample to form a test input. About the prompt templates, etc., please refer to Appendix A.1.


3     S TEP 1, I NPUT T EXT E NCODE : S EMANTICS E NCODING AS L INEAR
      R EPRESENTATIONS IN H IDDEN S TATES

This section mainly confirms that LMs construct task-relevant and linearly separable semantic rep-
resentations for every input text (demonstrations and queries) in the hidden states. Such linear
representations are an important foundation for explaining the dynamics of ICL based on induction
heads, since attention-based feature retrieval, a key mechanism of induction heads, can be easily
done on linear representations. Current successful studies on simplified models and inputs (Chan
et al., 2022; Reddy, 2024; Singh et al., 2024b) also assume the existence of such linear representa-
tions. Moreover, we confirm some interesting properties of the encoded input text representations:
(1) It is based on the capacity in the model weights and can be enhanced by demonstrations in
context. (2) The similarity of representations is biased towards the encoding target’s position.

3.1   LLM S E NCODE I NPUT T EXT ON F ORERUNNER T OKENS IN H IDDEN S TATES

We first study the existence of input text encoding in hidden states and then explain their linear
separability and task relevance in §3.2. For each text-label pair (xt , yt ) (encoding target) sampled
from the datasets, we prepend them with k demonstrations, resulting in augmentated (by label [yt ])
ICL-styled inputs [x1 ][s1 ][y1 ] . . . [xk ][sk ][yk ][xt ][st ][yt ]. These inputs are then fed into an LM to
extract the hidden states of a specific token in [xt ][st ][yt ] from each layer, serving as the ICL in-
ner representations. To assess the quality of these representations as sentence representations, we
use the sentence embedding of xt encoded by BGE M3 (Chen et al., 2024), a SotA encoder-only
Transformer, as a reference representation and then calculate the mutual nearest-neighbor kernel
alignment3 (Huh et al., 2024) between these representations. See Appendix A.1 and A.2 for details.
Forerunner Tokens Encode Input Text Representations. We plot the kernel alignment on the 3
types of tokens in Fig. 2 (Left), where the forerunner token, while often overlooked in previous work,
produces the best input text encoding, emerging in the early phase (layers 0-28) of the inference
process, and keeping a high level to the end of inference. Interestingly, hidden states of label words
are not satisfactory input text representations even with a high background value (the result at layer

   3
     Intuitively, kernel alignment measures similarity between two representations toward the same datasets,
and according to Huh et al. (2024), a higher cross-model kernel alignment usually means a better representation.


                                                       3
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                     slope: 0.010 k = 0
                                                                                                                                   # Demo.                        0.5
                                                                                        0.30                                          Rand.


                                                                     Kernel Alignment
Kernel Alignment   0.25
                                                                                                                                      Cont.


                                                                                                                                                    Kernel Alignment
                                                                                        0.25                                          0                           0.0
                   0.20                    Token Type                                                                                 1                                 2       4     6     8        10             12


                                        Random Baseline                                 0.20                                          2                                              slope:+0.008 k = 8
                                        Controlled Experiment                                                                         4
                   0.15                 Label Token                                                                                   8                           0.5
                                                                                        0.15
                                        Last Token of Input Text                                                                      12
                                        Forerunner Token of Label
                   0.10                                                                 0.10                                                                      0.0
                          0       20      40         60         80                             0      20     40       60      80                                        2      4     6     8     10             12
                               Transformer Block Number                                            Transformer Block Number                                                 Language Modeling Loss
     Figure 2: Input text encoding magnitudes (metricized by kernel alignment with feature encoded
     by an encoder-structured model) of hidden states in various layers in ICL scenario (The controlled
     experiments are results between current 6 datasets and TEE (Mohammad et al., 2018)). Left: En-
     coding magnitudes on hidden states from various types of token. Middle4 : Encoding magnitudes
     with different k on the forerunner tokens. Right: Encoding magnitudes in layer 24 of Llama 3 70B
     against the causal language modeling loss of the input text with (upper) k = 0 and (lower) k = 8.


     0, refer to Appendix A.2.1), which is a critical supplement to previous work which suggests the label
     tokens are pivots for collecting the information of demontrations (Wang et al., 2023).
     Input Text Encoding is Enhanced by Demonstrations. We investigate the influence of contextual
     information on input text encoding by repeating the experiments with different k. As shown in Fig. 2
     (Middle), when the demonstrations increase, kernel alignment is enhanced, which is counterintuitive
     since longer preceding texts are more likely to confuse encoding targets. Such findings indicate that
     LMs (1) utilize contextual information to enhance the input text encoding and (2) correctly segment
     different demonstrations (detailed operation discussed in Appendix C).
     Perplexed Texts are Encoded Worse. We investigate the correlation between kernel alignment and
     the perplexity of encoding targets with various k. Fig. 2 (Right, upper) shows a negative correlation
     for k = 0, that is, LMs generate poorer encodings for more perplexed input text when no demon-
     strations are given, which can be identified as an In-weight Learning (IWL) property of the inner
     text encoding. While, when demonstrations are given in context (Fig. 2 (Right, lower)), the nega-
     tive correlation disappears, which suggests that LMs effectively encode more complex samples with
     the help of demonstrations in context. More discussion about the correlation between classification
     performance and perplexity is in Appendix F.
     The above findings suggest that the inner text encoding is a hybrid process of ICL and IWL: Basic
     encoding capability presents from LMs weights, and is enhanced by demonstrations in context,
     which can be a clue to how demonstrations help ICL. Moreover, we are about to illustrate that
     these encodings are sufficiently informative for ICL tasks and linearly separable, which meets the
     presumption of simplified models on the linear and well-embedded input features.

      3.2                     I NPUT T EXT E NCODING IS L INEAR AND TASK -R ELEVANT BUT P OSITION - BIASED

     Input Text Encoding is Linear Separable and Task-relevant.                  0.8
     We train a centroid classifier on hold-out 256 input samples (Cho
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kernel Alignment


                                                                                 0.7                                       0.25
     et al., 2024), using the hidden states of a specific token in [xt ][st ]5
                                                                                                                                         Accuracy


                                                                                 0.6
     from each layer and then predict the label yt (see Appendix A.3                                                       0.20
                                                                                 0.5
     for details). The results are shown in Fig. 3, where considerably
                                                                                 0.4               Token Type
     high classification accuracy of the forerunner token suggests the                         Forerunner Token of Label 0.15
                                                                                 0.3           Last Token of Input Text
     high linear separabilities of the hidden states in the task-semantic-
     relevant subspaces since the centroid classifier is linear. In addi-            0     20       40         60       80
                                                                                       Transformer Block Number
     tion, a similar emerging trend in accuracy and kernel alignment
     confirms the reliability of the kernel alignment measurement.             Figure 3: Test results of cen-
                                                                               troid classifier trained on ICL
     Input Text Encoding is Biased towards Position. Ideally, the hidden states. Solid: Centroid
     inner representations of similar queries should be highly simi- classification accuracy, Dotted:
     lar regardless of their position in ICL inputs to support attention- Kernel alignment.
                     4
                         Experiments of Fig. 2 (Middle) on Llama 3 70B do not involve results on AGNews.
                     5
                         We skip the experiments on label tokens because of the leakage of ground-truth label information.


                                                                                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


based operations for classification. To verify this, for each encoding target, we extract the hidden
states of forerunner tokens with various numbers of preceding demonstrations, and then calculate
the cosine similarity between all possible pairs of the hidden states for the same target or different
targets. As shown in Fig. 4, although the overall similarities on the same target are higher than on
the different targets, they are both especially higher when their positions are close to each other. As
to be discussed in §5.3, such positional similarity bias may lead to one flaw: Demonstrations closer
to the query have stronger impacts on ICL (Zhao et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Chang & Jia, 2023;
Guo et al., 2024). The principle of such bias is discussed in Appendix C.


4     I NDUCTION C IRCUITS IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                                                                        1                                             0.69


                                                                                0


                                                                                                                               0
This section mainly shows how LMs utilize the encoded
                                                                                       0.58 1                                         0.53 0.78


                                                                      Query Location


                                                                                                                     Query Location
                                                                                1


                                                                                                                               1
linear text representations in induction circuits with a typ-                          0.47 0.8   1                                   0.44 0.75 0.82


                                                                                2


                                                                                                                               2
ical 2-step form (Singh et al., 2024b): Forerunner To-                                 0.42 0.72 0.86 1                               0.39 0.68 0.79 0.82


                                                                                4


                                                                                                                               4
ken Heads merge the demonstration text representations                                 0.37 0.65 0.81 0.9   1                         0.35 0.61 0.74 0.81 0.82


                                                                                8


                                                                                                                               8
in the forerunner tokens into their corresponding label                                0.35 0.62 0.77 0.88 0.93 1                     0.33 0.58 0.71 0.79 0.82 0.83


                                                                                12


                                                                                                                               12
tokens with a selectivity regarding the compatibility of                                0    1    2    4    8   12                     0     1    2    4    8    12
                                                                                            Query Location                                   Query Location
demonstrations and label semantics. Induction Heads
copy the information in the label representations similar               Figure 4: The similarities of ICL hidden
to the query representation back to the query, which is                 states in different positions on layer 24
conducted on task-specific subspaces, enabling LMs to                   between Left: the same queries, Right:
solve multiple tasks by multiplexing hidden spaces.                     two different queries (on SST-2).

4.1    S TEP 2, F ORERUNNER T OKEN H EAD : C OPY FROM T EXT F EATURE TO L ABEL T OKEN

This subsection mainly examines and measures the forerunner token heads, which copy the informa-
tion in the forerunner token into label tokens. We focus on how the representations in these tokens
are merged, especially when the semantics of demonstrations and corresponding labels are disjoint,
to explain the robustness of ICL against wrong labels present in the demonstrations.
Text Representations are Copied to Label Tokens. To confirm the existence of the representation
copy process, we start by calculating the kernel alignment between the hidden state of forerunner
token [st ] at layer l (the copy source) and that of label token [yt ] at layer (l + 1) (the copy target). To
suppress the high background values caused by the semantics of labels (refer to Appendix A.2.1), we
use abstract label tokens {“A”, “B”, “C”, . . . } instead of the original label tokens. The results are
shown in Fig. 5 (Left), where the kernel alignment between the hidden states of the label token and
the forerunner token gradually increases and then bumps up after the encoding magnitude (described
in §3) in the forerunner token finished ascending. Such a phenomenon indicates that the hidden states
of the input text representation encoded in the forerunner tokens are merged into their label tokens,
suggesting the existence of copy processing from the forerunner token to the label token.
Text Representations are Copied without Selectivity. For each attention head, we extract the
attention score6 αst →yt from the forerunner token [st ] (as attention key) to the corresponding label
token [yt ] (as attention query). We then mark the head with αst →yt ⩾ 5/nt (nt : the length of
tokens before [yt ]) as a Forerunner Token Head and count them in each layer. The results are
shown in Fig. 5 (Middle, “Correct Label”), where the peak matches the copy period in Fig. 5 (Left).
Moreover, to investigate the influence of the correctness of label tokens, we replace [yt ] with a wrong
label token7 , where the results in Fig. 5 (Middle, “Wrong Label”) are almost identical to the correct-
label setting, suggesting that the forerunner token heads don’t show selectivity toward the semantic
consistency between input text and labels, and simply merge the input text representations into the
label tokens. Furthermore, we find (Appendix D) that the copy processing is inherent: During the
copy processing, the preceding tokens are copied to the subsequent tokens, regardless of whether
these copied tokens are forerunner tokens, which indicates that such copy processing is a universal
inference behavior established during pre-training, rather than being evoked by the special tokens in
the in-context learning (ICL) input, while still aiding ICL process (discussed in §5.1).
   6
     This paper use notation αK→Q to denote attention score with attention query Q and attention key K,
which is same with the flow of information.
   7
     For example, for a label space of “positive” and “negative”, if [yt ] is “positive”, we replace it to “negative”.


                                                          5
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                   30


                                                                                                                                                Maximum Copy Magnitude
                                                                                                                             Copy To:


                                                                         Forerunner Token Head #
                   0.40                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                             Correct Label
Kernel Alignment   0.35                                                                            25                        Wrong Label                                            0.8
                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy
                   0.30                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                   15
                   0.25                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                   10                                         0.4                                                  Predict from:
                   0.20                   Random Baseline                                                                                                                                       Correct Label
                                          Abstract Label - Forerunner                              5                                          0.2                                   0.2         Forerunner
                   0.15                   Forerunner - Encoding                                                                                                                                 Correct Label w/o Context
                                          Copy Processing                                          0                                                                                            Wrong Label
                                                                                                                                              0.0                                   0.0
                          0        20      40          60           80                                  1      20       40    60         80                                               0        20         40            60   80
                                Transformer Block Number                                                    Transformer Block Number                                                          Transformer Block Number
     Figure 5: Hidden states copy magnitude from forerunner tokens to label tokens against layers. Left:
     Kernel alignment between the forerunner token (the copy source) and the abstract label token of the
     next layer (the copy target). Middle: Curves: The count of marked forerunner token heads with
     correct and wrong labels; Colored Areas: The maximum attention scores from forerunner token
     to query (copy magnitude) with correct and wrong labels (detailed attention head statistical data is
     in Appendix H.1). Right: Centroid classifier results predicted on the hidden states of correct and
     wrong label tokens, on SST-2 and MR. Solid: Predicted by classifiers Cs trained on hidden states of
     forerunner tokens. Dotted: Predicted by classifiers Cy trained on hidden states of label tokens.



     Hidden States of Label Tokens are Joint Representations of Text Encodings and Label Seman-
     tics. Given the findings above, we probe the content of hidden states of label tokens [yt ], i.e., how
     the copied text representation interacts with the original label semantics. We first train two centroid
     classifiers to predict the corresponding label yt : (1) Cs trained on the hidden states of forerunner
     tokens [st ] and (2) Cy trained on the hidden states of label tokens [yt ]. To check whether the label
     tokens include the information of forerunner tokens, we use Cs to predict the label on the hidden
     state of label token [yt ] in Fig. 5 (Right, solid). It shows that, during the copy processing, high
     classification accuracies can be achieved both on the correct label tokens and wrong label tokens,
     suggesting that the text features in the forerunner tokens can be partly and linearly detected in the
     label tokens. Moreover, results using Cy (dotted line) show extreme results, suggesting the label
     information remains in the label token. So, we can conclude that: Hidden states of label tokens are
     joint representations of label semantics and text representations. Moreover, interestingly, the accu-
     racies from Cs shown in Fig. 5 (Right) decline after layer 35, suggesting that the information sharing
     between the forerunner tokens and the label tokens ends in later layers, which aligns with the results
     in Fig. 5 (Middle).
     Label Denoising is Conducted on the Overlap of Label Semantics and Text Representations.
     Notice that in Fig. 5 (Right, solid), compared to the typical results predicted on the forerunner tokens,
     accuracies are improved on the correct label and suppressed on the wrong label, which suggests that
     information consistent with the label semantics is easier to be enhanced by the label tokens and
     vice versa, showing a feature selectivity on the consistency between the text representations and
     the label semantics. Given the observation that the information on label semantics and text features
     can be extracted separately and linearly, we can confirm that these two kinds of information are
     located in different sub-spaces of the hidden states, and linearly merged by the attention operation
     of forerunner token heads. Moreover, given the fact that there is no selectivity is observed in the copy
     behavior of the forerunner token heads (Fig. 5 (Middle)), it is intuitive that the feature selectivity
     shown in Fig. 5 (Right) comes from the arithmetical interaction of feature vectors on the overlap of
     sub-spaces between the label semantics and text features, making ICL stable against label noise (Min
     et al., 2022). Moreover, as mentioned by Wei et al. (2023), large models show poorer stability
     against label noise, and we infer that the larger hidden dimensions in larger models lower the overlap
     between the sub-spaces of label semantics and text representations to reduce the interaction.


      4.2                     S TEP 3, I NDUCTION H EAD : F EATURE R ETRIEVAL ON TASK S UBSPACE

     This subsection examines the existence of the induction heads, which retrieve label token features
     similar to the queries’ forerunner token feature, and copy the retrieved features back to the query.
     We claim the necessity of multi-head attention in this process: Correct feature retrieval can only be
     conducted on the subspace of the hidden space, which is captured by some attention heads.


                                                                                                                    6
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   30                       Induction                                       0.7                                                        SST-2     1


                                                                 Correct Label Assignment
                   25                       Correct Induction
Induction Head #                            Copy (Step 2)                                   0.6                                                         MR 0.83 1
                   20


                                                                                                                                           Dataset 1
                                                                                            0.5                                                          FP 0.67 0.76 1
                   15                                                                                                                                  SST-5 0.59 0.58 0.55 1
                                                                                            0.4
                   10                                                                                                                                  TREC 0.6 0.57 0.55 0.75 1
                   5                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                      Vanilla Attention    Head Average                AGN 0.59 0.62 0.66 0.66 0.68 1
                   0                                                                        0.2       Best Ind. Head       Random


                                                                                                                                                                       MR
                                                                                                                                                                            FP


                                                                                                                                                                                         TREC
                                                                                                                                                                                                AGN
                                                                                                                                                               SST-2


                                                                                                                                                                                 SST-5
                        1      20      40        60         80                                    1       20          40    60        80
                            Transformer Block Number                                                  Transformer Block Number                                              Dataset 2
     Figure 6: Measurements for induction heads. Left: The count of marked induction heads and
     correct induction heads against layers. Middle: The correctness of attention assignment (the sum of
     attention scores from query’s forerunner token towards correct label tokens normalized by attention
     scores towards all the label tokens) extracted from the following attention calculations: Vanilla
     Attention: attention scores directly calculated on full dimensionality. Head Average: the averaged
     attention scores among all the heads. Best Ind. Head: the scores of attention head with the most
     correctness. Right: The correct induction heads overlap of all dataset pairs.


     Induction is Correct in Minority Subspaces. Similar to Fig. 5 (Middle), we mark (1) the attention
     heads with the sum of attention scores from all the label tokens in the demonstrations [y1 ], . . . , [yk ]
     (as attention keys) to the query’s forerunner token [sq ] (as attention query) of more than 5k/nt as
     Induction Heads, and (2) attention heads with the sum of scores from all the correct label tokens
     more than 5k/|Y|nt as Correct Induction Heads (Y is the label space). We show the number of
     both kinds of induction heads in Fig. 6 (Left, detailed head statistics in Appendix H.1), where an
     unimodal pattern is observed later than the copy processing of Step 2. Moreover, more than half
     of the induction heads are not correct ones, suggesting that task-specific feature similarity can only
     be caught on some induction subspaces (defined by low-rank transition matrix WQh⊤ WK                        h
                                                                                                                    of correct
     induction head h). We enhance this claim in Fig. 6 (Middle) (details in Appendix A.4), where both
     vanilla attention (without transformation and head split) and attention scores averaged among all
     heads show low assignment on correct label tokens, while some heads show considerable correct-
     ness. Considering the average value, the majority of attention heads almost randomly copy label
     token information to the query, causing the final prediction biased to the frequency of labels present
     in the demonstrations (Zhao et al., 2021). As the reason, we infer that the hidden states are sufficient
     (Fig. 3) but not minimum for ICL, where redundant information interferes with the operation of
     induction heads.                                   Layer 31, Head 32, Correct Rate: 0.95 Layer 31, Head 9, Correct Rate: 0.00
                                                                                                                    k=1            k=2                     k=1                      k=2
     Some Induction Subspaces are Task-specific.
     We check if different tasks share the same
     induction subspaces based on the overlap of
     the correct induction heads across different
     datasets. Given nD (h) as the number of times h       k = 15      k = 16      k = 15       k = 16
     is marked as correct induction head on dataset
     D, the overlap rate S is defined as:
                        P
                      2 ∀h min[nD1 (h), nD2 (h)]
       S(D1 , D2 ) = P                             .
                            ∀h nD1 (h) + nD2 (h)       Figure 7: Label representations of k demonstra-
     The results are shown in Fig. 6 (Right), where: tions visualized on Left 4: correct and Right 4:
     (1) A significant overlap of induction heads in- wrong induction head, on one sample of SST-2
     dicates that a part of correct induction heads is (see Appendix H.3). ◦: “positive” label, ×: “neg-
     inherent in the model, built by the pre-training ative” label, ▲: zero vector. Color: Radial den-
     process (Reddy, 2024; Singh et al., 2024b). (2) sity of each categories, to estimate the attention
     Such overlap is not fully observed, suggesting assigned to query, negative to positive (cartogra-
     that some induction subspaces are task-specific: phy: Appendix A.5).
     Input texts evoke task-specific induction heads, enabling the anisotropy multiplex of different sub-
     spaces in the hidden spaces to transmit relevant information for various tasks. Therefore, we can
     analogize ICL as an implicit end-to-end multi-task learning with hidden state multiplexing since
     multi-task learning also utilizes various task heads on common bottom network layers and informa-
     tive hidden states (Zhang & Yang, 2021).


                                                                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Demonstrations Saturate on Induction Subspace. We visualize the demonstrations’ label token
representations mapped on the induction subspaces by the transition matrix WQh⊤ WK        h
                                                                                             and princi-
pal component analysis in Fig. 7, indicating: (1) Compared to correct induction heads (Left 4),
wrong induction heads (Right 4) are easier to map label representations linear-inseparably. (2) In
the early stage of demonstration feeding (k = 1 → 2), when a new demonstration is given, the mor-
phology of attention assignment towards query updates significantly (shown as background color in
Fig. 7, estimated by the radial density of various labels; see §A.5 for details), while in the late stage
(k = 15 → 16), attention assignment morphology is stable. This can explain the demonstration
saturation (Agarwal et al., 2024; Bertsch et al., 2024): ICL performance is submodular against the
number of demonstrations. Intuitively, since demonstrations follow a prior distribution, represen-
tation of a new demonstration is likely to be located within the closure of existing demonstrations,
making it less diverse to contribute to the attention assignment in the induction subspace.


5     P UTTING T HINGS T OGETHER

So far, we have revealed the existence of the circuit with 3 steps, organized by the sequential in-
ference process among Transformer layers. In this section, we find that the circuit is dominant in
the ICL inference, while some bypass mechanisms activated by residual connection assist ICL in-
ference. Moreover, a series of phenomena observed in ICL is successfully explained by the circuit.

5.1    A BLATION A NALYSIS                  Table 1: Accuracy variation (%) with each inference step ab-
                                            lated on Llama 3 8B. Small numbers are controlled results
To (1) examine the causality be-            (mean ± std) of randomly ablating equivalent amounts of con-
tween the attention connection              nections. Ablations are applied from the bottom to the top layers,
specified by the 3 steps and ICL            and results with various ablated layers are reported (detailed set-
inference, and (2) demonstrate              tings: Appendix A.7).
that our 3-phase circuit domi-             Attention Disconnected                Affected Layers Ratio (from layer 1)
                                     #
nates or at least participates in               Key → Query                   25%          50%          75%         100%
ICL process, we disconnect the       1      None (4-shot baseline)                         ±0 (Acc. 68.55)
related attention connection of                                  – Step1: Input Text Encode –
each step in the proposed circuit    2 Demo. Texts xi → Forerunner si −0.89  −4.98       −15.82       −23.43       −30.60
                                                                                 ± 0.00 −1.19 ± 0.02 −3.29 ± 1.87 −1.61 ± 0.01

(see Appendix A.7 for details),      3 Query Texts xq → Forerunner sq −0.16 −13.87       −21.10       −24.74       −28.38
                                                                                 ± 0.00 −0.08 ± 0.00 −0.47 ± 0.04 −0.55 ± 0.00

and test the accuracies without                                  – Step2: Semantics Merge –
such connections, as shown in        4 Demo. Forerunner si → Label yi −0.00  −2.24        −3.45        −3.39        −3.42
                                                                                 ± 0.00 −0.18 ± 0.00 −0.10 ± 0.04 −0.18 ± 0.01

Table 1. The results indicate                                – Step3: Feature Retrieval & Copy –
that, compared to the controlled     5 Label yi → Query Forerunner sq +0.03  −5.14       −10.03       −11.36       −10.22
                                                                                 ± 0.00 −0.08 ± 0.00 +0.00 ± 0.00 −0.06 ± 0.00

results, where trivial connec-                                         Reference Value
tions are removed, the accuracy      6            Zero-shot                              −17.90 (Acc. 50.65)
                                     7       Random Prediction                           −36.05 (Acc. 32.50)
of ICL significantly decreases
when the non-trivial connections designated by the proposed circuit are ablated. This supports the
existence of our circuit. However, the result doesn’t fully match expectations, for example, the result
without induction (line 5) should be consistent with the zero-shot inference result (line 6), since all
the expected communication from demonstration to query is intercepted, but the real result is better;
and the contribution of Step 1 in later layers are unexpectedly high, indicating the existence of
some bypass mechanisms parallelly contributing to ICL accuracies.

5.2    B YPASS M ECHANISM                                                                Step 1    Step 2     Step 3
                                                               Llama 3 70B
Motivated by the ablation results, we believe                      80L, 64H
                                                                Falcon 40B
that several mechanisms including our circuit                    60L, 128H
run parallelly for ICL, since the residual con-                 Llama 3 8B
                                                                   32L, 32H
nection supports complex paths among layers                       Falcon 7B
and attention heads. We list some possible by-                     32L, 71H
passes and plan a complete enumeration as fu-                              0%      20%       40%       60%      80%     100%
                                                                                         Normlized Layer Number
ture work.
                                                Figure 8: Dynamics and deserialization of magni-
Parallel Circuits. Multiple 3-step circuits can tudes of proposed 3 inference steps (cartography
execute in parallel, and one layer can assign details: Appendix A.6).


                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


multiple inference functions to different heads, causing dispersion and deserialization as shown
in Fig. 8, where a narrow (fewer heads per layer) and deep (more layers) model is more likely to
generate localized inference, and vice versa.
Direct Decoding. Residual connection to the LM heads allows intermediate hidden states to be
decoded directly. Intuitively, a shortcut from Step 1 encodings to the LM head enables ICL with
zero-shot capacities, since we have confirmed that encoded representations are informative for ICL
tasks (§3.2), while the decoding methods should be selected carefully (Cho et al., 2024) (e.g. with
essential calibration). On the other hand, shortcuts from insufficiently encoded features may lead
to meaningless information decoded by language model heads, causing prediction bias, i.e., even if
no query is given, ICL still returns unbalanced results (Zhao et al., 2021) decoded from tokens of
prompt template (see Appendix E for details).
                                                     Table 2: Accuracy drop with shortcut ablated.
Shortcut Induction. Note that a k-shot ICL             Attention Disconnected (∀i)    25%   50%   75%   100%
input sequence always contains a (k − 1)-           Forerunner s1:i → Forerunner si:q −1.30 −0.75 −0.78 −1.56
                                                                                    −0.00   −0.16   −0.16   −0.71
shot sequence, where the k-th forerunner token
(served as the query of (k − 1)-shot sequence) is previously processed by the (k − 1)-shot inference.
So every forerunner can directly retrieve previously processed forerunner tokens in the demonstra-
tions to copy their induction results directly. The non-trivial result (Table 2) with all forerunner
tokens disconnected from each other confirms such infer.

5.3   E XPLAINATION TOWARDS O BSERVED ICL P HENOMENA

Difficulty-based Demonstration Selection. In §3.1, we find that in the zero-shot scenario, per-
plexed texts are harder to encode, explaining the observation of PPL-ICL (Gonen et al., 2023):
Selecting demonstrations with lower perplexity can improve ICL performance. Moreover, while the
demonstrations increase, LMs can encode more complex inputs with diverse information to update
the attention assignment shown in Fig. 7, making it beneficial to input harder demonstrations later,
which explains the ICCL (Liu et al., 2024), which build demonstrations sequence from easy to hard.
Prediction Bias. (1) Contextual Bias: As mentioned in §5.2 and shown in Appendix E, direct
decoding insufficiently encoded information adds meanless logits into LM’s output, causing a back-
ground prediction value even if no queries are given (named bias). (2) Positional Bias: As shown
in §3.2, closer demonstrations are encoded more similarly, so label tokens near the query have more
similar information to the query, causing more attention assignment in the induction processing, so
that more influences on the prediction. (3) Frequency Bias: As shown in §4.2, in the induction,
some attention heads are without correct selectivity towards labels, causing an averaged copy pro-
cessing from label tokens to the query, triggering a prediction bias towards the label frequency in the
demonstration, even if their contribution (absolute value of attention score on label tokens) is small.
All three biases are observed by Zhao et al. (2021), and can be removed by ICL calibration methods.
The Roles and Saturates of Demonstrations. It is well known that demonstrations improve the
performance of ICL. We decompose such performance improvement into 2 parts: (1) demonstra-
tions help early layers encode better (§3.1), and (2) more demonstrations provide larger label token
closure, enabling more accurate attention assignment (§4.2), while the volume of such closure is
submodular to demonstrations, causing the saturates of ICL performance towards demonstrations.
The Effect of Wrong Label. It is well-known that the label noise is less harmful in ICL (Min et al.,
2022) than in gradient-based learning (Zhang et al., 2021). We have explained in §4.1 that ICL
implies labels denoise to stabilize ICL against label noise, while weakened by dimensionality.

6     C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
Conclusion. In summary, this paper restores ICL inference into 3 basic operations and confirms their
existence. Fine-grained measurements are conducted to capture and explain various phenomena
successfully. Moreover, ablation studies show the proposed inference circuit dominates and reveals
the existence of bypass mechanisms. We hope this paper can bring new insight into ICL practice.
The Role of Early and Later Layers. Our framework shows: The encoding result of Step 1 can
be directly used for classification with reliable decoding, and later transformer layers are not con-
tributing to centroid classification accuracies (Fig. 3), leading to a taxonomy of Input Encoding for


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 1 and Output Preparation for Step 2 and 3: LMs complete multi-task classification implicitly
in early layers, and verbalize it by merging task-specific label semantics in later layers. Therefore,
we suggest an early-exiting inference: removing some top layers and using a centroid classifier (Cho
et al., 2024) to accelerate ICL as shown in Table 3 and Appendix E.
Pre-training Possibility from Natural Language Data. Table 3: Performance of full and layer-
A large gap can be considered between such a deli- pruned ICL inference.
cate circuit and gradient descent pre-training on the wild         Inference      Acc.  # Param. Speed
data. However, we believe the wild training target con-         Full + LM Head   66.19%   70.6B    1×
tains the ICL circuit functionally: Based on the previ-         Full + Centroid  83.24%   69.5B  1.00×
ous works finding trainability of ICL on simplified lin-      Layer34 + LM Head 49.29%    32.7B  2.16×
                                                              Layer34 + Centroid 84.27%   31.2B  2.38×
ear representation-label pairs (Chan et al., 2022; Reddy,
2024; Singh et al., 2024b), we speculate that in early training step, Transformers learn to extract
linear representations shown in §3 from wild data (detailed in Appendix B), serving as the training
input of later layers to evoke the emergence of induction heads with the same mechanism shown
in aforementioned previous works. Moreover, our conclusion of Step 3 highlights the input data
requirements for the later layers: These data should activate the multiplex of hidden space, i.e.,
it should implicate multi-task classification with a wide distribution, which is consistent with the
aforementioned previous works.
Comparison with Previous Works. Several prior studies have sought to interpret ICL as known
processes, including implicit gradient descent (Dai et al., 2023), kernel regression (Han et al.,
2023a), and implicit Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2022), etc. However, as stated in §2.1, these
approaches fall short of fully explaining the phenomena observed during the ICL inference process.
For instance, gradient descent is known to be fragile against label noise (Zhang et al., 2021), leading
to a misalignment when analogies are drawn to ICL, which is robust against label noise (Min et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2020). Similarly, attempts to explain ICL as kernel regression fail to account for po-
sitional bias, making them disconnected from empirical studies that have observed various inference
phenomena in real-world LMs. Also, other works have employed induction circuits to explain ICL
dynamics (Wang et al., 2023; Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022), yet significant gaps remain
in aligning these explanations with empirical observations. Our work is the first to unify the frag-
mented conclusions from prior empirical studies (discussed in §5.3) through detailed experimental
measurements. By demonstrating the alignment of these observations, we emphasize the novelty
and primary contribution of our paper.
Limitations & Open-questions. (1) These 3 basic operations are not functionally indivisible. Ide-
ally, mechanistic interpretability aims to reduce every operation in ICL inference to the interconnec-
tion of special attention heads to ulteriorly examine how the operating subspaces interact between
steps, and reconstruct ICL behavior from a minimal set of attention heads. Also, although we show
the significance of the inference circuit in the ablation analysis (§5.1), measuring the connectivity
of these attention heads can also be beneficial to get more insights into the circuit. (2) The con-
clusions may not align with scenarios where ground-truth labels are not provided in the context in
some cases, which are often referred to as in-weight learning, where significant differences or even
antagonism with standard ICL have been highlighted by previous works8 (Chan et al., 2022; Reddy,
2024), reasonably and necessarily warranting separate discussion (discussed in Appendix G). This
paper explains the inference behavior of the model under ICL conditions, leaving the in-weight
learning scenario for future works. (3) We only focus on classification tasks, while we believe that
our findings can be applied to non-classification tasks, efforts are still needed to fill the gap.


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
Hakaze Cho, also known as Yufeng Zhao, handled the entire workload in this paper. He provided
ideas, designed / conducted experiments, collected / described data, and wrote / revised the paper.
Naoya Inoue, as the supervisor, provided valuable feedback, revisions, and financial support for this
paper. M.K. and Y.S. made minor contributions that placed them on the borderline of authorship
criteria: they participated in discussions and offered comments, some of which were incorporated.

   8
     In these works, toy models even struggle to work on both inputs simultaneously, so that it is natural to
consider different inference mechanism for the so-called in-weight learning.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The official code implementation of this paper by the author can be found at https://github.
com/hc495/ICL_Circuit. Please follow the instructions in this GitHub repository to repro-
duce the experiments. If any final data or intermediate results are required, please get in touch with
the first author by contact information shown in .

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by The Nakajima Foundation Start-Up Support Grant.
The authors would like to thank Mr. Lihao Liu at the Beijing Institute of Technology, and Ms. Yunpin
Li at the Capital Normal University for proofreading.
The authors would like to sincerely thank the chairs and reviewers of ICLR 2025 for their thoughtful
and insightful feedback on this paper, their perceptive reviews and discussions have greatly improved
this work.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei M Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Luis Rosias, Stephanie CY Chan, Biao
  Zhang, Aleksandra Faust, and Hugo Larochelle. Many-shot in-context learning. In ICML 2024
  Workshop on In-Context Learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11018.
AI@Meta. Llama 3 model card. 2024. URL https://github.com/meta-llama/
  llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Co-
  jocaru, Mérouane Debbah, Étienne Goffinet, Daniel Hesslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic,
  et al. The falcon series of open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16867, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16867.
Amanda Bertsch, Maor Ivgi, Uri Alon, Jonathan Berant, Matthew R Gormley, and Graham Neu-
 big. In-context learning with long-context models: An in-depth exploration. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2405.00200, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00200.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien,
  Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward
  Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scal-
  ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01373.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learn-
  ing in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05055.
Ting-Yun Chang and Robin Jia. Data curation alone can stabilize in-context learning. In Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8123–8144, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10378.
Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding:
   Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge dis-
   tillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
   03216.
Hakaze Cho, Yoshihiro Sakai, Mariko Kato, Kenshiro Tanaka, Akira Ishii, and Naoya Inoue. Token-
  based decision criteria are suboptimal in in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16535,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16535.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can
  gpt learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers.
  In ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models,
  2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10559.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu,
  and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00234, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00234.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework
  for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1(1):12, 2021. URL https://
  transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.
Hila Gonen, Srini Iyer, Terra Blevins, Noah A Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Demystifying prompts
  in language models via perplexity estimation. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 10136–10148, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2212.04037.
Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. Pre-training to learn in context. In Proceedings
  of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 4849–4870, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09137.
Qi Guo, Leiyu Wang, Yidong Wang, Wei Ye, and Shikun Zhang. What makes a good order
  of examples in in-context learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics ACL 2024, pp. 14892–14904, 2024. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  findings-acl.884/.
Chi Han, Ziqi Wang, Han Zhao, and Heng Ji. Explaining emergent in-context learning as ker-
  nel regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12766, 2023a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.12766.
Xiaochuang Han, Daniel Simig, Todor Mihaylov, Yulia Tsvetkov, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Tianlu
  Wang. Understanding in-context learning via supportive pretraining data. In Proceedings of the
  61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 12660–12673, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15091.
Eduard Hovy, Laurie Gerber, Ulf Hermjakob, Chin-Yew Lin, and Deepak Ravichandran. To-
  ward semantics-based answer pinpointing. In Proceedings of the First International Confer-
  ence on Human Language Technology Research, 2001. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
  anthology/H01-1069.
Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Tongzhou Wang, and Phillip Isola. The platonic representation hy-
 pothesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07987, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.
 07987.
Hong Jun Jeon, Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, and Benjamin Van Roy. An information-theoretic analysis of
  in-context learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.15530.
Max Klabunde, Tobias Schumacher, Markus Strohmaier, and Florian Lemmerich. Similarity of
 neural network models: A survey of functional and representational measures. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.06329, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06329.
Jannik Kossen, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. In-context learning learns label relationships but is
  not conventional learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.12375.
Xiaonan Li and Xipeng Qiu. Finding support examples for in-context learning. In Findings of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 6219–6235, 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2302.13539.
Xin Li and Dan Roth. Learning question classifiers. In COLING 2002: The 19th Interna-
  tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2002. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
  anthology/C02-1150.
Jinlong Liu, Guoqing Jiang, Yunzhi Bai, Ting Chen, and Huayan Wang. Understanding why neural
   networks generalize well through gsnr of parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07384, 2020.
   URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.07384.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yinpeng Liu, Jiawei Liu, Xiang Shi, Qikai Cheng, and Wei Lu. Let’s learn step by step: Enhancing
  in-context learning ability with curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10738, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10738.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8086–8098, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08786.
P. Malo, A. Sinha, P. Korhonen, J. Wallenius, and P. Takala. Good debt or bad debt: Detecting
   semantic orientations in economic texts. Journal of the Association for Information Science and
   Technology, 65, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.5336.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? In
  Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  11048–11064, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.12837.
Saif Mohammad, Felipe Bravo-Marquez, Mohammad Salameh, and Svetlana Kiritchenko. Semeval-
  2018 task 1: Affect in tweets. In Proceedings of the 12th international workshop on semantic
  evaluation, pp. 1–17, 2018. URL https://aclanthology.org/S18-1001/.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction
  heads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.
  11895.
Jane Pan. What in-context learning “learns” in-context: Disentangling task recognition and task
  learning. Master’s thesis, Princeton University, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2305.09731.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization
  with respect to rating scales. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL’05), pp. 115–124, 2005. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/P05-1015/.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever,
  et al.  Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9,
  2019. URL https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-models/language_
  models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
  classification task. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03002.
Aaditya Singh, Stephanie Chan, Ted Moskovitz, Erin Grant, Andrew Saxe, and Felix Hill. The
  transient nature of emergent in-context learning in transformers. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08360.
Aaditya K Singh, Ted Moskovitz, Felix Hill, Stephanie CY Chan, and Andrew M Saxe. What
  needs to go right for an induction head? a mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and
  their formation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07129.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng,
  and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
  treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1170.
Lean Wang, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. Label
  words are anchors: An information flow perspective for understanding in-context learning. In
  Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
  9840–9855, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14160.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
   Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03846.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming
  language models with attention sinks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17453.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2111.02080.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.02080.
Kang Min Yoo, Junyeob Kim, Hyuhng Joon Kim, Hyunsoo Cho, Hwiyeol Jo, Sang-Woo Lee, Sang-
  goo Lee, and Taeuk Kim. Ground-truth labels matter: A deeper look into input-label demon-
  strations. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 2422–2437, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12685.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.03530.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L Bartlett. Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09927, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09927.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text
  classification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1509.01626.
Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. A survey on multi-task learning. IEEE transactions on knowledge
  and data engineering, 34(12):5586–5609, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.
  08114.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09690.
Bowen Zheng, Ming Ma, Zhongqiao Lin, and Tianming Yang. Distributed rule vectors is a key
  mechanism in large language models’ in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16007,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16007.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Revisiting In-context Learning Inference Circuit in Large Language Models
                                           Appendices
A       E XPERIMENT D ETAILS AND S ETTINGS

A.1      D ETAILED OVERALL E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

                            Table 4: Prompt templates used in this paper.
 Dataset                     Prompt Template (Unit)                                   Label Tokens
  SST-2    sentence: [input sentence] sentiment: [label token] \n                     negative, positive
   MR       review: [input sentence] sentiment: [label token] \n                      negative, positive
   FP      sentence: [input sentence] sentiment: [label token] \n                 negative, neutral, positive
  SST-5    sentence: [input sentence] sentiment: [label token] \n              poor, bad, neutral, good, great
  TREC       question: [input sentence] target: [label token] \n    short, entity, description, person, location, number
 AGNews       news: [input sentence] topic: [label token] \n                  world, sports, business, science


Prompt Template. We conduct experiments on a specific prompt template for each dataset as shown
in Table 4. Moreover, similar to typical ICL practices, we reduce the label into one token to simplify
the prediction decoding. The reduced label tokens are also shown in Table 4.
Quantization. In our experiments, we use BitsAndBytes9 to quantize Llama 3 70B and Falcon
40B to INT4. For the other models, full-precision inference is conducted.
Other. All the experiment materials (models and datasets) are downloaded from huggingface.
For the BGE M3, we use its pooler output as the output feature.

A.2      C ALCULATION OF M UTUAL N EAREST- NEIGHBOR K ERNEL A LIGNMENT

In this paper, we need to measure the similarity between features from two different models or
model layers. There are many approaches (Klabunde et al., 2023), and we use mutual nearest-
neighbor kernel alignment (Huh et al., 2024), which is relatively concise and accurate, calculated
                                                                                            n
as follows to measure the similarity of representation from the same object set X = {xi }i=1 in
different feature spaces.
Calculation of Mutual Nearest-neighbor Kernel Alignment. Given a representation mapping
δ : X → Hd from the objects to a space where similarity measurement ⟨·, ·⟩ : Hd × Hd → R is
defined, we can calculate the similarity map from dataset X as Sδ ∈ Rn×n , where the elements are
Sδ|i,j = ⟨δ (xi ) , δ (xj )⟩, especially, we axiomatic define ⟨x, x⟩ = 1, so we set the diagonal element
Sδ|i,i ≒ 0 since they are trivial values that disturb the following calculation with values 1.
Given two representation functions δ1 and δ2 , two similarity map can be calculated as Sδ1 and Sδ2
on the same object set X . For each line vector index  i = 1, 2, . . . , n in Sδ1 , we select
                                                                                             the index of
top-K elements from greater to lower as topk Sδ1 |i . Similarly, we get topK Sδ2 |i from Sδ2 .
Then, we calculate the kernel alignment for sample i as:

                                           topK Sδ1 |i ∩ topK Sδ2 |i
                         KAX (δ1 , δ2 )i =                             .                                             (1)
                                                         k
The kernel alignment for dataset X is the average on each KAX (δ1 , δ2 )i .
Implementation. In our experiments, we choose cosine similarity as the ⟨·, ·⟩, and K ≒ 64.
According to experiment settings in §2.2, n ≒ 512 is defined, and a randomlized matrix S have
KA = 64/512 = 0.125 as the random baseline.

A.2.1      BACKGROUND VALUES OF K ERNEL A LIGNMENT: L ABEL T OKEN - T EXT E NCODING .
In a specific layer of a decoder Transformer, the representations of a token x can be written as
δ(x) = e(x)+ϵ(p), where e(x) is the embedding vector of the token x, and ϵ(p) are the residual side-
flow w.r.t. the context p. Given two specific tokens xi and xj where kernel alignment is calculated
    9
        https://huggingface.co/docs/bitsandbytes/main/en/index


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 9: Distributions (clusters) of representations generated by: Left: encoder model (BGE),
clustering w.r.t. the label. Middle: ICL on the forerunner token, where representations gather into
one point (e([“: ”])) when no Transformer operation is conducted. Right: ICL on the label token,
where representations gather into points w.r.t. label (using a 2-way example) when no Transformer
operation is conducted, causing a high background value.


from different ICL-styled input sequences pi and pj , we discuss the background value of kernel
alignment as below.
Intuition. As shown in Fig. 9, the hidden states on the label token have a prior clustering, making
them naturally similar to the representation generated by the encoder model, even if the ICL process
does not encode it sufficiently. So, at layer 0, since the model is not able to perform any contextual
encoding in this layer, the kernel alignment on the forerunner is on a random baseline value of
0.125, but the value on the label token will be greater (estimated below). In the case where (1)
BGE generates fully linearly separable clusters against x in each class, with sufficient inter-cluster
distance, and (2) the number of samples for each label is not less than 64, such upper bias can be
expected to be 0.125(|Y|−1) (proof omitted). Intuitively, such bias can propagate along the residual
network from the embedding of [y] to every layer, making the results of every layer upper-biased.
Similarity on Forerunner Tokens. The cosine similarity between δ(xi ) and δ(xj ), where the xi
and xj are forerunner tokens of the input sequence can be written as:

        ⟨δ(xi ), δ(xj )⟩ = ⟨e(xi ) + ϵ(pi ), e(xj ) + ϵ(pj )⟩                                            (2)
                           ⟨e(xi ), e(xj )⟩ + ⟨e(xi ), ϵ(pj )⟩ + ⟨e(xj ), ϵ(pi )⟩ + ⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩
                         =                                                                           .   (3)
                                            ∥e(xi ) + ϵ(pi )∥2 ∥e(xj ) + ϵ(pj )∥2

Denote Bi,j = ⟨e(xi ), ϵ(pj )⟩ + ⟨e(xj ), ϵ(pi )⟩, Ci,j = ∥e(xi ) + ϵ(pi )∥2 ∥e(xj ) + ϵ(pj )∥2 , and no-
tice that xi = xj since they are forerunner tokens which is kept consistent in experiments, we have:

                                                   1 + Bi,j + ⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩
                              ⟨δ(xi ), δ(xj )⟩ =                               .                         (4)
                                                             Ci,j

Similarity on Label Tokens. Similarly, the cosine similarity between δ(yi ) and δ(yj ) on label
tokens can be written as:

                                            ⟨e(yi ), e(yj )⟩ + Bi,j + ⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩
                       ⟨δ(yi ), δ(yj )⟩ =                                              .                 (5)
                                                               Ci,j

Encoding on Label Tokens Enhances       the Similarity with Same Labels. Given K = 1 for sim-
plicity, the probability top1 Sδ|i selects a sample with the similar label with i-th sample on the
forerunner token can be written as:
              h                 i       Ej|yi =yj [⟨δ(xi ), δ(xj )⟩]
            PF yi = ytop (Sδ|i ) = ryi                                                                   (6)
                        1                  Ej [⟨δ(xi ), δ(xj )⟩]
                                        1 + Ej|yi =yj [Bi,j ] + Ej|yi =yj [⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩]
                                  ≈ ryi                                                      ,           (7)
                                               1 + Ej [Bi,j ] + Ej [⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩]


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


where the ryi is the label ratio of yi . Similarly, the probability on the label token can be written as:
                    h                   i
                PL yi = ytop (Sδ|i )
                                 1

                          ryi (1 + Ej|yi =yj [Bi,j ] + Ej|yi =yj [⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩])
                  ≈
                    ryi 1 + Ej|yi =yj [Bi,j ] + Ej|yi =yj [⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩]
                       + (1 − ryi ) (⟨e(yi ), e(yj )⟩ + Ej [Bi,j ] + Ej [⟨ϵ(pi ), ϵ(pj )⟩])
                       h                 i
                  ⩾ PF yi = ytop (Sδ|i ) .                                                                 (8)
                                     1

That is, the inputs with the same labels with xi are easier to be selected into the top1 Sδ|i . Notice
that we make approximations here: (1) we consider the Ej|yi =yj [Ci,j ] ≈ Ej [Ci,j ], i.e., the 2-norm
of two encoding vectors are considered equal granted by normalization used in Transformer. (2) We
consider the context term c in the label token scenario the same as the forerunner scenario since the
difference is only a label token, which usually occupies quite a small part of the input sequence.
Background Values of Kernel Alignment.      According to the explanation above, as shown in Fig. 9,
it is intuitive to conclude that topK Sδ|i from label tokens is easier to cluster samples with the same
label as yi . Moreover, a well-pre-trained encoder can catch the prior distribution of the input texts
determined by their labels, and also cluster samples with the same label, causing a high similarity
of similarity map, so that a high but unfaithful kernel alignment as the background value from the
similarity on e(y) but not ϵ(p). An intuitive verification of such background value is shown in the
Fig. 2 (Left), where the “Label Token” curve has a high value in layer 0 with ϵ(p) = 0. However,
the background value also indicates that the representation generated by BGE correctly clusters the
samples, confirming its reliability.

A.3    T RAINING AND I NFERENCE OF C ENTROID C LASSIFIER

In this paper, we follow Cho et al. (2024) to train centroid
                                                         mclassifiers as a probe toward hidden states
of LMs. In detail, given the LM’s hidden states set hli i=1 of the selected tokens (according to the
experimental setting, the last label token or forerunner token) in layer l from an [ICL input]-[query
                           m
label] set Z = {(pi , yi )}i=1 , where the labels are limited in label space Y, in the training phase,
we calculate the centroid of the hidden state h̄ly for each label respectively:

                                          h̄ly = Ei|yi =y hli .

                                                                                                   (9)

In the inference phase, we extract the equitant10 hidden state hlt as the training phase from the test
input, and calculate the similarity between hlt and the centroids calculated above. Then, we choose
the label of the most similar centroids as the prediction:
                                         C(hlt ) = argmax hlt , h̄ly .                                    (10)
                                                      y

Implementation. In our experiments, we set training sample number m ≒ 256, similarity function
⟨a, b⟩ ≒ −∥a − b∥2 .

A.4    C ARTOGRAPHY D ETAILS OF F IG . 6 (M IDDLE )

In Fig. 6 (Middle), we define a Correct Label Assignment, here we introduce how this measurement
is calculated. Suppose we have an attention score AW,f (K, Q) calculated as (also written as αK→Q
in brief):
                                  AW,f (K, Q) = f Q⊤ W K ,

                                                                                               (11)
with hidden dimensionality of d, give a certain layer, K ∈ Rd×nt is the hidden state matrix of full
context, Q ∈ Rd×1 is the hidden state of query’s forerunner token (Q⊤ = Kn⊤t ), f : Rnt → Ωnt
is a normalization mapping from nt -dimensional real vector to nt -dimensional probability vector
(usually softmax function), the W is a linear kernel, usually WQh⊤ WKh
                                                                       for multi-head attention or
            nt
I = diag (1 ) for vanilla attention.
  10
     Equitant refers to hidden states from the same layer and token type. While, in experiments shown in Fig. 5
(Right), we don’t keep the token type consistent.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Visualization of non-trivial attention connection defined and disconnected in ablation
analysis in §5.1 and Table 1. Notations and line numbers are same as Table 1.


For one input sample, given the token-index set of label tokens as L, the token-index set of label
tokens which is the same as the query’s ground truth label as L+ , we define the Correct Label
Assignment (CLA) of one sample as:
                                                    P
                                                          + AW,f (K, Q)i
                          CLAW,f (K, Q, L, L ) = Pi∈L
                                               +
                                                                         .                    (12)
                                                       i∈L AW,f (K, Q)i
Intuitively, CLA reflects the accuracy of attention computation AW,f towards label tokens on one
input. For an input set built from a dataset, we calculate the averaged CLA on these inputs, and
repeat in every layer to plot a curve of Averaged CLA against layer numbers. Specifically:
(1) Vanilla attention. We assign W ≒ I, f to linear normlization.
(2) Best Induction Head. For each attention head h, we assign W h ≒ WQh⊤ WK      h
                                                                                   , f ≒ softmax.
                                                      +
For each input, we calculate max CLAW h ,f (K, Q, L, L ) as the result for single input.
                               h
(3) Head Average. For each attention head h, we assign W h ≒ WQh⊤ WK   h
                                                                         , f ≒ softmax. For
                                                  +
                           P
each input, we calculate h CLAW h ,f (K, Q, L, L ) /|H|, where the |H| is the amount of heads
in current layer, as the result for single input.
Note that we do not consider the absolute value of attention assignment on label tokens in this
experiment, and most of the heads have little scores assigned to the label (Fig. 6 (Left)), therefore,
although the average assignments tend to be average, this result shown in Fig. 6 (Middle) does not
contradict the phenomenon that ICL can achieve high accuracy.

A.5   C ARTOGRAPHY D ETAILS OF F IG . 7

For Fig. 7, we input one sample from SST-2 into Llama 3 70B, take the output of layer 30 on the label
tokens to span a matrix KL , and map them by WQh⊤ WK     h
                                                            of head 32 (the best induction heads in this
layer) and 9 (the worst induction heads) of layer 31 (the layer with the most correct induction heads),
respectively. We visualize the distribution of these mapped WQh⊤ WK       h
                                                                            KL , we conduct principal
component analysis on them, and plot them on the plane of the first two components.
For each point q ∈ R2 on the principal component plane, we calculate the attention assignment
as follows. Give the index set of “positive” label token in KL as L+ , the index set of “negative”
label token as L− , we calculate the attention assignment, which can be an estimate of ICL predic-
tion (Wang et al., 2023), as:
                                   X                        X
                AttAssign(q) =          q ⊤ WQh⊤ WKh
                                                     KL|i −     q ⊤ WQh⊤ WKh
                                                                             KL|i .           (13)
                                   i∈L+                       i∈L−
We map this value to the degree of blue color of each pixel. The larger the positive value, the bluer
it is, and the smaller the negative value, the redder it is.

A.6   C ARTOGRAPHY D ETAILS OF F IG . 8

For Fig. 8, we calculate the magnitude of Step 1 as the finite differences of kernel alignment in
Fig. 2 (Left, “Forerunner Token of Label”). We directly use the head counting of Fig. 5 (Middle)


                                                  18
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.24                                                                                                                                                                                               PT Steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1


                                                               Forerunner Token Head #
                   0.22                                                                  15.0                                                           8                                                                 16


                                                                                                                                    Induction Head #
Kernel Alignment
                                                                                         12.5                                                                                                                             64
                   0.20                                                                                                                                 6                                                                 256
                                                                                         10.0                                                                                                                             512
                   0.18
                                                                                          7.5                                                           4                                                                 1k
                   0.16                                                                                                                                                                                                   5k
                                                                                          5.0                                                                                                                             20k
                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                 50k
                   0.14                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100k
                   0.12                                                                   0.0                                                           0                                                                 120k
                          0     5   10   15   20   25     30                                    1    5   10   15    20   25    30                                         1     5   10    15       20   25    30
                               Transformer Block Number                                             Transformer Block Number                                                   Transformer Block Number

     Figure 12: The 3 operating magnitudes on Pythia 6.9B with various pre-training steps. Left: Step 1,
     Input Text Encode. Middle: Step 2, Semantics Merge. Right: Step 3, Feature Retrieval and Copy,
     measured by the correct induction head numbers.



     and Fig. 6 (Left) as the magnitude of Steps 2 and 3. These data are regularized and converted into
     transparencies.


      A.7                     E XPERIMENT S ETTING OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS IN TABLE 1

     In Table 1, we attribute each step of the inference process to specific attention connections, also
     shown in Fig. 10. When we aim to remove this step from the inference, we eliminate (i.e. zeroing) all
     corresponding attention connections from layer 0 to layer {25%, 50%, 75%, 100%} × TotalLayers.
     For reference, for each experiment, we also conduct controlled experiments where the same amount
     of randomly selected attention connections are removed from the same layers as the controlled
     values. The controlled results are shown as smaller numbers under the experimental results.


      B                   LM P RE - TRAINING DYNAMICS M EASURED BY ICL C IRCUIT

     We extend the discussion of pre-training dynamics in §6 here.
                                                                                                                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                                                            Normlized Value / Accuracy


     One can divide a self-regression model into an early part and
     a later part in depth of layers, where the early part encodes the                                                                                                   0.8
     input into a hidden representation, and the later part decodes
     the hidden representation back to the input. So, the training ob-                                                                                                   0.6
     ject can also be divided into an encoding loss and a decoding                                                                                                       0.4
     loss. According to the discussion in §6, the operation of Step 1                                                                                                                                   Layer: 3, Encoding
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Layer: 5, Copy #
     can be classified as encoding, and the other two steps of the in-                                                                                                   0.2                            Layer: 10, Corr. Ind. #
     duction circuit can be classified as decoding. Intuitively, since                                                                                                                                  Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
     the decoding operations require the encoding results as input,                                                                                                             0     2        4        6     8      10      12
     unless the encoding operation converges to a stable output, the             Pretraining Steps / 10000
     decoding can not be trained since the input-output mapping is     Figure 11: Operating magnitude
     noised, causing unstable gradients to interfere with the train-   for each inference step (normal-
     ing (Liu et al., 2020).                                           ized) and ICL accuracy against
                                                                       pre-training steps on Pythia 6.9B
     We confirm such a hypothesis by measurements in Pythia
                                                                       and SST-2.
     6.9B (Biderman et al., 2023) as shown in Fig 11, where: (1)
     The magnitude of the 3 operations emerge in the early phase of pre-training (less than 10k steps),
     and is monotonically increasing, while the encoding operation has the fastest growth rate. (2) ICL
     capacity appearance after all three operations reaches a high level (around 50k steps, notice that
     the random accuracy is 0.5), while the curve morphologies of the operating magnitudes against the
     layer numbers (shown in Fig. 12) are convergence to the last training step. Such results suggest that:
     LMs start to produce the inner encoding in the very early steps of the pre-training, and can be an
     important fundamental in building the subsequent induction circuits, as explained in the previous
     works mentioned in §2.1.


                                                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Attention score visualized with the forerunner token of the ICL query as the attention
query, from (Left) layer 21 and (Right) layer 2 in Llama 3 70B from an input case.


B.1    DATA D ISTRIBUTION R EQUIREMENT E XPLAINED BY H IDDEN S TATE M ULTIPLEX

Moreover, the hidden space multiplexing in the induction operation observed in this paper can give
a prototypical and phenomenological conjecture for the data distribution requirement found in the
previous works (Olsson et al., 2022; Reddy, 2024; Singh et al., 2024b), where data with a large label
space and various tasks can promote ICL and suppress In-weight Learning (IWL), and vice versa.
Intuitively, suppose the encoding inputted into the later layers is clustered by their labels (similar to
the well-embedded input styles in the works above, confirmed in Fig. 3). In that case, we can say
a cluster center is the eigen-subspace of the corresponding label. Since attention only conducts
dot-multiplication operations, let us assume that these eigen-subspaces are radially distributed.
During the training, (1) When the label space is small, the trained attention heads only need to
extract the projected length of the query on each label’s eigen-subspace. For each label, such op-
eration has a parameters’ analytical solution with (encoding kernel) WQ⊤ WK = I and (decoding
transformation) WO WV = o⊤          y ey , where oy is the label token’s output embedding, and ey is the la-
bel’s eigen-subspace. From such an operation, theoretically, one layer can handle at most |H| labels,
where |H| is the head amounts. While, considering the sparsity of these eigen-subspaces, such an
upper bound can be increased to d′ |H| by multiplex one head to decode an orthogonal group of la-
bels with orthogonal eigen-subspaces of E = [ey1 ; ey2 ; . . . ; eyd′ ] and orthogonal output embedding
O = [oy1 ; oy2 ; . . . ; oyd′ ], where d′ is the inner dimension of attention head, with decoding transfor-
mation WO WV = O⊤ E. (2) When the label space expands11 , the decoding transformation can
not distinguish all the clusters since the WO WV is low-rank. Driven by the training loss, the model
can choose to transform the encoding kernel to focus on catching the most similar label tokens with
the query, and copy the label tokens’ information back to the query. As a result, one attention head
can catch at most d′ groups of label tokens mapped collinearly by the encoding kernel (note that this
set of labels may not appear simultaneously in the context, so confusion can be avoided), and the
common space of these label words become the induction subspace shown in §4.2.
Our other conjecture is that the ICL training endpoint is thermodynamically stable (with a lower
loss), and in contrast, the IWL training endpoint is kinetically stable (with a more accessible training
trajectory). Moreover, the IWL training object can be a precursor of ICL training, since the total
number of labels fed into the model gradually increases with the data. So, we can hypothesize that:
When the metastable state is disturbed by some condition, such as the appearance of rare or noisy
labels, the training can show a phase transition toward a thermodynamically stable state.

   11
      Notice that such a situation can also occur when the orthogonality between eigen-subspaces or output
embeddings is lost. A common situation is that the variance of the cluster increases, creating confusion within
the decoding space of the attention head.


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Notice that this section is our hypothesis based on the results of this paper, the detailed dynamics are
still unknown, which should be empirically validated in future work. One can start by decomposing
pre-training targets into implicit tasks, and examine how these tasks can evoke the occurrence of the
3-step inference operations. A possible beginning is: finding implicit input-label tuples in wild data.



C    C AN LM S S EGMENT ICL I NPUTS ?

The experiments in §3.1 imply that LMs conduct
effective segmentation on ICL-styled inputs, en-
abling LMs to block the interference of preceding
demonstrations in the input text encoding opera-
tion. Here, as a prototypical discussion, we con-
firm the existence of the segmentation operation
and then reveal that such segmentation can be done
in very early layers from an attention operation fo-
cusing on some specific segmentation tokens in the
inputs.
As a preliminary observation, we visualize the at-
tention scores with the last forerunner token as the Figure 14: Attention matrix visualized on layer
attention queue at layer 21 (a layer with high en- 2, head 53 in Llama 3 70B from an input case.
coding magnitude, refer to Fig. 2) from an input case, as shown in Fig. 13 (Left), where most of the
attention heads are focused on the query text. The visualization suggests that encoding operations
are localized into the query tokens.
Although position embedding inserts sufficient positional information to hidden states and enables
attention heads to identify nearby tokens, we believe that position embedding is insufficient to ac-
curately segment the various input parts of uncertain lengths. We hypothesize that LM focused on
natural delimiters (e.g. “\n”, “: ”) in the input during the early stages of inference, and visualiza-
tion in Fig. 13 (Right) supports such hypothesis: In layer 2, most of the attention heads focus on the
natural delimiters, and another visualization in Fig. 14 shows that all attention queries (not only the
forerunner token) exhibit similar separator-focusing behavior, suggesting that: Some attention heads
merge all the preceding delimiters’ representation into every token as delimiter-based positional en-
coding, making the representations of tokens with the same number of preceding delimiters similar,
while differentiating the representations of tokens with different numbers of preceding delimiters.
In the subsequent inference process, LM can utilize these delimiter-based positional encodings for
localization operations. Such observation is also consistent with Fig. 4.
Furthermore, we empirically demonstrate that de- Table 5: Accuracy drop with delimiters re-
limiters have significant saliency towards ICL accu- moved/modified from prompts on SST-2.
racies in Table 5 (upper), experimented by remov-         Template Modification                Acc. (%)
ing them from prompt templates. Interestingly, the        None (Table 4)                        91.60
trial to completely remove these delimiters from the        - w/o “\n”                          93.36
                                                            - w/o “: ”                          85.74
inputs yielded almost random results, even though           - w/o “sentence: ”, “sentiment: ”   79.10
these inputs still conform to the primary form of           - w/o all above                     50.98
ICL. A reliable reason can be that: The hiatus of           - “: ” → “hello ”                   78.91
the delimiter interferes with the encoding operation        - “: ” → “@ ”                       91.41
                                                            - “: ” → “positive ”                71.48
(Step 1) on both demonstrations and queries, which
                                                          (Random)                              50.00
completely disrupts the ICL process.
The scale of such a segmentation operation can surprise one, since more than half of the heads focus
on the segmenting operation as shown in Fig. 13 (Right). However, as an assumption, we want to
argue that dividing the input text into local segmentation is a crucial step in language modeling, so,
functionally, LM has sufficient “motivation” to focus on segmenting by the pre-training objective.
Moreover, based on the above principles, as long as the delimiter appears periodically at appropriate
positions and can be captured by attention heads (only in the structured parts of the prompt template),
as shown in Table 5 (lower), the delimiter can be designed to any token. While we still recommend
natural delimiters without semantics in the template design.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    S EMANTICS M ERGE IS N ON - SELECTIVE ON L OCATION

To investigate whether the copy processing described in §4.1 has selectivity on the forerunner token,
on every attention head of each layer, for a given token position i, we measure the Normalized Copy
Magnitude shown below:
                                     NCMnt (α) = nt α(i−1)→i ,                                   (14)
where the α(i−1)→i is the attention score with i-th token serving as the attention query and (i − 1)-th
token serving as the attention key. For each layer, we export the NCM at all positions and on all
attention heads, and separately statistics the cases where the i-th token is a label token or a non-label
token. The results for 4 models on SST-2 are shown in Fig. 15.
From the results, no significant statistical differences between these two types of tokens can be
observed, suggesting that the semantics copy process, which is identified as Step 2 of our circuit,
is not selective on the token types. However, even if we demonstrate that the model cannot exhibit
selectivity in the copy positions within the current input, a potential direction for future research is
to investigate whether any forerunner tokens in the inputs can enhance or weaken this copy process.
Given that this copying is known to be related to label denoising (§4.1), exploring and carefully
designing these forerunner tokens could significantly benefit the control of ICL behavior.


E    M EASUREMENT ON D IRECT D ECODING

This section measures the direct decoding bypass, suggesting that: (1) Direct decoding on well-
processed hidden states with some later layer skipped can get satisfactory accuracy even better than
the full inference process. (2) Direct decoding on insufficient processed hidden states adds bias
towards the predicting distribution.
                                                                   Direct Decoding Accuracy
                                                                                              0.9
We examine the first claim by applying the language model
head on each layer’s hidden state on SST-2, Llama 3 8B, and                                   0.8
conduct a standard ICL process on the decoded token predic-                                   0.7
tion distribution. The results are shown in Fig. 16, where di-
rect decoding accuracy emerges from random to near 1 around                                   0.6
layer 18. Refer to Fig. 8 and results in Appendix H.2, we can                                 0.5
confirm: Accuracy emerges after all three steps are executed.
Moreover, the accuracies on the intermediate hidden states are                                      0   10   20   30
even higher than the last hidden states, which is aligned with                      Transformer Block Number
the discussion in Table 3. So, we can conclude: Direct decod-              Figure 16: Direct decoding accura-
ing on well-processed hidden states can classify well.                     cies on various layers.
Moreover, we infer that direct decoding from lower layers, where hidden states are not sufficiently
processed, causes prediction bias. We investigate the influence of the direct decoding result of layer
0, by the relationship between direct decoded distribution and final prediction distribution. In detail,
on SST-2 and Llama 3 8B, we use various forerunner tokens with different direct decoding distri-
butions on the label tokens “positive” and “negative”, and calculate their ICL prediction probability
distributions respectively, as shown in Fig. 17 (Upper), where forerunner tokens with biased direct
decoding distribution produce prediction biases with the same tendencies. While, when we apply
contextual calibration (Zhao et al., 2021), which removes the background value without a query
from the prediction, such similar tendencies disappear (Fig. 17 (Lower)).


F    D EMONSTRATIONS E NHANCE THE I NFERENCE OF P ERPLEXED Q UERIES

We investigate the correlation between the queries’ perplexities and the classification accuracies with
and without demonstrations, as a supplement of results in Fig. 2 (Right). We divide the queries into
10 bins w.r.t. the language modeling loss, and calculate the prediction accuracy in each bin, shown
in Fig. 18. In these results, although a unified correlation can not be observed, we can confirm that:
Compared to the 0-shot results, the 4-shot inference shows better accuracies, especially on queries
with high language modeling loss. So, we can conclude that: Demonstrations enhance the inference
accuracy of perplexed queries, consistent with the results in Fig. 2 (Right).


                                                   22
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                   Normlized Copy Magnitude to Normal Tokens and Label Tokens on Falcon 40B
                           10
                                                                                   Copy to:
                                                                                  Non-label Token
                                                                                  Label Token
                           8
Normlized Copy Magnitude
                           6


                           4


                           2


                           0
                                                                                 Layer Index
                                                   Normlized Copy Magnitude to Normal Tokens and Label Tokens on Falcon 40B
                           16                                                                                                  Copy to:
                                                                                                                              Non-label Token
                           14                                                                                                 Label Token
Normlized Copy Magnitude


                           12

                           10

                           8

                           6

                           4

                           2

                           0
                                                                                 Layer Index
                                                   Normlized Copy Magnitude to Normal Tokens and Label Tokens on Falcon 40B
                           25
                                                                                                                               Copy to:
                                                                                                                              Non-label Token
                                                                                                                              Label Token
                           20
Normlized Copy Magnitude


                           15


                           10


                           5


                           0
                                                                                 Layer Index
                                                   Normlized Copy Magnitude to Normal Tokens and Label Tokens on Falcon 40B
                           25
                                                                                                                               Copy to:
                                                                                                                              Non-label Token
                                                                                                                              Label Token
                           20
Normlized Copy Magnitude


                           15


                           10


                           5


                           0
                                                                                 Layer Index


        Figure 15: Copy magnitude normalized by the sequence length from the previous token to the non-
        label token and label token, for every token and head in each layer. Significant statistical differences
        cannot be observed.


         G                      D EGRADATION A NALYSIS : I N - WEIGHT L EARNING WITHOUT
                                G ROUND - TRUTH L ABEL IN C ONTEXT

        Given the circuit proposed in this paper, it is intuitive that some label tokens, especially the ground-
        truth label token of the query should be presented in the demonstrations, which is the typical in-
        context learning setting compared to the In-Weight Learning (IWL) setting (Chan et al., 2022;
        Reddy, 2024) where the ground-truth label is not offered in the demonstration. When the ground-
        truth label is missing, the behavior of Steps 1 and 2 remains constant as they are independent of the
        query (due to the causal attention mask), while the behavior of Step 3 should be re-discussed.
        In this section, we demonstrate that our circuit, especially the induction processing of Step 3, can
        still explain the inference behavior in the IWL scenario, but is not as robust as in the ICL scenario.
        Moreover, our experiments demonstrate that in the IWL scenario, induction heads are detrimental to
        the model’s predictions, which is consistent with the conclusion drawn from the results in the main
        text. Also, some inference phenomena in the IWL scenario can be explained by our conclusions.
        While, we also illustrate through a counterexample that under the condition of IWL, even if the
        induction heads work negatively, the demonstrations can still enhance the inference.


                                                                                 23
       Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vanilla ICL
                                                                        0.8


                                                 Avg. Prediction Dis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               negative                                       positive
                                                                        0.6
                                                                        0.4
                                                                        0.2
                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                        Ground-truth                       "label"                                    "label :"                                         "label \n"                     "label \t" "label positive"
                                                                                                                                          -0.0034                                     -0.0007                                            -0.0003                       +0.0005       +0.0025
                                                                                                    Forerunner Tokens / Direct Decoding Logits Difference (N P, Layer 0)
                                                                                                                           Contextual Calibration
                                                                        0.8
                                                 Avg. Prediction Dis.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               negative                                       positive
                                                                        0.6
                                                                        0.4
                                                                        0.2
                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                        Ground-truth                       "label"                                    "label :"                                         "label \n"                     "label \t" "label positive"
                                                                                                                                          -0.0034                                     -0.0007                                            -0.0003                       +0.0005       +0.0025
                                                                                                    Forerunner Tokens / Direct Decoding Logits Difference (N P, Layer 0)
       Figure 17: Predicting distributions on different forerunner tokens with various direct decoding logits.
       Inference process used: Upper: Vanilla ICL, Lower: Biased removed inference by Contextual
       Calibration proposed by Zhao et al. (2021).


                                    SST2 k = 0                                                                MR k = 0                                                        FP k = 0                                                      SST5 k = 0                                                      TREC k = 0                                                    AGNews k = 0
                         1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                  1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0               Accuracy per Bin
ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                         ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ICL Accuracy / Density
                                           Loss Distribution                                                        Loss Distribution                                              Loss Distribution                                               Loss Distribution                                               Loss Distribution                                              Loss Distribution
                         0.8                                                                      0.8                                                            0.8                                                             0.8                                                             0.8                                                            0.8
                         0.6                                                                      0.6                                                            0.6                                                             0.6                                                             0.6                                                            0.6
                         0.4                                                                      0.4                                                            0.4                                                             0.4                                                             0.4                                                            0.4
                         0.2                                                                      0.2                                                            0.2                                                             0.2                                                             0.2                                                            0.2
                         0.0                                                                      0.0                                                            0.0                                                             0.0                                                             0.0                                                            0.0
                                       5                 10                                                     5             10                                               5              10                                               5              10                                               5              10                                              5              10
                               Language Modeling Loss                                                   Language Modeling Loss                                         Language Modeling Loss                                          Language Modeling Loss                                          Language Modeling Loss                                         Language Modeling Loss

                                    SST2 k = 4                                                                MR k = 4                                                        FP k = 4                                                      SST5 k = 4                                                      TREC k = 4                                                    AGNews k = 4
                         1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                  1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0               Accuracy per Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0               Accuracy per Bin
ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                         ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ICL Accuracy / Density


                                           Loss Distribution                                                        Loss Distribution                                              Loss Distribution                                               Loss Distribution                                               Loss Distribution   ICL Accuracy / Density                     Loss Distribution
                         0.8                                                                      0.8                                                            0.8                                                             0.8                                                             0.8                                                            0.8
                         0.6                                                                      0.6                                                            0.6                                                             0.6                                                             0.6                                                            0.6
                         0.4                                                                      0.4                                                            0.4                                                             0.4                                                             0.4                                                            0.4
                         0.2                                                                      0.2                                                            0.2                                                             0.2                                                             0.2                                                            0.2
                         0.0                                                                      0.0                                                            0.0                                                             0.0                                                             0.0                                                            0.0
                                       5                 10                                                     5             10                                               5              10                                               5              10                                               5              10                                              5              10
                               Language Modeling Loss                                                   Language Modeling Loss                                         Language Modeling Loss                                          Language Modeling Loss                                          Language Modeling Loss                                         Language Modeling Loss


       Figure 18: The correlations between language modeling loss and ICL prediction accuracies. Upper:
       0-shot results; Lower: 4-shot results.


       Experimental results in this section require us to consider new inference dynamics for IWL scenar-
       ios, although we believe the discussion for ICL scenarios in this paper is robust. We demonstrate
       that such separate consideration of ICL and IWL is reasonable and responsible by highlighting the
       essential differences between ICL and IWL settings, as also shown in previous works (Chan et al.,
       2022; Reddy, 2024).

        G.1                          H OW ACCURATE CAN I NDUCTION H EADS E XPLAIN IWL I NFERENCE ?

       Our main concern is: Whether the induction heads in our circuit for ICL can explain or predict the
       inference behavior in the IWL scenario. We design a metric to investigate the accuracy of such an
       explanation: We calculate the divergence between the real output probability of the model and the
       predicted output probability through the attention assignment of the induction heads. In detail, given
       a label space Y, for each label l ∈ Y, we denote the token-index set of l as Ll . Then, we calculate
       the predicted output probability ô as:

                                         ô = softmax o1 , o2 , . . . , o|Y| ,                           (15)


                                                                                                                                                                                                       24
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                     Jensen Shannon Divergence: Predicted Output ~ Real Output on Llama 3 70B, SST5
                0.6
                0.5
JS Divergence   0.4
                0.3
                0.2
                0.1
                                                                                                                                           In-domain Data        Out-of-domain Data   Random
                0.0
                       0           10           20                    30                   40                   50                    60                            70
                                                                                      Layer Index
                                                     Jensen Shannon Divergence: Predicted Output ~ Real Output on Falcon 40B, SST5
                0.6
                0.5
JS Divergence


                0.4
                0.3
                0.2
                0.1
                                                                                                                                           In-domain Data        Out-of-domain Data   Random
                0.0
                       0                10                       20                        30                          40                                   50
                                                                                      Layer Index
                                                     Jensen Shannon Divergence: Predicted Output ~ Real Output on Llama 3 8B, SST5
                0.8

                0.6
JS Divergence


                0.4

                0.2
                                                                                                                                           In-domain Data        Out-of-domain Data   Random
                0.0
                           0                                10                                                  20                                                            30
                                                                                      Layer Index
                                                      Jensen Shannon Divergence: Predicted Output ~ Real Output on Falcon 7B, SST5
                0.6
                0.5
JS Divergence


                0.4
                0.3
                0.2
                0.1                                                                                                                        In-domain Data        Out-of-domain Data   Random
                           0                                10                                                  20                                                            30
                                                                                      Layer Index


    Figure 19: The JS divergence between the predicted output by the induction attention score (Eq. 15)
    and real output on ICL and IWL settings. Since not all attention heads are induction heads, the
    lowest 5 data of each layer is selected.

                                                                                       X
                                                                                                 h
                                                                           ol = n t             αi→q ,                                                                                (16)
                                                                                      i∈Ll
                 h
    where the αi→q    is the attention score of head h where the query’s forerunner token serves as the
    attention query, and the i-th token as the attention key. Given the real output distribution of ICL as
    o, we calculate the Jensen–Shannon divergence DJS [ô, o] as the metric for the accuracy of predicting
    o from ô. For each Transformer layer, we select the results of the 5 attention heads with the lowest
    divergence, and the results on SST-512 are shown in Fig. 19.
    In the results, statistically, compared to the ICL setting, induction heads provide poorer explanations
    of model predictions in the IWL setting. However, these divergences consistently remain below the
    random baseline, indicating that model outputs in the IWL setting can still be weakly explained by
    induction heads. This indicates that the circuit utilized in this paper aligns with the IWL scenario,
    albeit slightly weaker.

     G.2                   D O I NDUCTION H EADS C ONTRIBUTE TO IWL P ROCESSING ?

    To test the generalizability of our conclusion towards IWL scenarios, we conduct more ablation
    experiments similar to §5.1, but with filtered inputs with no ground-truth query label presented
    in the context. The results are shown in Table 6. Generally speaking, these experiments confirm
    that: Our theoretical framework is still able to explain inference phenomena in IWL scenarios, thus
    strengthening our framework.
    In detail, compared to the results of unfiltered inputs (Table 1), we highlight 4 major phenomena,
    and explain them within our framework: (1) The baseline accuracies (line 1) in IWL settings are
    lower than in normal settings, even worse than random prediction. This is easy to understand given
                  12
                       We select a more-way task to reduce the influence of frequency bias of ICL (introduced in §5.3).


                                                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 6: Accuracy variation (%) with each inference step ablated on Left: Llama 3 8B, Right:
Falcon 7B in IWL scenarios. Notations are the same with Table 1, significant comparisons are
highlighted with arrows.
        Attention Disconnected           Affected Layers Ratio (from layer 1)                 Attention Disconnected           Affected Layers Ratio (from layer 1)
  #                                                                                     #
             Key → Query                 25%         50%       75%        100%                     Key → Query                 25%         50%       75%        100%
  1    None (4-shot IWL baseline)                   ±0 (Acc. 33.43 ↓)                   1    None (4-shot IWL baseline)                   ±0 (Acc. 27.41 ↓)
                         – Step1: Input Text Encode –                                                          – Step1: Input Text Encode –
  2 Demo. Texts xi → Forerunner si      −2.31     −17.90      −28.58     −31.22         2 Demo. Texts xi → Forerunner si −17.64         −24.32      −26.17     −26.43
                                         +0.03     +0.78       +0.49       −0.10                                               −0.13     −0.42       −1.24       +0.91

  3 Query Texts xq → Forerunner sq      −2.67     −12.96      −17.87     −13.41         3 Query Texts xq → Forerunner sq      −3.19     −15.33      −21.48     −22.53
                                         +0.23       +0.23     −0.46       +0.26                                               −0.33       −0.23     +0.03       +0.32

                         – Step2: Semantics Merge –                                                            – Step2: Semantics Merge –
  4 Label yi → Query Forerunner sq    −1.20     +0.13 ↑      +0.52 ↑     +0.88 ↑        4 Demo. Forerunner si → Label yi +2.93     ↑ +1.10 ↑       +6.38 ↑     +5.86 ↑
                                       +0.29     −0.10         −0.06       −0.06                                             −0.00      +0.32         0.13       −0.13

                     – Step3: Feature Retrieval & Copy –                                                   – Step3: Feature Retrieval & Copy –
  5 Label yi → Query Forerunner sq +2.08      ↑ +2.05 ↑      +5.40 ↑     +22.95 ↑       5 Label yi → Query Forerunner sq +8.20      ↑ +5.63 ↑      +9.28 ↑     +29.26 ↑
                                        −0.23      −0.06       −0.36       +0.00                                              +0.13      0.23        +0.00       +0.10

                                 Reference Value                                                                       Reference Value
  6           Zero-shot                            +17.22 (Acc. 50.65)                  6           Zero-shot                            +33.58 (Acc. 60.99)
  7       Random Prediction                        −0.93 (Acc. 32.50)                   7       Random Prediction                        +5.09 (Acc. 32.50)


the frequency bias introduced in §5.3. (2) As we gradually suppress the induction heads (line 5), the
accuracies increase, which is consistent with the conclusion in the main text of this paper: In IWL
setting, induction heads can not find and copy any correct label-related information in the context,
and only copy the label information presented in the context noisily. Therefore, after removing
it from the inference process, the accuracies increase and approach a 0-shot level. These results
confirm our main claim of this section: Induction heads are detrimental to IWL inference. (3)
Interestingly, removing the copying processing (line 4) unexpectedly enhances the accuracy. We
infer that the input texts of different labels under the same task still have a certain background-value
similarity of the encoding at the forerunner token. Such similarities are propagated into the label
tokens by Step 2, enhancing the attention flow from labels to the query’s forerunner token in Step
3, causing a decrease in accuracy. (4) Removing the demonstration text encoding (line 2) decreases
the accuracy to around 0. According to our discussion about Step 1, in this case, forerunner tokens
cannot receive information from the demonstration text, leading an equivalent sequence for the
later layers without demonstration text like [s1 ][y1 ][s2 ][y2 ] . . . [sk ][yk ][xq ][sq ][yq ]. Given that the
forerunner token [s· ] is consistent throughout the input, later layers are likely to conduct induction
only on the forerunner token, whose subsequent tokens do not contain the correct label, leading to a
0 accuracy. This is also a critical rebuttal to previous work (Wang et al., 2023), which believes the
label tokens directly collect the information of input text: If that is the case, then disconnecting the
links from demonstration texts to the forerunner tokens will not have such a significant disturbance
on the accuracy.
In summary, these results indicate: Even in the IWL setting, this paper’s conclusions can explain the
inference phenomena, and the findings in our paper are also significantly enhanced. This extends the
applicability of our conclusions, while, given the existence of some counterexamples shown below,
we still hope that future work can provide a more detailed discussion of the inference dynamics
under the IWL scenario.

G.3      T HE C OUNTEREXAMPLE

Given the demonstration shown in Fig. 20, we use the query “Geoffrey Hinton”, whose ground-
truth label is presented in the context as “Researcher” as the ICL example, and the query “Michael
Jordan”, whose ground-truth label “Athlete” is NOT presented in the context as an IWL example.
Here, to investigate the behavior of the induction heads, we input both examples to Llama 3 70B,
and visualize the attention scores from the query’s forerunner token (which serves as the attention
query) on layer 31, which is identified as the layer with the highest induction magnitude, as shown
in Fig. 20. In the right part of the figure for the IWL scenario, the attention magnitude directed
toward the labeled tokens is significantly weak, with most of the attention scores being absorbed by
the Attention Sink (Xiao et al., 2024) of the first token. A comparison with the left part, where a
ground-truth label is given in the context can particularly highlight such an observation. Such an
observation is currently aligned with our expectations since no label features similar to the query’s
forerunner token can be accessed in the IWL input.
In other words, the induction heads are almost not writing demonstration-relevant information to the
query in the IWL scenario. It is intuitive to infer that the model cannot predict the label for “Michael


                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 20: A counterexample when the induction head’s behavior cannot predict the LM’s inference
behavior. Given the demonstration shown in the figure, the attention scores from the label’s forerun-
ner token are visualized on layer 31 of Llama 3 70B. The left part is a standard ICL scenario where
the ground-truth label of the query can be accessed in the demonstrations. The right part is the IWL
scenario where the ground-truth label of the query is not presented in the demonstrations. A clear
induction pattern can not be observed in the IWL scenario.


Jordan” well, and the demonstrations cannot help the prediction either. However, as shown in Ta-
ble 7, the model produces good predictions and benefits from the demonstration, which contradicts
our expectations. Such contradiction indicates that even if our inference circuit can robustly explain
the inference behavior in the ICL scenario, it can not generalize to the IWL scenario generalizatively.



G.4   D ISCUSSIONS : T HE P OSSIBILITY OF D IFFERENT I NFERENCE DYNAMICS IN IWL
      S CENARIOS

Our explanation for this counterex- Table 7: Label probabilities from the model predictions
ample is: It can be considered that of the ICL (query: “Geoffrey Hinton” (Researcher)) and
in the IWL settings, some different IWL (query: “Michael Jordan” (Athlete)) scenario shown
inference dynamics contribute to the in Fig. 20. In this case, IWL predictions also benefit from
prediction. Such difference is natural, demonstrations.
since even if the ICL and IWL input       Label Token “ Ath#” “ Research#” “ Singer” “ Politician”
data share a consistent format, they
                                                 3-shot 1.00       0.00       0.00       0.00
are fundamentally distinct, and some-    IWL
                                                 0-shot 0.89       0.04       0.01       0.06
times even antagonistic, as shown in      ICL 3-shot    0.00       1.00       0.00       0.00
previous works (Chan et al., 2022;
Reddy, 2024), which find that toy Transformers are difficult to perform well on both types of data
with a same set of parameters. While, large models may allow for the coexistence of multiple in-
ference dynamics, as discussed in §5.2, making LLMs able to yield better performance on both ICL
and IWL inference scenarios.
Therefore, although we claim that our circuit can explain inference behavior under some of the IWL
scenarios, it is reasonable to consider ICL data and IWL data separately, and this paper conducts a
robust analysis under ICL conditions, leaving the IWL scenario for future works.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Layer 31, Head 32, Correct Rate: 0.95   Layer 31, Head 9, Correct Rate: 0.00             Layer 31, Head 32, Correct Rate: 0.95         Layer 31, Head 9, Correct Rate: 0.00
      k=1                 k=2                 k=1                 k=2                          k=1                 k=2                       k=1                 k=2


     k = 15               k = 16             k = 15              k = 16                       k = 15               k = 16                   k = 15              k = 16


Layer 31, Head 32, Correct Rate: 0.95   Layer 31, Head 9, Correct Rate: 0.00             Layer 31, Head 32, Correct Rate: 0.95         Layer 31, Head 9, Correct Rate: 0.00
      k=1                 k=2                 k=1                 k=2                          k=1                 k=2                       k=1                 k=2


     k = 15               k = 16             k = 15              k = 16                       k = 15               k = 16                   k = 15              k = 16


                         Figure 21: Supplemental experiment result on more samples for Fig. 7.

H        AUGMENTATED E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
H.1        ATTENTION H EAD S TATISTICS

We count the marked times of each attention head as Forerunner Token Head (Fig. 22, 23, 24, 25) /
Correct Induction Head (Fig. 26, 27, 28, 29) by all data samples from each dataset on each model.
Forerunner Token Head Statistics. We plot the distributions of the marked Forerunner Token
Heads towards correct and wrong labels: There are observable morphological differences in figures
across different datasets, while the forerunner token heads marked on the correct and incorrect labels
of the same dataset are almost identical. The detailed data confirms our conclusion in §4.1.
Induction Head Statistics. We plot the distributions of the marked Correct Induction Heads, where
there are observable morphological differences in figures across different datasets, but also signifi-
cant overlaps, which confirms our conclusion in §4.2.

H.2        OTHER LM S ’ E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

The results of most experiments in                                                Table 8: Results of Table 1 on Falcon 7B.
the main text on Llama 3 8B are                                                Attention Disconnected                  Affected Layers Ratio (from layer 1)
                                                                    #
shown in Fig. 30, 33, 36, and 39;                                                   Key → Query                     25%             50%              75%          100%
The results of most experiments in                                  1          None (4-shot baseline)                               ±0 (Acc. 65.27)
the main text on Falcon 40B are                                                              – Step1: Input Text Encode –
                                                                                                         −7.65
                                                                    2 Demo. Texts xi → Forerunner si −0.68           −15.69                      −27.15          −29.10
shown in Fig. 31, 34, 37, and 40;                                                                            ± 0.07 −0.62 ± 0.07                +0.08 ± 0.03   −0.36 ± 0.07

                                                                    3 Query Texts xq → Forerunner sq     −8.30       −21.13                      −28.84          −31.74
The results of most experiments in                                                                               −0.16 ± 0.00    −0.15 ± 0.00   +0.11 ± 0.01   −0.15 ± 0.02


the main text on Falcon 7B are shown                                                         – Step2: Semantics Merge –
                                                                                                        −1.01       −1.92                         −1.04          −1.27
                                                                    4 Demo. Forerunner si → Label yi +0.36
in Fig. 32, 35, 38, 41, and Table 8.                                                                       ± 0.10 −0.00 ± 0.00                  +0.06 ± 0.00   +0.06 ± 0.02

                                                                                                – Step3: Feature Retrieval & Copy –
From these results, we can conclude          5 Label yi → Query Forerunner sq     +3.32      −3.61       −7.91                                                   −5.92
                                                                                                                 +1.72 ± 3.94    −0.03 ± 0.00   −0.00 ± 0.00   +0.10 ± 0.00

consistently with the main text. How-                                       Reference Value
                                             6            Zero-shot                         −4.28 (Acc. 60.99)
ever, as discussed in §5.2, inference        7       Random Prediction                      −32.77 (Acc. 32.50)
dynamics on these models are delo-
calized, thus clear serialization of the 3 steps can not be observed in these results.

H.3        M ORE R ESULTS OF F IG . 7

To enhance the persuasiveness, we additionally and randomly try 4 input samples as supplements to
Fig. 7 on SST-2 and Llama 3 70B as shown in Fig. 21. From these results, we can observe similar
phenomena to Fig. 21 and conclude consistently.


                                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                       Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                  500                        1                                                500                        1                                                  500                        1                                                500
                    11                                                                            11                                                                          11                                                                            11
                                                                        450                                                                         450                                                                           450                                                                         450
                    21                                                                            21                                                                          21                                                                            21
                                                                        400                                                                         400                                                                           400                                                                         400
Transformer Block


                                                                              Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                          Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer Block
                    31                                                                            31                                                                          31                                                                            31
                                                                        350                                                                         350                                                                           350                                                                         350
                    41                                                                            41                                                                          41                                                                            41
                                                                        300                                                                         300                                                                           300                                                                         300
                    51                                                                            51                                                                          51                                                                            51
                                                                        250                                                                         250                                                                           250                                                                         250
                    61                                                                            61                                                                          61                                                                            61
                                                                        200                                                                         200                                                                           200                                                                         200
                    71                                                                            71                                                                          71                                                                            71
                                                                        150                                                                         150                                                                           150                                                                         150
                         0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60                                   0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60
                                             Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #

                                                                       SST-2                                                                                                                                                      MR
                    Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                       Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                  500                        1                                                500                        1                                                  500                        1                                                500
                    11                                                                            11                                                                          11                                                                            11
                                                                        450                                                                         450                                                                           450                                                                         450
                    21                                                                            21                                                                          21                                                                            21
                                                                        400                                                                         400                                                                           400                                                                         400
Transformer Block


                                                                              Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                          Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer Block
                    31                                                                            31                                                                          31                                                                            31
                                                                        350                                                                         350                                                                           350                                                                         350
                    41                                                                            41                                                                          41                                                                            41
                                                                        300                                                                         300                                                                           300                                                                         300
                    51                                                                            51                                                                          51                                                                            51
                                                                        250                                                                         250                                                                           250                                                                         250
                    61                                                                            61                                                                          61                                                                            61
                                                                        200                                                                         200                                                                           200                                                                         200
                    71                                                                            71                                                                          71                                                                            71
                                                                        150                                                                         150                                                                           150                                                                         150
                         0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60                                   0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60
                                             Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #

                                                                        FP                                                                                                                                                       SST-5
                    Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                       Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                         Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                  500                        1                                                500                        1                                                  500                        1                                                500
                    11                                                                            11                                                                          11                                                                            11
                                                                        450                                                                         450                                                                           450                                                                         450
                    21                                                                            21                                                                          21                                                                            21
                                                                        400                                                                         400                                                                           400                                                                         400
Transformer Block


                                                                              Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                          Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer Block
                    31                                                                            31                                                                          31                                                                            31
                                                                        350                                                                         350                                                                           350                                                                         350
                    41                                                                            41                                                                          41                                                                            41
                                                                        300                                                                         300                                                                           300                                                                         300
                    51                                                                            51                                                                          51                                                                            51
                                                                        250                                                                         250                                                                           250                                                                         250
                    61                                                                            61                                                                          61                                                                            61
                                                                        200                                                                         200                                                                           200                                                                         200
                    71                                                                            71                                                                          71                                                                            71
                                                                        150                                                                         150                                                                           150                                                                         150
                         0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60                                   0       10    20     30      40   50    60                                    0       10   20     30      40   50    60
                                             Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #

                                                                       TREC                                                                                                                                                      AGNews

                                                                  Figure 22: Forerunner Token Head marked on Llama 3 70B.



                             Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                    1                                                   500                       1                                                 500                       1                                                   500                       1                                                 500

                                                                        450                       6                                                 450                                                                           450                       6                                                 450

                                                                        400                                                                         400                                                                           400                                                                         400
Transformer Block


                                                                              Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                          Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer Block


                    11                                                                            11                                                                          11                                                                            11
                                                                        350                                                                         350                                                                           350                                                                         350
                                                                                                  16                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                        300                                                                         300                                                                           300                                                                         300
                    21                                                                            21                                                                          21                                                                            21
                                                                        250                                                                         250                                                                           250                                                                         250

                                                                        200                       26                                                200                                                                           200                       26                                                200

                    31                                                  150                       31                                                150                       31                                                  150                       31                                                150
                         0        5     10     15     20    25    30                                   0       5     10     15     20    25    30                                  0        5     10     15     20    25    30                                   0       5     10     15     20    25    30
                                             Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #

                                                                       SST-2                                                                                                                                                      MR
                             Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                    1                                                   500                       1                                                 500                       1                                                   500                       1                                                 500

                                                                        450                                                                         450                                                                           450                                                                         450

                                                                        400                                                                         400                                                                           400                                                                         400
Transformer Block


                                                                              Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                          Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Transformer Block


                    11                                                                            11                                                                          11                                                                            11
                                                                        350                                                                         350                                                                           350                                                                         350

                                                                        300                                                                         300                                                                           300                                                                         300
                    21                                                                            21                                                                          21                                                                            21
                                                                        250                                                                         250                                                                           250                                                                         250

                                                                        200                                                                         200                                                                           200                                                                         200

                    31                                                  150                       31                                                150                       31                                                  150                       31                                                150
                         0        5     10     15     20    25    30                                   0       5     10     15     20    25    30                                  0        5     10     15     20    25    30                                   0       5     10     15     20    25    30
                                             Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #                                                                       Head #

                                                                        FP                                                                                                                                                       SST-5



                                                                                                                                                      29
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                               Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label                                                   Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                            Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                      1                                                   500                       1                                                   500                                1                                                       500                       1                                                  500

                                                                          450                                                                           450                                                                                        450                                                                          450

                                                                          400                                                                           400                                                                                        400                                                                          400
  Transformer Block


                                                                                Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                       Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Transformer Block
                      11                                                                            11                                                                                     11                                                                                11
                                                                          350                                                                           350                                                                                        350                                                                          350

                                                                          300                                                                           300                                                                                        300                                                                          300
                      21                                                                            21                                                                                     21                                                                                21
                                                                          250                                                                           250                                                                                        250                                                                          250

                                                                          200                                                                           200                                                                                        200                                                                          200

                      31                                                  150                       31                                                  150                                31                                                      150                       31                                                 150
                           0        5     10    15      20   25    30                                    0        5    10     15      20     25   30                                            0        5     10        15   20    25   30                                       0       5     10    15      20    25   30
                                               Head #                                                                        Head #                                                                                  Head #                                                                          Head #

                                                                         TREC                                                                                                                                                                 AGNews

                                                                        Figure 23: Forerunner Token Head marked on Llama 3 8B.


                                         Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                              Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                            1                                                                                                                          500                                  1                                                                                                                                 500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                               Transformer Block
                           11                                                                                                                                                              11
                           21                                                                                                                          400                                 21                                                                                                                                 400
                           31                                                                                                                          300                                 31                                                                                                                                 300
                           41                                                                                                                                                              41
                           51                                                                                                                          200                                 51                                                                                                                                 200

                                   0            20           40           60                                 80             100            120                                                       0              20             40         60                                  80           100            120
                                                                         Head #                                                                                                                                                              Head #
                                                                                                                                                       SST-2

                                        Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                               Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                            1                                                                                                                          500                                  1                                                                                                                                 500
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                              Transformer Block


                           11                                                                                                                                                              11
                           21                                                                                                                          400                                 21                                                                                                                                 400
                           31                                                                                                                          300                                 31                                                                                                                                 300
                           41                                                                                                                                                              41
                           51                                                                                                                          200                                 51                                                                                                                                 200

                                  0            20            40          60                                  80         100                120                                                       0              20             40         60                              80               100            120
                                                                        Head #                                                                                                                                                            Head #
                                                                                                                                                        MR

                                         Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                              Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                            1                                                                                                                          500                                  1                                                                                                                                 500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                               Transformer Block


                           11                                                                                                                                                              11
                           21                                                                                                                          400                                 21                                                                                                                                 400
                           31                                                                                                                          300                                 31                                                                                                                                 300
                           41                                                                                                                                                              41
                           51                                                                                                                          200                                 51                                                                                                                                 200

                                   0            20           40           60                                 80             100            120                                                       0              20             40         60                                  80           100            120
                                                                         Head #                                                                                                                                                              Head #
                                                                                                                                                         FP

                                        Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                               Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                            1                                                                                                                          500                                  1                                                                                                                                 500
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                              Transformer Block


                           11                                                                                                                                                              11
                           21                                                                                                                          400                                 21                                                                                                                                 400
                           31                                                                                                                          300                                 31                                                                                                                                 300
                           41                                                                                                                                                              41
                           51                                                                                                                          200                                 51                                                                                                                                 200

                                  0            20            40          60                                  80         100                120                                                       0              20             40         60                              80               100            120
                                                                        Head #                                                                                                                                                            Head #
                                                                                                                                                       SST-5



                                                                                                                                                         30
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                           Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                      1                                                                      500                       1                                                                    500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                  Transformer Block
                     11                                                                                               11
                     21                                                                      400                      21                                                                    400
                     31                                                                      300                      31                                                                    300
                     41                                                                                               41
                     51                                                                      200                      51                                                                    200

                          0      20     40        60        80        100        120                                       0      20    40        60        80        100        120
                                              Head #                                                                                         Head #
                                                                                            TREC

                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                           Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                      500                     1                                                                       500
Transformer Block


                                                                                               Transformer Block
                    11                                                                                             11
                    21                                                                      400                    21                                                                       400
                    31                                                                      300                    31                                                                       300
                    41                                                                                             41
                    51                                                                      200                    51                                                                       200

                          0      20     40    60            80        100        120                                       0     20     40    60            80        100        120
                                             Head #                                                                                          Head #
                                                                                            AGNews

                                             Figure 24: Forerunner Token Head marked on Falcon 40B.



                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                           Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                       500                      1                                                                     500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                  Transformer Block


                     11                                                                      400                      11                                                                    400

                                                                                             300                                                                                            300
                     21                                                                                               21
                                                                                             200                                                                                            200
                     31                                                                                               31
                          0      10    20    30        40        50         60         70                                  0     10    20    30        40        50         60         70
                                              Head #                                                                                         Head #
                                                                                            SST-2

                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                           Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                      500                       1                                                                     500
Transformer Block


                                                                                               Transformer Block


                    11                                                                      400                    11                                                                       400

                                                                                            300                                                                                             300
                    21                                                                                             21
                                                                                            200                                                                                             200
                    31                                                                                             31
                          0     10    20     30        40        50         60     70                                      0     10    20    30        40        50         60     70
                                             Head #                                                                                          Head #
                                                                                              MR

                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                           Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                       500                      1                                                                     500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                  Transformer Block


                     11                                                                      400                      11                                                                    400

                                                                                             300                                                                                            300
                     21                                                                                               21
                                                                                             200                                                                                            200
                     31                                                                                               31
                          0      10    20    30        40        50         60         70                                  0     10    20    30        40        50         60         70
                                              Head #                                                                                         Head #
                                                                                              FP


                                                                                              31
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                                                                             500                       1                                                                                                      500

Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                     Transformer Block
                    11                                                                                                                             400                   11                                                                                                         400

                                                                                                                                                   300                                                                                                                              300
                    21                                                                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                                                                   200                                                                                                                              200
                    31                                                                                                                                                   31
                          0     10                        20            30         40        50   60                                 70                                            0          10                          20            30         40           50       60    70
                                                                        Head #                                                                                                                                                          Head #
                                                                                                                                                   SST-5

                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                                                                             500                       1                                                                                                      500
 Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                         Transformer Block
                     11                                                                                                                            400                       11                                                                                                     400

                                                                                                                                                   300                                                                                                                              300
                     21                                                                                                                                                      21
                                                                                                                                                   200                                                                                                                              200
                     31                                                                                                                                                      31
                          0      10                        20           30         40        50       60                             70                                            0          10                              20        30            40        50        60   70
                                                                        Head #                                                                                                                                                          Head #
                                                                                                                                                   TREC

                              Forerunner Token Head to Correct Label                                                                                                                        Forerunner Token Head to Wrong Label
                     1                                                                                                                             500                       1                                                                                                      500
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                     Transformer Block



                    11                                                                                                                             400                   11                                                                                                         400

                                                                                                                                                   300                                                                                                                              300
                    21                                                                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                                                                   200                                                                                                                              200
                    31                                                                                                                                                   31
                          0     10                        20            30         40        50   60                                 70                                            0          10                          20            30         40           50       60    70
                                                                        Head #                                                                                                                                                          Head #
                                                                                                                                              AGNews

                                                                        Figure 25: Forerunner Token Head marked on Falcon 7B.


                                                                   Correct Induction Head                                                 Correct Induction Head                                                                   Correct Induction Head
                                                          1                                       250                       1                                                                  250                       1                                           250
                                                          11                                                                11                                                                                           11
                                                                                                  200                                                                                          200                                                                   200
                                                          21                                                                21                                                                                           21
                                      Transformer Block


                                                                                                        Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transformer Block


                                                          31                                                                31                                                                                           31
                                                                                                  150                                                                                          150                                                                   150
                                                          41                                                                41                                                                                           41

                                                          51                                      100                       51                                                                 100                       51                                          100

                                                          61                                                                61                                                                                           61
                                                                                                  50                                                                                           50                                                                    50
                                                          71                                                                71                                                                                           71

                                                                                                  0                                                                                            0                                                                     0
                                                               0   10   20    30   40   50   60                                  0    10      20    30            40          50       60                                     0    10   20    30   40      50   60
                                                                             Head #                                                                Head #                                                                                    Head #

                                                                             SST-2                                                                  MR                                                                                        FP
                                                                   Correct Induction Head                                                 Correct Induction Head                                                                   Correct Induction Head
                                                          1                                       250                       1                                                                  250                       1                                           250
                                                          11                                                                11                                                                                           11
                                                                                                  200                                                                                          200                                                                   200
                                                          21                                                                21                                                                                           21
                                      Transformer Block


                                                                                                        Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transformer Block


                                                          31                                                                31                                                                                           31
                                                                                                  150                                                                                          150                                                                   150
                                                          41                                                                41                                                                                           41

                                                          51                                      100                       51                                                                 100                       51                                          100

                                                          61                                                                61                                                                                           61
                                                                                                  50                                                                                           50                                                                    50
                                                          71                                                                71                                                                                           71

                                                                                                  0                                                                                            0                                                                     0
                                                               0   10   20    30   40   50   60                                  0    10      20    30            40          50       60                                     0    10   20    30   40      50   60
                                                                             Head #                                                                Head #                                                                                    Head #

                                                                             SST-5                                                                 TREC                                                                                 AGNews

                                                                    Figure 26: Correct Induction Head marked on Llama 3 70B.


                                                                                                                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                        Correct Induction Head                                                      Correct Induction Head                                                                     Correct Induction Head
                                                      1                                                      250                       1                                                           250                       1                                                      250


                                                                                                             200                                                                                   200                                                                              200


                                  Transformer Block


                                                                                                                   Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Transformer Block
                                                      11                                                                               11                                                                                    11
                                                                                                             150                                                                                   150                                                                              150


                                                                                                             100                                                                                   100                                                                              100
                                                      21                                                                               21                                                                                    21

                                                                                                             50                                                                                    50                                                                               50

                                                      31                                                                               31                                                                                    31
                                                                                                             0                                                                                     0                                                                                0
                                                           0        5      10    15      20      25   30                                    0   5      10       15          20        25      30                                  0        5      10    15      20      25   30
                                                                                Head #                                                                      Head #                                                                                     Head #

                                                                                SST-2                                                                           MR                                                                                      FP
                                                                        Correct Induction Head                                                      Correct Induction Head                                                                     Correct Induction Head
                                                      1                                                      250                       1                                                           250                       1                                                      250


                                                                                                             200                                                                                   200                                                                              200
                                  Transformer Block


                                                                                                                   Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Transformer Block
                                                      11                                                                               11                                                                                    11
                                                                                                             150                                                                                   150                                                                              150


                                                                                                             100                                                                                   100                                                                              100
                                                      21                                                                               21                                                                                    21

                                                                                                             50                                                                                    50                                                                               50

                                                      31                                                                               31                                                                                    31
                                                                                                             0                                                                                     0                                                                                0
                                                           0        5      10    15      20      25   30                                    0   5      10       15          20        25      30                                  0        5      10    15      20      25   30
                                                                                Head #                                                                      Head #                                                                                     Head #

                                                                                SST-5                                                                       TREC                                                                                 AGNews

                                                                        Figure 27: Correct Induction Head marked on Llama 3 8B.


                                                      Correct Induction Head                                                                                                                                                  Correct Induction Head
                     1                                                                                                                                      250                       1                                                                                                         250
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                 Transformer Block


                    11                                                                                                                                      200                      11                                                                                                         200
                    21                                                                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                                                                            150                                                                                                                                 150
                    31                                                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                                                            100                                                                                                                                 100
                    41                                                                                                                                                               41
                    51                                                                                                                                      50                       51                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                   0
                         0   20                                40               60            80           100                         120                                                0        20                                 40               60            80           100     120
                                                                           Head #                                                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                                SST-2                                                                                                                                                                  MR

                                                      Correct Induction Head                                                                                                                                                  Correct Induction Head
                     1                                                                                                                                      250                       1                                                                                                         250
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                 Transformer Block


                    11                                                                                                                                      200                      11                                                                                                         200
                    21                                                                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                                                                            150                                                                                                                                 150
                    31                                                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                                                            100                                                                                                                                 100
                    41                                                                                                                                                               41
                    51                                                                                                                                      50                       51                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                   0
                         0   20                                40               60            80           100                         120                                                0        20                                 40               60            80           100     120
                                                                           Head #                                                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                                 FP                                                                                                                                                                    SST-5

                                                      Correct Induction Head                                                                                                                                                  Correct Induction Head
                     1                                                                                                                                      250                       1                                                                                                         250
Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                                                 Transformer Block


                    11                                                                                                                                      200                      11                                                                                                         200
                    21                                                                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                                                                            150                                                                                                                                 150
                    31                                                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                                                            100                                                                                                                                 100
                    41                                                                                                                                                               41
                    51                                                                                                                                      50                       51                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                   0
                         0   20                                40               60            80           100                         120                                                0        20                                 40               60            80           100     120
                                                                           Head #                                                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                            TREC                                                                                                                                                                 AGNews

                                                                        Figure 28: Correct Induction Head marked on Falcon 40B.


                                                                                                                                                                33
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                  Correct Induction Head                                                                                                             Correct Induction Head
                         1                                                                                                            250                      1                                                                                                              250
     Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                           Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                      200                                                                                                                                     200
                         11                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                      150                                                                                                                                     150
                         21                                                                                                           100                      21                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                      50                                                                                                                                      50
                         31                                                                                                                                    31
                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                       0
                              0         10         20          30             40              50                  60        70                                      0         10       20          30                  40              50            60       70
                                                                Head #                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                    SST-2                                                                                                                                         MR

                                                  Correct Induction Head                                                                                                             Correct Induction Head
                         1                                                                                                            250                      1                                                                                                              250
     Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                           Transformer Block
                                                                                                                                      200                                                                                                                                     200
                         11                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                      150                                                                                                                                     150
                         21                                                                                                           100                      21                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                      50                                                                                                                                      50
                         31                                                                                                                                    31
                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                       0
                              0         10         20          30             40              50                  60        70                                      0         10       20          30                  40              50            60       70
                                                                Head #                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                         FP                                                                                                                                  SST-5

                                                  Correct Induction Head                                                                                                             Correct Induction Head
                         1                                                                                                            250                      1                                                                                                              250
     Transformer Block


                                                                                                                                           Transformer Block



                                                                                                                                      200                                                                                                                                     200
                         11                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                      150                                                                                                                                     150
                         21                                                                                                           100                      21                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                      50                                                                                                                                      50
                         31                                                                                                                                    31
                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                       0
                              0         10         20          30             40              50                  60        70                                      0         10       20          30                  40              50            60       70
                                                                Head #                                                                                                                                 Head #
                                                                    TREC                                                                                                                            AGNews

                                                               Figure 29: Correct Induction Head marked on Falcon 7B.


                   0.30                                                                                    0.35                                                                                                                                 slope: 0.014              k=0
                                                                                                                                                                                   # Demo.                       0.5
                                                                                                           0.30                                                                       Rand.
Kernel Alignment


                                                                                        Kernel Alignment


                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                              Kernel Alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                      Cont.
                                                                                                           0.25                                                                       0                          0.0
                   0.20                                Token Type                                                                                                                     1                                         2           4        6        8          10


                                                  Random Baseline                                          0.20                                                                       2                                                         slope: 0.008            k = 12
                                                  Controlled Experiment                                                                                                               4                          0.5
                   0.15                           Label Token                                              0.15                                                                       8
                                                  Last Token of Input Text                                                                                                            12
                                                  Forerunner Token of Label
                   0.10                                                                                    0.10                                                                                                  0.0
                              0    5     10       15      20        25        30                                  0     5    10       15          20            25       30                                                 2               4        6        8         10
                                  Transformer Block Number                                                             Transformer Block Number                                                                                     Language Modeling Loss

                                                         Figure 30: Augmentated results towards Fig. 2 on Llama 3 8B.


                   0.275                                                                                   0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 slope: 0.011 k = 0
                                                                                                                                                                                   # Demo.                  0.5
                   0.250                                                                                                                                                              Rand.
                                                                                        Kernel Alignment
Kernel Alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                              Kernel Alignment


                   0.225                                                                                   0.25                                                                       Cont.
                                                                                                                                                                                      0                     0.0
                   0.200                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                        Token Type
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2           4        6        8        10              12


                                                                                                           0.20                                                                       2
                   0.175                          Random Baseline                                                                                                                                                                                slope: 0.008 k = 12
                                                  Controlled Experiment                                                                                                               4                     0.5
                   0.150                          Label Token                                              0.15                                                                       8
                   0.125                          Last Token of Input Text                                                                                                            12
                                                  Forerunner Token of Label
                   0.100                                                                                   0.10                                                                                             0.0
                              0    10        20     30         40        50        60                             0    10        20   30              40            50    60                                            2               4        6        8        10             12
                                  Transformer Block Number                                                             Transformer Block Number                                                                                     Language Modeling Loss

                                                         Figure 31: Augmentated results towards Fig. 2 on Falcon 40B.


                                                                                                                                           34
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.275
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             slope: 0.013 k = 0
                                                                                             0.30                                                               # Demo.                       0.5
                   0.250                                                                                                                                           Rand.


                                                                          Kernel Alignment
Kernel Alignment

                                                                                                                                                                   Cont.


                                                                                                                                                                           Kernel Alignment
                   0.225                                                                     0.25                                                                  0
                   0.200                                                                                                                                           1                          0.0
                                                 Token Type
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2         4        6       8        10


                   0.175                    Random Baseline                                  0.20                                                                  2                                                         slope: 0.017 k = 12
                                            Controlled Experiment                                                                                                  4
                   0.150                    Label Token                                      0.15                                                                  8                          0.5
                   0.125                    Last Token of Input Text                                                                                               12
                                            Forerunner Token of Label
                   0.100                                                                     0.10                                                                                             0.0
                           0     5   10     15     20     25    30                                      0          5            10      15    20      25   30                                                  2         4        6       8        10
                                Transformer Block Number                                                          Transformer Block Number                                                                          Language Modeling Loss

                                                   Figure 32: Augmentated results towards Fig. 2 on Falcon 7B.


                                                                                       0.30
                   0.7                                                                                                                   1                                                                     0.76

                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                               Kernel Alignment

                                                                                       0.25                            Query Location   0.62 1                                                                 0.59 0.84


                                                                                                                                                                                              Query Location
                   0.6
                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                        0.57 0.89 1                                                            0.54 0.82 0.85
                                                                                                                                 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                   0.5
                                                                                       0.20                                             0.52 0.85 0.9       1                                                      0.5 0.79 0.83 0.85
                                                                                                                                 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                   0.4
                                              Token Type                                                                                0.48 0.8 0.87 0.92 1                                                   0.46 0.74 0.8 0.84 0.85
                                                                                                                                 8


                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                   0.3                    Forerunner Token of Label                    0.15
                                          Last Token of Input Text                                                                      0.46 0.78 0.85 0.9 0.94 1                                              0.44 0.72 0.78 0.82 0.85 0.85
                                                                                                                                 12


                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                           0         10              20              30                                                                  0        1    2    4   8    12                                            0     1    2       4       8   12
                               Transformer Block Number                                                                                           Query Location                                                         Query Location
                                Figure 33: Augmentated results towards Fig. 3 and 4 (on Layer 16) on Llama 3 8B.


                   0.8                                                                                                                   1                                                                         0.9
                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0


                   0.7                                                                 0.25
                                                                                               Kernel Alignment


                                                                                                                                        0.85 1                                                                 0.83 0.94
                                                                                                                       Query Location


                                                                                                                                                                                              Query Location
                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                        1


                   0.6
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                        0.82 0.95 1                                                            0.81 0.93 0.95
                                                                                                                                 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                        2


                   0.5                                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                                        0.8 0.94 0.96 1                                                        0.79 0.92 0.94 0.95
                                                                                                                                 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                        4


                   0.4                        Token Type                                                                                0.78 0.92 0.95 0.97 1                                                  0.78 0.91 0.94 0.95 0.96
                                                                                                                                 8


                                                                                                                                                                                                        8


                                          Forerunner Token of Label                    0.15
                   0.3                    Last Token of Input Text                                                                      0.77 0.91 0.95 0.97 0.98 1                                             0.77 0.9 0.93 0.95 0.96 0.96
                                                                                                                                 12


                                                                                                                                                                                                        12


                           0          20                40                60                                                             0        1    2    4   8    12                                            0     1    2       4       8   12
                               Transformer Block Number                                                                                           Query Location                                                         Query Location
                                Figure 34: Augmentated results towards Fig. 3 and 4 (on Layer 24) on Falcon 40B.


                   0.7                                                                                                                   1                                                                     0.71
                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                               Kernel Alignment


                   0.6                                                                                                                  0.65 1                                                                 0.57 0.78
                                                                                                                       Query Location


                                                                                                                                                                                              Query Location
                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
Accuracy


                                                                                                                                        0.58 0.83 1                                                            0.52 0.75 0.79
                   0.5
                                                                                                                                 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                        2


                                                                                       0.20
                                                                                                                                        0.51 0.78 0.85 1                                                       0.47 0.71 0.78 0.82
                                                                                                                                 4


                                                                                                                                                                                                        4


                   0.4
                                              Token Type                                                                                0.47 0.73 0.82 0.89 1                                                  0.44 0.67 0.76 0.82 0.84
                                                                                                                                 8


                                                                                                                                                                                                        8


                   0.3                    Forerunner Token of Label                    0.15
                                          Last Token of Input Text                                                                      0.45 0.7 0.8 0.88 0.93 1                                               0.42 0.65 0.74 0.81 0.84 0.85
                                                                                                                                 12


                                                                                                                                                                                                        12


                           0         10              20              30                                                                  0        1    2    4   8    12                                            0     1    2       4       8   12
                               Transformer Block Number                                                                                           Query Location                                                         Query Location
                                Figure 35: Augmentated results towards Fig. 3 and 4 (on Layer 16) on Falcon 7B.



                                                                                                                                             35
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   0.45                                                                              20.0                                                                                                                                    1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maximum Copy Magnitude
                                                                                                                                                                            Copy To:


                                                                           Forerunner Token Head #
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.0
                   0.40                                                                              17.5                                                                   Correct Label
                                                                                                                                                                            Wrong Label                                                      0.8
Kernel Alignment

                   0.35                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                     15.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy
                   0.30                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                     12.5                                                                                         0.6
                   0.25                                                                              10.0                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                           Predict from:
                   0.20                  Random Baseline                                                    7.5                                                                                                                                              Correct Label
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2                                        0.2             Forerunner
                   0.15                  Abstract Label - Forerunner                                                                                                                                                                                         Correct Label w/o Context
                                         Forerunner - Encoding                                              5.0                                                                                                                                              Wrong Label
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0                                        0.0
                          0    5    10     15     20     25      30                                                                       1    5       10     15      20      25        30                                                           0       5           10    15    20       25        30
                              Transformer Block Number                                                                                        Transformer Block Number                                                                                   Transformer Block Number

                                             Figure 36: Augmentated results towards Fig. 5 on Llama 3 8B.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maximum Copy Magnitude
                                                                                                                                                                           Copy To:
                                                                                 Forerunner Token Head #


                   0.45                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                           Correct Label
                   0.40                                                                                     80                                                             Wrong Label                                                       0.8
Kernel Alignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                   0.35                                                                                     60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                   0.30                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                   0.25                                                                                     40                                                                                   0.4                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Predict from:
                   0.20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Correct Label
                                         Random Baseline                                                    20                                                                                                                               0.2             Forerunner
                                         Abstract Label - Forerunner                                                                                                                             0.2                                                         Correct Label w/o Context
                   0.15                  Forerunner - Encoding                                                                                                                                                                                               Wrong Label
                                                                                                                  0                                                                              0.0                                         0.0
                          0    10   20      30      40      50        60                                                              1       10    20           30    40         50        60                                                       0       10          20     30     40          50        60
                              Transformer Block Number                                                                                        Transformer Block Number                                                                                   Transformer Block Number

                                              Figure 37: Augmentated results towards Fig. 5 on Falcon 40B.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maximum Copy Magnitude


                   0.45                                                                                                                                                    Copy To:
                                                                                 Forerunner Token Head #


                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                            30                                                             Correct Label
                   0.40                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
Kernel Alignment


                                                                                                                                                                           Wrong Label           0.8
                   0.35                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                   0.30                                                                                     20                                                                                   0.6
                   0.25                                                                                                                                                                          0.4                                         0.4                Predict from:
                                                                                                            15                                                                                                                                               Correct Label
                   0.20                  Random Baseline                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2             Forerunner
                                         Abstract Label - Forerunner                                        10                                                                                   0.2                                                         Correct Label w/o Context
                   0.15                  Forerunner - Encoding                                                                                                                                                                                               Wrong Label
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0                                         0.0
                          0    5    10     15     20     25      30                                                                   1        5   10        15       20     25        30                                                            0       5           10 15 20 25 30
                              Transformer Block Number                                                                                        Transformer Block Number                                                                                   Transformer Block Number

                                                Figure 38: Augmentated results towards Fig. 5 on Falcon 7B.


                   20                              Induction
                                                                                                           Correct Label Assignment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SST-2         1
                                                   Correct Induction                                                                  0.6
Induction Head #


                   15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MR 0.84 1
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dataset 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FP 0.74 0.79 1
                   10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SST-5 0.6 0.55 0.58 1
                                                                                                                                      0.4
                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TREC 0.6 0.54 0.55 0.81 1
                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                   Vanilla Attention                   Head Average                                                  AGN 0.66 0.65 0.69 0.72 0.7                             1
                    0                                                                                                                 0.2          Best Ind. Head                      Random
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TREC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AGN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SST-2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SST-5


                          1    5    10     15      20      25     30                                                                          1    5         10       15      20         25        30
                              Transformer Block Number                                                                                             Transformer Block Number                                                                                                    Dataset 2

                                             Figure 39: Augmentated results towards Fig. 6 on Llama 3 8B.



                                                                                                                                                            36
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 Induction                                          0.7                                                                SST-2     1


                                                                         Correct Label Assignment
                   40                            Correct Induction
Induction Head #


                                                                                                    0.6                                                                 MR 0.83 1
                   30


                                                                                                                                                           Dataset 1
                                                                                                    0.5                                                                  FP 0.63 0.69 1

                   20                                                                                                                                                  SST-5 0.58 0.58 0.53 1
                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                       TREC 0.52 0.48 0.44 0.69 1
                   10                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                              Vanilla Attention         Head Average                   AGN 0.56 0.56 0.53 0.67 0.65 1
                                                                                                    0.2       Best Ind. Head            Random
                   0


                                                                                                                                                                                       MR
                                                                                                                                                                                            FP


                                                                                                                                                                                                         TREC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AGN
                                                                                                                                                                               SST-2


                                                                                                                                                                                                 SST-5
                        1       10   20    30     40      50        60                                    1   10     20       30    40      50        60
                                Transformer Block Number                                                      Transformer Block Number                                                      Dataset 2

                                           Figure 40: Augmentated results towards Fig. 6 on Falcon 40B.


                                                 Induction
                                                                         Correct Label Assignment


                   25                                                                               0.7                                                                SST-2     1
                                                 Correct Induction
Induction Head #


                                                                                                    0.6                                                                 MR 0.83 1
                   20
                                                                                                                                                           Dataset 1


                                                                                                                                                                         FP 0.71 0.72 1
                   15                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                       SST-5 0.59 0.58 0.53 1
                   10                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                       TREC 0.48 0.45 0.43 0.69 1
                    5                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                              Vanilla Attention         Head Average                   AGN 0.54 0.54 0.52 0.67 0.64 1
                    0                                                                               0.2       Best Ind. Head            Random
                                                                                                                                                                                       MR
                                                                                                                                                                                            FP


                                                                                                                                                                                                         TREC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AGN
                                                                                                                                                                               SST-2


                                                                                                                                                                                                 SST-5


                            1    5   10   15     20    25      30                                         1   5     10      15     20     25     30
                                Transformer Block Number                                                      Transformer Block Number                                                      Dataset 2

                                               Figure 41: Augmentated results towards Fig. 6 on Falcon 7B.


                                                                                                                   37
