Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F EATURE -BASED O NLINE B ILATERAL T RADE
 Solenne Gaucher1 Martino Bernasconi2 Matteo Castiglioni3 Andrea Celli2
 Vianney Perchet4,5
 1
   CMAP, École polytechnique, IPP 2 Bocconi University
 3
   Politecnico di Milano 4 Criteo AI Lab 5 Fairplay team, CREST, ENSAE, IPP
 {martino.bernasconi,andrea.celli2}@unibocconi.it,
 matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it, vianney.perchet@normalesup.org,
 solenne.gaucher@polytechnique.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

          Bilateral trade models the problem of facilitating trades between a seller and a
          buyer having private valuations for the item being sold. In the online version of
          the problem, the learner faces a new seller and buyer at each time step, and has
          to post a price for each of the two parties without any knowledge of their valua-
          tions. We consider a scenario where, at each time step, before posting prices the
          learner observes a context vector containing information about the features of the
          item for sale. The valuations of both the seller and the buyer follow an unknown
          linear function of the context. In this setting, the learner could leverage previous
          transactions in an attempt to estimate private valuations. We characterize the re-
          gret regimes of different settings, taking as a baseline the best context-dependent
          prices in hindsight. First, in the setting in which the learner has two-bit feedback
          and strong budget balance constraints, we propose an algorithm with O(log T )
          regret. Then, we study the same set-up with noisy valuations, providing a tight
           e 2/3 ) regret upper bound. Finally, we show that loosening budget balance con-
          O(T
          straints allows the learner to operate under more restrictive feedback. Specifically,
          we show how to address the one-bit, global budget balance setting through a re-
          duction from the two-bit, strong budget balance setup. This established a fun-
          damental trade-off between the quality of the feedback and the strictness of the
          budget constraints.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Bilateral trade models scenarios in which a seller and a buyer, both having a private valuation for
a good, are interested in trading it in order to maximize their respective utilities (Vickrey, 1961;
Myerson & Satterthwaite, 1983). We study the online bilateral trade problem introduced by Cesa-
Bianchi et al. (2021). At each time t, a new seller and buyer arrive, with private valuations st and
bt , respectively. The seller’s valuation st is the lowest price they are willing to accept for the item.
Analogously, the buyer’s valuation bt represents the highest price they are willing to pay for the
item. The learner, without any knowledge about the private valuations at the current time t, posts
two (possibly randomized) prices: pt to the seller and qt to the buyer. A trade happens when st ≤ pt
and qt ≤ bt , so both agents agree to trade. The gain from trade (GFT) for a pair of prices (p, q) at
time t is
                              GFTt (p, q) := I{st ≤ p}I{q ≤ bt }(bt − st ).                            (1)
This represents the net utility gain generated by the trade. Following online bilateral trade litera-
ture (see, e.g., Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021; 2023); Bernasconi et al. (2024)), we assume the learner
aims to maximize trade gain or equivalently minimize regret relative to the best hindsight policy.1
A key challenge in online bilateral trade is the inherently limited feedback: under two-bit feedback,
the learner receives feedback (I{st ≤ pt }, I{bt ≥ qt }), and under one-bit feedback the learner only
observes whether the trade occurred, that is I{st ≤ pt } · I{bt ≥ qt }. Both provide far less informa-
   1
     We note that gain from trade and social welfare (i.e., the sum of the utilities of both agents if the trade
occurs, or the seller’s utility if it does not) result in the same notion of regret.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


tion than traditional bandit feedback, since the learner cannot even reconstruct the gain from trade
received for the prices it posted.
In the standard model of bilateral trade, the platform lacks information about the seller, buyer, or the
item being sold. However, this scenario is unrealistic in practice, where some information is usually
available to the learner. In contexts like online marketplaces, where products are often differentiated,
the learner can observe product features upfront and base pricing decisions on them, using past trade
data to estimate feature values and inform future pricing.
We introduce the feature-based online bilateral trade problem, in which the learner observes a fea-
ture vector xt ∈ Rd before posting prices for round t. Building on the traditional feature-based
dynamic pricing framework (see, e.g., Cohen et al. (2020); Javanmard (2017); Javanmard & Naz-
erzadeh (2019); Keskin & Zeevi (2014); Xu & Wang (2021)), we study the setting in which private
valuations are of the form x⊤                        d
                             t θ + ξt , where θ ∈ R is an unknown vector denoting the importance
of each feature, and ξt is an i.i.d. noise term. Following the set-up of Cohen et al. (2020), feature
vectors xt are chosen adversarially by nature. This ensures that our solution is robust to scenarios
where features are correlated and where the set of relevant features evolves over time.


1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

In this paper, we introduce the feature-based online bilateral trade model, and characterize the regret
for various scenarios with adversarially generated feature vectors.
First, we focus on the scenario in which the learner has two-bit feedback and strong budget balance
constraints (the learner has to set the same price to the seller and to the buyer, i.e., pt = qt at
each round t). As a preliminary warm-up, we begin by considering the deterministic setup where,
at each t, the seller’s valuation is st = x⊤     s                                      ⊤ b
                                              t θ and the buyer’s valuation is bt = xt θ . We show
that in this case, it is possible to adapt techniques proposed by Cohen et al. (2020) in the context
of feature-based dynamic pricing. The main difference here is that we need to maintain separate
ellipsoidal uncertainty sets for the seller and the buyer, respectively. Our analysis yields a regret of
order O(log T ) (Proposition 1).
Two-bit, noisy valuations. Then, we consider the case of noisy valuations in which st = x⊤          s   s
                                                                                                 t θ + ξt
and bt = x⊤  t θ b
                   + ξt
                       b
                         , where ξ s
                                   t and ξ b
                                           t are i.i.d. noise terms independent from  x t , with bounded
support and densities. We start by decomposing the expected gain-from-trade into components that
can be individually estimated using two-bit feedback (Lemma 1). Then, we describe an explore-
or-commit (EOC) algorithm with regret O(T     e 3/4 ) (Theorem 1) (this algorithm will be employed in
the subsequent reduction to the one-bit setting). Finally, we devise a S COUTING BANDITS WITH
I NFORMATION P OOLING algorithm, which makes a more efficient use of the information collected
during the learning phase. This algorithms achieves a regret O(T  e 2/3 )(Theorem 2), which is minimax
optimal up to poly-logarithmic factors and dependence on d. Indeed, there exists a matching Ω(T 2/3 )
lower bound for the stochastic bilateral trade problem without features in the case of independent
valuations with bounded densities and support Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021).
One-bit reduction. Finally, we provide a general black-box reduction that demonstrates how the
difficulty of maintaining a per-round budget balance can be traded for the ability to operate under
more demanding feedback conditions. In particular, given a two-bit explore-or-commit algorithm
guaranteeing strong budget balance and sublinear regret, we show that it is possible to construct a
no-regret algorithm that works under one-bit feedback, and is global budget balanced (Theorem 3).
The one-bit regret guarantees are dependent on a natural measure of the social welfare generated by
the market.


1.2   R ELATED WORKS

Bilateral trade. In the offline setting, Myerson & Satterthwaite (1983) showed the existence of
instances where a fully efficient mechanism that satisfies incentive compatibility, individual ratio-
nality, and budget balance does not exist. Subsequent research focused on finding approximately
efficient mechanisms in the Bayesian setting Blumrosen & Dobzinski (2014); Kang et al. (2022);
McAfee (2008); Blumrosen & Mizrahi (2016); Brustle et al. (2017); Deng et al. (2022); Fei (2022).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Online bilateral trade. Cesa-Bianchi et al. Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021); Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024)
study the case in which valuations are drawn i.i.d. from some fixed unknown distribution and the
learner has to enforce strong budget balance. They provide sublinear regret guarantees in the full-
feedback setting, and under partial feedback when valuations are i.i.d. samples from a smooth dis-
tribution, independently for the seller and the buyer. If the learner is only required to enforce weak
budget balance (i.e., pt ≤ qt for each t), then Azar et al. (2022) provide an algorithm achieving
a tight sublinear 2-regret when the sequence of valuation is generated by an oblivious adversary.
Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2023) show that sublinear regret can be achieved beyond the i.i.d. stochastic
setting under a σ-smooth adversary model. Bernasconi et al. (2024) show that sublinear regret can
be achieved in the fully adversarial setting if the learner enforces global budget balance constraints
(i.e., the constraint has to hold over the entire time horizon). A related setting to online bilateral
trade is online brokerage (Bolić et al., 2024). This model has some key structural differences from
the standard online bilateral trade framework by Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2021). For instance, traders
can act as both buyers and sellers depending on market conditions, and their valuations are i.i.d.
from the same unknown distribution. Bachoc et al. (2024) recently studied a contextual brokerage
model where traders’ valuations are zero-mean perturbations of a market price that is linear in the
feature vector.
Feature-based pricing. The one-dimensional version of the problem was introduced by Klein-
berg & Leighton (2003), while Amin et al. (2014) introduced the problem in the contextual, multi-
dimensional set-up under i.i.d. contexts. Cohen et al. (2020) study a model with adversarial contexts
                        e 2 log T ) regret guarantees in the noiseless setting, improving over the
   which they provide O(d
for√
O( T ) guarantees obtainable with general-purpose contextual bandits algorithms Agarwal et al.
 e
(2014). Moreover, they provide O(Te 2/3 ) regret guarantees for scenarios with adversarial contexts
and additive noise generated from a known sub-Gaussian distribution. Further improvements in the
achievable rates were later provided by Lobel et al. (2018); Leme & Schneider (2018); Liu et al.
(2021). Further instantiations of the feature-based pricing model can be found in the survey of
Den Boer (2015).

2   P RELIMINARIES
For any k ≥ 1, we compactly denote the set {1, 2, . . . , k} as JkK. We denote by LJ(H) the Löwner-
John ellipsoid of a convex body H (i.e., the minimal volume
                                                      √       ellipsoid that contains H). For a positive
definite matrix M ∈ Rd×d and x ∈ Rd , we denote x⊤ Mx by ∥x∥M . In our proof sketches, we
write AT ≲ BT if there exists a problem-dependent constant c such that AT ≤ cBT .
Learning protocol. At each round t, a new buyer and a seller arrive, characterized by private
valuations bt and st , respectively. After observing a feature vector xt ∈ Rd , the learner posts two
prices: pt to the seller and qt to the buyer. The trade happens if both agents accept the proposed
prices, that is st ≤ pt and qt ≤ bt . When the trade happens the learner is awarded the gain from
trade GFTt (pt , qt ), defined as per Equation (1). Feature vectors xt are generated by an oblivious
adversary.
Valuations. We consider two models to describe how features impact on the seller’s and buyer’s
valuations. In the first setting, valuations are a deterministic function of the context. At each round
t ∈ JT K, the valuations of the seller and of the buyer are given by
                                    st = x⊤
                                          t θ
                                              s
                                                  and   bt = x ⊤  b
                                                               t θ ,                                (2)
                      s   b     d
respectively, where θ , θ ∈ R are unknown to the learner. We assume that both the contexts xt
and the parameters θb and θs are bounded.
Assumption 1. There exist A, B ≥ 0 such that max(∥θs ∥, ∥θb ∥) ≤ A, and ∥xt ∥ ≤ B.
In the second setting, we consider noisy valuations. At each round t ∈ JT K, the valuations are given
by
                               bt = x ⊤   b
                                      t θ + ξt
                                              b
                                                 and st = x⊤     s    s
                                                              t θ + ξt ,                           (3)
where ξtb and ξts are i.i.d. centered noise terms independent from the context xt , with densities f b
and f s , respectively. We denote        s            s          b                           b
                                by F the c.d.f. of ξt , and by D the demand function sof ξt : for  all
x ∈ R, D (x) := P ξt ≥ x . We make the following assumption on the densities of ξt and ξtb .
            b           b



                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 E LLIPSOID P RICING FOR B ILATERAL T RADE (EP-BT)
 1: Input parameter ϵ > 0, bound A.
 2: Initialize K1s , K1b ← d-dimensional ball of radius A, E1s = LJ(K1s ) and E1b = LJ(K1b ).
 3: for t ∈ JT K do
 4:   Set st = minθ∈Ets x⊤                              ⊤
                            t θ and st = maxθ∈Ets xt θ and compute (bt , bt ) analogously
 5:   if st < bt then post price pt = (st + bt )/2
 6:   else if st − st ≥ ϵ then
 7:      Post price pt = (st + st )/2
                     s                                            s          s
 8:      Update Kt+1     according to the seller’s feedback, set Et+1 = LJ(Kt+1 )
 9:   else if bt − bt ≥ ϵ then
10:      Post price pt = (bt + bt )/2
                     b                                            b          b
11:      Update Kt+1     according to the seller’s feedback, set Et+1 = LJ(Kt+1 )
12:   else post price pt = (st + bt )/2


Assumption 2. Both ξts and ξtb are supported in [−C, C], and have densities bounded by L.
We observe that under Assumption 1 and 2, the valuations of the seller and the buyer are bounded in
[−P, P ], where P := C + AB.2 The bounded densities assumption is standard in repeated bilateral
trade problems with stochastic valuations, and there exists linear regret lower bounds for the case in
which this assumption is lifted (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2024).
Feedback models. After posting prices (pt , qt ), the learner does not observe directly the GFT or the
valuations, but receives some feedback zt about the transaction. We focus on two feedback models:
(i) Two-bit feedback, where both the buyer and the seller reveal their willingness to accept the prices
offered by the learner (i.e., zt is composed by the two bits (I{st ≤ pt }, I{qt ≤ bt })); (ii) One-bit
feedback: the learner only observes whether the trade happened or not (i.e., zt = I{st ≤ pt } ·
I{qt ≤ bt }). Both feedback models have the desirable property of revealing minimal information
about agent’s private valuations.
Regret. Our objective is to develop dynamic policies that perform well in terms of minimizing
regret. In the deterministic setting, the worst-case regret for learning algorithm A is defined as
                                                   X
                                                                      s +
                                                          x⊤    b

            RT (A) :=              max                      t (θ − θ )     − GFTt (pt , qt ) .
                            (θ s ,θ b )∈[−A,A],x∈[−C,C]T
                                                           t∈JT K

In the noisy model, we compare against a benchmark that maximizes the expected gain from trade.
Let EGFT(x, p, q) := E [GFTt (p, q) | xt = x]. The pseudo-regret for the noisy setting is defined as
                         X                                    X
              RT (A) :=           max 2 EGFT(xt , p, q) −          EGFT(xt , pt , qt ).
                                         (p,q)∈[−P,P ]
                                t∈JT K        p≤q                         t∈JT K

A property that directly follows by definition is that, for any feature vector, there exists a pair of
identical prices that maximize the expected gain from trade. To simplify the notation, we omit the
argument q of GFTt and EGFT if the same price is posted to both agents.

3       WARM - UP : TWO - BIT FEEDBACK , STRONG BUDGET BALANCE , NO NOISE
In this section, we consider the simplest set-up in terms of the information available to the learner, by
focusing on the setting with two-bit feedback and deterministic valuations following Equation (2).
We adapt the E LLIPSOID P RICING algorithm, originally proposed by Cohen et al. (2020) for feature-
based dynamic pricing, to our bilateral trade problem. The key distinction lies in managing separate
uncertainty sets for the seller and the buyer, while carefully setting prices consistent with both esti-
mations. In this set-up, we can update these uncertainty sets separately. Algorithm 1 describes the
main step of E LLIPSOID P RICING FOR B ILATERAL T RADE (EP-BT).
Proposition 1. Assume that the seller’s and buyer’s valuations follow Equation (2). Under Assump-
tion 1, Algorithm 1 with ϵ = ABd2 /T has regret bounded by RT ≤ 10ABd2 log 20(d + 1)T d−2 .


    2
        For simplicity, we work within [−P, P ]. If non-negative prices are required, a translation suffices.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 E STIMATION S UBROUTINES
 1: procedure E ST-PAR(T par )                                    ▷Update estimate of parameters θb , θs
 2:   Draw Pprice pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post (pt , pt )
 3:   V ← l∈T par xl x⊤   + Id
                     Pl
      θbs ← 2P V−1 l∈T par I{pl ≤ sl } − 12 xl

 4:
      θbb ← 2P V−1 l∈T par I{pl ≤ bl } − 12 xl
                     P
 5:
 6: procedure E ST-I NT(T int )                                       ▷Update estimate of integrals I, J
 7:   Draw price pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post (pt , pt )
 8:   for k ∈ K do               n                    o
        Jbk ← |T2Pint | l∈T int I sl ≤ pl ≤ kϵ + x⊤ bs .
                       P
 9:                                               l θ
                                  n                     o
         Ibk ← |T2Pint | l∈T int I kϵ + x⊤ bb
                        P
10:                                      l θ ≤ p l ≤ bl

11: procedure E ST-F(TkF , grid point k ∈ K)                                      ▷Update estimate of F s
       Post price pt = x⊤ bs                  bk                                    F
                                                           P
12:                     t θ + kϵ. Then update F ←             l∈T F I {sl ≤ pl }/|Tk |
                                                                 k

13: procedure E ST-D(TkD , grid point k ∈ K)                                      ▷Update estimate of Db
       Post price pt = x⊤ bb                  bk                                     D
                                                            P
14:                     t θ + kϵ. Then update D ←              l∈T D I {bl ≥ pl }/|Tk |
                                                                  k


We observe that the algorithm explores only whenever the estimations are not precise enough. In
the proof (Appendix B), we show that this happens in at most O(log T ) rounds.


4     N OISY VALUATIONS WITH TWO - BIT FEEDBACK

In this section, we consider bilateral trade with two-bit feedback and noisy valuations. We introduce
key components that we exploit in the analysis, before integrating them into an explore-or-commit
framework which ensures a regret O(T e 3/4 ). Finally, we show a careful re-design of the last phase of
                                                     e 2/3 ).
the algorithm yields a tight regret upper bound of O(T
We rely on the following decomposition lemma, which extends Lemma 1 of Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2024) to contextual settings. The proof can be found in Appendix E.1.
Lemma 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the expected gain from trade for x at price p is given by

                            EGFT(x, p) = I(δ b )F s (δ s ) + J(δ s )Db (δ b ),                        (4)

                                                    RC                           Rδ
where δ s := p − x⊤  s b          ⊤ b
                  t θ , δ := p − xt θ , I(δ) :=      δ
                                                         Db (u)du, and J(δ) :=    −C
                                                                                       F s (u)du.

Lemma 1 emphasizes that the expected gain from trade for a price p depends on the pair of price
increments (δ s , δ b ), or equivalently, on the pair (δ s , ∆t ), where the difference in average valu-
ations ∆t is defined as ∆t := x⊤            b     s
                                       t (θ − θ ). This shows that items with the same ∆t have
the same optimal seller’s price increment δt : if p = x⊤
                                                ∗                  s   ∗
                                                              t θ + δt maximizes EGFT(xt , ·), and if
  ⊤ b       s         ⊤ b       s         ′     ⊤ s       ∗
xt′ (θ − θ ) = xt (θ − θ ), then p = xt′ θ + δt maximizes EGFT(xt′ , ·). However, know-
ing the optimal increment δt∗ for a specific ∆t is not sufficient to determine the optimal increment
for a different ∆t (see Appendix F). Thus, finding the optimal price increment across various ∆t
values might require us to precise estimate the reward function over a broad range of increments.
This is a notable departure from the non-contextual stochastic bilateral trade problem discussed
in Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024), where precise estimation of the reward function around the optimal
price suffices. Since accurately estimating functions such as F s , Db , I, and J across a wide range
of arguments complicates the problem, the regret might be higher than the O(T      e 2/3 ) rate achieved
in Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024). Surprisingly, we show that with careful coordination of the various
estimation procedures, the optimal rate for the non-contextual case can still be attained.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3 E XPLORE -O R -C OMMIT FOR B ILATERAL T RADE (EOC-BT)
 1: Input: parameter µ, length of estimation phases Tint , TFD , discretization error ϵ, confidence δ.
 2: Initialize: K = ⌈2P/ϵ⌉ + 3, K ← J−K, KK, T par =T int =TkF =TkD =∅ for all k ∈ K, V = Id .
 3: while t ≤ T do
 4:   if ∥xt ∥V−1 > µ then T par ← T par ∪ {t}, E ST-PAR(T par )
 5:   else if |T int | < Tint then T int ← T int ∪ {t}, E ST-I NT(T int )
 6:   else if for some k ∈ K, |TkF | < TFD or |TkD | < TFD then
 7:      if |TkF | < TFD then TkF ← TkF ∪ {t}, E ST-F(TkF , k)
 8:      else if |TkD | < TFD then TkD ← TkD ∪ {t}, E ST-D(TkD , k)
 9:    else    n                        j                       ko                  ▷Exploitation phase
                        ′       2   ′             ⊤ bb     s      −1
10:       At ← (k, k ) ∈ K : k = kϵ − xt θt − θt ϵ        b
                                                       ′
11:                                                       b k′ Jbk and post price pt = x⊤ θbs + kt ϵ
          Choose (kt , k ′ ) ∈ arg max(k,k′ )∈A Fbk Ibk + D
                        t                     t                                         t


4.1   B UILDING BLOCKS : SUBROUTINES FOR LEARNING PARAMETERS

We first present the sub-routines to estimate the parameters θs and θb , and the functions F s , Db , I
and J used in the EGFT decomposition of Lemma 1. These sub-routines serve as the base compo-
nents for the subsequent algorithms.
The first sub-routine, E ST-PAR, estimates the parameters θs and θb . It uses the fact that, if
pt ∼ U([−P, P ]), then 2P (I{pt ≤ st } − 1/2) is an unbiased estimate of x⊤      s                b
                                                                              t θ (similarly for θ ).
Then, we can rely on classical results to estimate the parameters (see Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020,
Chapter 19)). The second sub-routine, E ST-I NT, estimates the integrals I(δ) and J(δ) over a grid
of price increments {kϵ : k ∈ K}. The third and fourth sub-routines, E ST-F and E ST-D, provide
estimates of the c.d.f. F s and the demand function Db at kϵ for a given increment level k ∈ K,
respectively.

4.2   E XPLORE -O R -C OMMIT FRAMEWORK

First, we consider a natural Explore-Or-Commit (EOC) algorithm which uses each round either
to compute estimates for the terms in Equation (4), or to greedily play the empirical best action.
This strategy is described in Algorithm 3. Our algorithm is not a standard Explore-Then-Commit
algorithm. Indeed, it resorts to the estimation subroutine E ST-PAR (Line 4) whenever the estimation
is not “good enough” and not only in the first rounds. The other estimation subroutines are executed
until a certain number of updates is reached. We show that the number of necessary exploration
rounds is upper bounded by O(T   e 3/4 ). This will be useful in section Section 5 to handle one-bit
feedback. Finally, in Lines 10 and 11 the algorithm selects the best price increments according to
the current estimates (i.e., “commit” rounds), and posts price pt build accordingly to both agents.
Theorem Theorem 1 bounds the regret of EOC-BT. Its proof is postponed to Appendix C, where we
provide explicit bounds on Te and C.  e
                                 1/4                                       q
                                                         −1 −1
                                                                                                 −1
Theorem 1. Set ϵ = log(T      )                                                         2T
                                                                             d log 1+B

                           T         , δ = T (74 + 32P  ϵ   )    , µ = ϵ P            δ      +A     ,
            2
Tint = ⌈ 8P log(1/δ)
             ϵ2      ⌉, and TFD = ⌈ 2 log(1/δ)
                                        ϵ2     ⌉. Then, under Assumptions 1 and 2, Algorithm 3
verifies
                                   RT ≤ CT  e 3/4 log(T )1/4

with probability at least 1 − T −1 when T ≥ Te, where Te and C
                                                             e are constants depending respectively
on A, B, and C, and on A, B, C, and d.

Sketch of the proof. For some ϵ > 0 to be chosen later, let K = J−P/ϵ, P/ϵK. Using standard
arguments Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011); Carpentier et al. (2020), we can show that O(ϵ   e −2 ) samples
                                                                             / T par the errors |x⊤
are sufficient for E ST-PAR to ensure that, with high probability, for all t ∈                        s
                                                                                                  t (θ −
θbts )| and |x⊤   b   bb
              t (θ − θt )| are smaller than ϵ. When this happens, classical concentration arguments
                   −2
ensure that O(ϵ ) samples are sufficient for E ST-I NT to estimate I(kϵ) and J(kϵ) with precision
               e


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 4 S COUTING BANDIT WITH I NFORMATION P OOLING (SBIP)
 1: Input: parameter µ > 0, length of scouting phase Tint , discretization size ϵ, confidence δ > 0.
 2: Initialize: T par = T int = ∅, V = Id , K = ⌈2P/ϵ⌉ + 3, K = J−K, KK, e      ϵ = (12P L + 7)ϵ,
                                                                          p
 3: N k,s = N k,b = Fb k = D    b k = 0 for all k ∈ K. Let β : N ∋ n 7→ 2 log(δ −1 )/n
 4: while t ≤ T do
 5:   if ∥xt ∥V−1 > µ then
 6:      T par ← T par ∪ {t}, E ST-PAR(T par )
 7:   else if |T int | < Tint then
 8:      T int ← T int ∪ {t}, E ST-I NT(T int )
 9:   else                       n                     j                   ▷Run
                                                                               Successive
                                                                                  ko      Elimination
10:      for (k, k ′ ) ∈ At := (k, k ′ ) ∈ K2 : k ′ = x⊤    t  θbs − θbb + kϵ ϵ−1 do
                                                                 t     t
                                  ′

11:        UCBt (k, k ′ ) ← Ibk Fbtk + Jbk Db tk′ + e
                                                    ϵ + 2P β(N k,s ) + β(N k ,b )
                                                                                   ′


                                 ′

12:        LCBt (k, k ′ ) ← Ibk Fbtk + Jbk Db k′ − eϵ − 2P β(N k,s ) + β(N k ,b )
                                                                                  ′
                                              t

         Kt := (k, k ′ ) ∈ At : UCBt (k, k ′ ) ≥ max(l,l′ )∈At LCBt (l, l′ )

13:
                                                                  ′
14:      Choose (kt , kt′ ) ∈ arg min(k,k′ )∈Kt min{N k,s , N k ,b } and post price pt = x⊤     bs
                                                                                              t θt + kt ϵ
15:      Observe feedback and update:
                                                                        ′
                      N kt ,s Fbkt + I {st ≤ pt }                            b kt′ + I {bt ≥ pt }
                                                                     N kt ,b D
               kt                                             kt′
             F ←
             b                                        and D ←
                                                            b                        ′            ,
                                N kt ,s + 1                                   N kt ,b + 1
                                                ′          ′
16:          N kt ,s ← N kt ,s + 1   and     N kt ,b ← N kt ,b + 1


                                                −2
ϵ uniformly for k ∈ K. By contrast, O(|K|ϵ
                                         e         ) samples are necessary for E ST-F and E ST-F to
estimate F s (kϵ) and Db (kϵ) with precision ϵ uniformly for k ∈ K. Thus, with high probability, after
        −2
O(|K|ϵ
 e         ) rounds of exploration, the expected gain from trade for prices x⊤   bs
                                                                               t θt + kϵ is estimated
with precision O(ϵ) uniformly for k ∈ K. Now, Assumption 2 ensures that the reward function is
Lipschitz-continuous, so the discretization error is also O(ϵ). By choosing ϵ = T −1/4 , we balance
the estimation and discretization errors with the regret of the exploration phase, thereby obtaining a
        e 3/4 ).
regret O(T

4.3   C LOSING THE GAP : SCOUTING BANDITS WITH INFORMATION POOLING
      e 3/4 ) regret of the EOC strategy is mainly due to the cost of estimating the c.d.f. F s and
The O(T
demand function Db . To bypass this costly estimation, an alternative approach is to first estimate θb ,
θs , I, and J, then run independent scouting bandit algorithms (as described in Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2024)) for each (rounded) value of ∆t = x⊤           b    s
                                                  t (θ − θ ). As shown in Appendix H, this strategy also
                3/4                                                    e 2/3 ) achieved in non-contextual
achieves O(Te       ) regret. This regret rate is higher than the rate O(T
stochastic bilateral trade. Surprisingly, by combining the strengths of both strategies, we achieve
              e 2/3 ). This reveals that the contextual stochastic bilateral trade problem is no more
a regret of O(T
difficult, in terms of regret, than its non-contextual counterpart, although the comparison is against
a stronger benchmark.
To achieve this optimal regret rate, we design a scouting bandit strategy with information pooling
across different values of ∆t , presented in Algorithm 4. Information pooling is related to cross-
learning, developed for bandits with graph feedback Balseiro et al. (2019). In particular, after having
estimated x⊤   s   ⊤ b
            t θ , xt θ , I and J, we run a successive elimination algorithm for each value of ∆t .
Then, to estimate the reward of a price corresponding to increments δ s and δ b , we use the feedback
from rounds where these increments have been selected across all values of ∆t .
Theorem 2. Under Assumptions 1qand 2, Algorithm 4 with ϵ = (d2 log(T )2 /T )1/3 , δ =
                     2 −1
                                                            −1                    2
                                                               , and Tint = ⌈ 8P log(1/δ)
                                                  2T
 (38 + 16P                 , µ = ϵ P d log 1+B

         ϵ )(T + 1)                             δ      +A                           ϵ2     ⌉ verifies
                                             e log(T )T )2/3
                                        RT ≤ C(d
with probability at least 1 − 1/T when T ≥ Te, where Te and C
                                                            e are constants depending respectively
on A, B, and C, and on A, B, C, and d.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The regret rate of Algorithm 4 matches the lower bound Ω(T 2/3 ) established by Cesa-Bianchi et al.
(2021) for the simpler problem of non-contextual stochastic bilateral trade under similar assumptions
(i.e., independent valuations with bounded densities and support). Thus, aside from the constant C,e
the dependence on the dimension d, and logarithmic factors, Algorithm 4 achieves minimax-optimal
regret. We outline the proof of this result below, with the full formal proof as well as bounds on Te
and C e deferred to Appendix D.

Sketch of the proof. Let r(x, p) := maxp′ EGFT(x, p′ ) − EGFT(x, p), and Tpar = |T par |. The
regret is bounded by 2P Tpar + 2P Tint + t∈T
                                                   P
                                                        / par ∪T int r(xt , pt ). The elliptical potential Lemma
(Carpentier et al., 2020) implies that Tpar ≲ d2 log(T )2 ϵ−2 , so Tpar + Tint ≲ d2 log(T )2 ϵ−2 .
By using concentration arguments and exploiting the Lipschitz continuity of the reward, we can
show that, for all t ∈  / T par ∪ T int and (k, k ′ ) ∈ At , [LCBt (k, k ′ ), UCBt (k, k ′ )] is a p   valid confi-
                                     ⊤ bs
dence interval for EGFT(xt , xt θ + kϵ). Now, we want to show that r(xt , pt ) ≲ O 1/N kt ,s +      e
p                                                                   ′
   1/N kt′ ,b + ϵ . To prove this claim, we define (k ∗ , k ∗ ) ∈ arg max                                   ⊤ bs

                                                              t     t                 (k,k′ )∈At EGFT(xt , xt θ +
kϵ). The Lipschitz-continuity of the reward ensures that the discretization error is of or-
                                                                                    ′               ′
der O(ϵ). Moreover, [LCBt (kt , kt′ ), UCBt (kt , kt′ )] and [LCBt (kt∗ , kt∗ ), UCBt (kt∗ , kt∗ )] are confi-
                                                                                                          ∗ ′∗
dence intervals for EGFT(xt , pt ) and EGFT(xt , x⊤            bs       ∗
                                                            t θ + kt ϵ), respectively, and LCBt (kt , kt ) ≤
UCBt (kt , kt′ ) by Line 13. Then, it holds that EGFT(xt , x⊤             bs      ∗
                                                                       t θ + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , pt ) is of order
                                                   ′                       ′
UCBt (kt , kt′ ) − LCBt (kt , kt′ ) + UCBt (kt∗ , kt∗ ) − LCBt (kt∗ , kt∗ ). Our choice of (kt , kt′ ) ensures that
                   ′                  ∗     ′∗
min{N kt ,s , N kt ,b } ≤ min{N kt ,s , N kt ,s } (Line 14). Then, p         by definitionpof UCB and LCB, and
                                                                                                  ′

since the discretization is at most O(ϵ), we get r(xt , pt ) ≲ O 1/N kt ,s + 1/N kt ,b + ϵ .
                                                                        e
To bound the regret of the Successive Elimination     p     phase, we consider separately the rounds (indexed
by Tks ) where the bound ispdominated by 1/N k,s and kt = k, and the rounds (indexed by Tkb′ )
                                     1 k′ ,b and k ′ = k ′ . Then, we decompose the regret of this phase
   P it is dominated by P/N P
where                                                t             P                                     −a
as t∈T / par ∪T int r(xt , pt ) =      k∈K (   t∈Tks r(xt , pt ) +    t∈Tkb r(xt , pt )). Choosing ra = 2   and
ra ≈ ϵ, we consider the decreasing sequence of intervals (ra )a≤a . The previous result implies that
if N k,s ∈ [O(
             e 1/ra2 ), O(
                         e 1/ra+1
                                2
                                    )], then r(xt , pt ) ≲ ra . Thus,
                      X                                  X
                                            e r12 +                   2
                                                                           − ra2 + ra |Tks | .

                             r(xt , pt ) ≲ O                     ra ra+1
                    t∈Tks                          1≤a≤a−1


This sum is of order Tsk ϵ+ log(1/δ)/ϵ. We sum over (k, k ′ ) ∈ K, and use the fact that              s   b
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                 k∈K Tk +Tk ≤
T while |K| ≈ ϵ−1 , to conclude that RT = O(T  e 2/3 ).


5    T RADING OFF BUDGET BALANCE CONSTRAINTS FOR FEEDBACK

In this section, we show that it is possible to relax the budget balance constraints in order to handle
scenarios with limited feedback. In particular, we show that any EOC-like algorithm for two-bit
feedback (for instance, Algorithms 1 and 3) can be suitably adapted to handle settings with one-bit
feedback. To achieve this, we resort to the notion of global budget balance recently introduced by
Bernasconi et al. (2024) and we show that budget can be exploited to compensate for the lack of feed-
back. The notion of global budget balance requires the learner to be budget balanced only “overall”
(i.e., over the whole time horizon). In particular, let P ROFITt (p, q) := I{st ≤ p}I{q ≤ bt }(q − p)
be the profit extracted by the learner at time t by posting prices (p, q). Then, the learning algorithm
                                                               PT
is global budget balanced if the following inequality holds: t=1 P ROFIT(pt , qt ) ≥ 0.
Given an EOC-like algorithm for the two-bit strong budget balance set-up, the idea is to simulate
its exploration rounds by doing separate updates for the seller and the buyer, each using a single
bit of feedback. In particular, each time in which the two-bit algorithm uses the seller’s feedback
I{st ≤ p}, the one-bit algorithm needs to actively collect that information by posting (p, −P ) in-
stead of (p, p). Notice that, even under one-bit feedback, if the learner posts price (p, −P ) it is able
to observe I{st ≤ p} since the buyer is always going to accept the trade. Analogously, when the
two-bit algorithm would employ I{bt ≥ p}, the one-bit algorithm has to collect that information by


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


posting (P, p). For instance, instead of executing E ST-PAR, the one-bit algorithm runs two explo-
ration phases: one in which it updates only θbs (Line 4 of E ST-PAR) by posting (pt , −P ), and one in
which it updates only θbb by posting (P, pt′ ). The same happens for the other estimation subroutines.
The one-bit algorithm simulates finer-grained feedback by posting pairs of prices (P, p), (p, −P ),
resulting in a negative GFT. By enforcing global budget balance, we allow the learning algorithm to
set prices that are not budget balanced individually, as long as the overall budget balance is main-
tained. To do that, we add an initial “budget-collection” phase, allowing the algorithm to accumulate
enough profit for subsequent exploration rounds. In the following, we demonstrate how sufficient
profit can be accumulated during the budget-collection phase without incurring excessive regret rela-
tive to GFT. This allows us to provide sublinear regret guarantees under one-bit feedback, with rates
depending on some natural characteristics of the underlying market. This approach is specifically
suited for EOC-like algorithms, which require a limited number of learning rounds before starting
to set greedy prices without requiring further feedback. By contrast, algorithms such as Algorithm 4
rely on two-bit feedback in each round to continuously refine their estimates of D and F . Accumu-
lating sufficient budget to emulate two-bit feedback throughout the entire time horizon would yield
linear regret, rendering the reduction scheme inapplicable.
Collecting budget. Let B be the budget required by the one-bit algorithm to cover the rounds in
which it must post either (P, p) or (p, −P ) to collect information
                                                            P           (the value of B will be set later).
Therefore, the budget collection phase ends as soon as t P ROFIT(pt , qt ) ≥ B. We denote by τ the
random variable indicating the last round of the budget-collection phase. Moreover, let T B := Jτ K
be the random set of rounds designated for budget collection. For each round t ∈ T B , the algorithm
samples a price pt uniformly from [−P, P ], and a value it uniformly from [0, log T ]. Then, it posts
a pair of prices (pt , qt ), where qt = pt + 2−it . We start by providing a lower bound to the per-round
expected profit obtained in this way.
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                         t −st )
Lemma 2. For each round t ∈ T B such that bt ≥ st , it holds: E[P ROFITt (pt , qt )] ≥ (b         2
                                                                                       8P log T − T ,
where the expectation is with respect to the choice of (pt , qt ).

Our guarantees for the one-bit feedback case will depend on instance-dependent properties of the
market. We measure this by looking at the per-round GFT that be extracted on sufficiently long
windows of time.
Definition 1. Given a sequence of valuations {(st , bt )}Tt=1 , α is defined as
                                                         X [bt − st ]+
                                       α := ′ min                        .
                                             t ≥log T             t′
                                                        t∈Jt′ K


Intuitively, α measures how easily the learner can accumulate budget. The budget-collection phase
will have at least length of order log T since τ ≥ B/2P , and B = Ω(log T ) even in the setting without
noise. Then, we can show that the profit accumulated by time τ is at least a factor of 1/ log T of the
cumulative GFT up to that point, assuming all trades up to τ had occurred.
Lemma 3. For τ ≥ log T , it holds with probability at least 1 − 1/T that
                                  α
    X                                    X                 s             X
        P ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≥               [bt − st ]+ − 4P 2 log(T )     [bt − st ]+ − 2.
                              8P log(T )
      t∈Jτ K                                   t∈Jτ K                               t∈Jτ K


Now let A be a two-bit algorithm such that, with probability at least 1 − 1/T , it requires at most T E
                                                              (2 bit)
exploration rounds, and has regret for the commit phase of RT . We set the overall budget to be
collected to
                             B = max 2048P 4 α−2 log3 T, 2P T E .3

                                                                                                    (5)
The first argument is used in the following proof to establish an upper bound on concentration terms,
while the second accounts for the exploration costs over T E rounds. Then, the resulting one-bit
learning algorithm has the following guarantees.
    3
      With probability at most 1/T , the budget B may be insufficient for T E exploration rounds. In this case, we
halt exploration and begin posting arbitrary strong budget-balanced prices.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Theorem 3. Given the two-bit algorithm A, the corresponding one-bit learning algorithm satisfies
global budget balance and, with probability at least 1 − 1/T , has regret
                                (1 bit)                          (2)
                                        ≤ O α−3 T E log4 T + RT .

                              RT

The guarantees above rely on the specific characteristics of the market, represented by the parameter
α. When α = Ω(1) the market is well-behaved, meaning that trade opportunities arise frequently
enough. This occurs, for example, when buyers are willing to pay more than the seller’s asking price,
even if only by a small margin. When α = Ω(1), the guarantees of Theorem 3 can be effectively
leveraged. For instance, under the set-up of Section 4, we can use Algorithm 3 as the two-bid
algorithm A. Then, B ≤ 4P T E = 4P ·2P (|TTpar          int        FD
                                                +1 |+T +2|K|T ), which is of order O(P dT
                                                                                         e 4 3/4 ).
Therefore, the final regret bound in the noisy, one-bit setting with global budget balance is of order
 e 3/4 ). A similar argument shows that in the noiseless setting of Section 3 the regret is of order
O(T
polylog(T ).
When the market is not well-behaved, we can still establish sublinear regret guarantees under one-bit
feedback and global budget balance. Indeed, through steps analogous to those of Lemma 3, we can
show that
                                                                                     √
                                                     P                      2
                                                 −1                      +
             P
               t∈Jτ K P ROFIT t (pt , qt ) ≥ Ω τ      t∈Jτ K ([bt − st )]       − O(
                                                                                  e T ).

Moreover, we can exploit the fact that we can decompose the one-bit regret as
     (1 bit)                       p                          (2)
             ≤ t∈Jτ K [bt − st ]+ + 16P 2 τ log(T ) + 2T E + RT
              P
   RT                                                               (see proof of Theorem 3).

Then, if we take the budget B (or, equivalently, T E ) to be log T , the expression above yields
                    +   e 1/2 T 1/4 ). In the worst case we have τ = T (i.e., the market does not
P
   t∈Jτ K [bt − st ]  ≤ O(τ
                                                                  e 3/4 ) in the deterministic set-up
allow to collect enough budget), which yields a regret of order O(T
of Section 3. By setting B ≈ T 3/4 we achieve a regret of O(T
                                                            e 7/8 ) in the noisy set-up of Section 4.
Clearly, the rates are worse compared to the case where α = Ω(1), due to the difficulty in accumu-
lating sufficient budget to cover the cost of posting non-budget balanced prices.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MB and MC are partially supported by the FAIR (Future Artificial Intelligence Research) project
PE0000013, funded by the NextGenerationEU program within the PNRR-PE-AI scheme (M4C2,
investment 1.3, line on Artificial Intelligence). MC is also partially supported by the EU Horizon
project ELIAS (European Lighthouse of AI for Sustainability, No. 101120237). AC is partially
supported by ERC grant (Project 101165466 — PLA-STEER). VP acknowledges support from
the French National Research Agency (ANR) under grant number ANR-19-CE23- 0026 as well
as from the grant “Investissements d’Avenir” (LabEx Ecodec/ANR-11-LABX-0047). SG gratefully
acknowledges funding from the Jacques Hadamard Foundation (FMJH).
Funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s)
only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council
Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible
for them.

R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24, 2011.
Alekh Agarwal, Daniel Hsu, Satyen Kale, John Langford, Lihong Li, and Robert Schapire. Taming
  the monster: A fast and simple algorithm for contextual bandits. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1638–1646. PMLR, 2014.
Kareem Amin, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Umar Syed. Repeated contextual auctions with strategic
  buyers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yossi Azar, Amos Fiat, and Federico Fusco. An α-regret analysis of adversarial bilateral trade. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
François Bachoc, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. A contextual online learning theory of
  brokerage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01566, 2024.
Santiago Balseiro, Negin Golrezaei, Mohammad Mahdian, Vahab Mirrokni, and Jon Schneider.
  Contextual bandits with cross-learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Martino Bernasconi, Matteo Castiglioni, Andrea Celli, and Federico Fusco. No-regret learning in
 bilateral trade via global budget balance. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
 Theory of Computing, pp. 247–258, 2024.
Liad Blumrosen and Shahar Dobzinski. Reallocation mechanisms. In Proceedings of the ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation, pp. 617. ACM, 2014.
Liad Blumrosen and Yehonatan Mizrahi. Approximating gains-from-trade in bilateral trading. In
  WINE, volume 10123 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 400–413. Springer, 2016.
Natasa Bolić, Tommaso Cesari, and Roberto Colomboni. An online learning theory of brokerage. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  pp. 216–224, 2024.
Johannes Brustle, Yang Cai, Fa Wu, and Mingfei Zhao. Approximating gains from trade in two-sided
  markets via simple mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and
  Computation, pp. 589–590, 2017.
Alexandra Carpentier, Claire Vernade, and Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori. The elliptical potential lemma
  revisited. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10182, 2020.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  A regret analysis of bilateral trade. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Economics and
  Computation, pp. 289–309. ACM, 2021.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  Repeated bilateral trade against a smoothed adversary. In COLT, volume 195 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 1095–1130. PMLR, 2023.
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, Tommaso Cesari, Roberto Colomboni, Federico Fusco, and Stefano Leonardi.
  Bilateral trade: A regret minimization perspective. Mathematics of Operations Research, 49(1):
  171–203, 2024.
Maxime C Cohen, Ilan Lobel, and Renato Paes Leme. Feature-based dynamic pricing. Management
 Science, 66(11):4921–4943, 2020.
Arnoud V Den Boer. Dynamic pricing and learning: historical origins, current research, and new
  directions. Surveys in operations research and management science, 20(1):1–18, 2015.
Yuan Deng, Jieming Mao, Balasubramanian Sivan, and Kangning Wang. Approximately efficient
  bilateral trade. In STOC, pp. 718–721. ACM, 2022.
Yumou Fei. Improved approximation to first-best gains-from-trade. In International Conference on
  Web and Internet Economics, pp. 204–218. Springer, 2022.
Martin Grötschel, László Lovász, and Alexander Schrijver. Geometric algorithms and combinato-
 rial optimization. Springer Science & Business Media, 1993.
Adel Javanmard. Perishability of data: dynamic pricing under varying-coefficient models. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 18(53):1–31, 2017.
Adel Javanmard and Hamid Nazerzadeh. Dynamic pricing in high-dimensions. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 20(9):1–49, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Zi Yang Kang, Francisco Pernice, and Jan Vondrák. Fixed-price approximations in bilateral trade.
  In SODA, pp. 2964–2985. SIAM, 2022.
N Bora Keskin and Assaf Zeevi. Dynamic pricing with an unknown demand model: Asymptotically
  optimal semi-myopic policies. Operations research, 62(5):1142–1167, 2014.
R. Kleinberg and T. Leighton. The value of knowing a demand curve: bounds on regret for online
  posted-price auctions. In 44th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pp. 594–605, 2003.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Renato Paes Leme and Jon Schneider. Contextual search via intrinsic volumes. In 2018 IEEE 59th
  Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 268–282. IEEE, 2018.
Allen Liu, Renato Paes Leme, and Jon Schneider. Optimal contextual pricing and extensions. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 1059–1078.
  SIAM, 2021.
Ilan Lobel, Renato Paes Leme, and Adrian Vladu. Multidimensional binary search for contextual
   decision-making. Operations Research, 66(5):1346–1361, 2018.
R Preston McAfee. The gains from trade under fixed price mechanisms. Applied economics research
  bulletin, 1(1):1–10, 2008.
Roger B Myerson and Mark A Satterthwaite. Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of
  economic theory, 29(2):265–281, 1983.
William Vickrey. Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders. The Journal of
 finance, 16(1):8–37, 1961.
Jianyu Xu and Yu-Xiang Wang. Logarithmic regret in feature-based dynamic pricing. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:13898–13910, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    BASIC FACTS ABOUT ELLIPSOIDS
An ellipsoid E with center c ∈ Rd and positive definite matrix M ∈ Rd×d is defined as
                            E(M, c) := x ∈ Rd : ∥x − c∥M−1 ≤ 1 .


Given an hyperplane H(a, c) := {x ∈ Rd : a⊤ (x − c) ≤ 0}, the minimal volume ellipsoid
containing K = E(M, c) ∩ H(a, c) can be computed in closed form as follows. The new center is
                                                1      1
                                    c′ = c −       ·√      Ma,
                                               d+1     ⊤
                                                      a Ma
and the new positive definite matrix is
                                       d2               Maa⊤ M

                                                   2
                              M′ =            M −     ·          .
                                     d2 − 1       d+1    a⊤ Ma
Then, the Löwner-John ellipsoid LJ(K) of the half ellipsoid K is the ellipsoid E(M′ , c′ ).
Going from E(M, c) to E(M′ , c′ ) the volume shrinks by the following amount:

                                vol(E(M′ , c′ )) ≤ e
                                                       −1/2d
                                                               vol(E(M, c)).
An in-depth analysis of these results can be found in Grötschel et al. (1993).

B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
Before proving Proposition 1, we begin by provide a high-level view of Algorithm 1. This algorithm
maintains two ellipsoidal uncertainty sets Ets and Etb (see Appendix A for some basic facts about
ellipsoids). The key idea is that, at each update, the volume of an uncertainty shrinks “fast enough”
to yield a good estimate of the true parameter in a small number of iterations. The problems of
computing the maximum and minimum possible valuations of the seller and buyer (Line 4) admit a
simple closed-form solution (see, e.g., , Grötschel et al. (1993, Chapter 3)).
At each round t, given the current uncertainty sets we compute the maximum and minimum possible
valuations of the seller for the current product as
                           st = minθ∈Ets x⊤
                                          t θ     and st = maxθ∈Ets x⊤
                                                                     t θ.                             (6)

The maximum and minimum possible valuations of the buyer, denoted by bt and bt , are computed
analogously. All of these optimization problems admit a simple closed form solution (see, e.g., ,
Grötschel et al. (1993, Chapter 3)).
If the smallest possible valuation for the buyer bt is above the highest possible valuation for the seller
st (Line 5), the algorithm can post any price between these two values, ensuring that the trade will
occur. If st and st are far apart (Line 6), the algorithm performs a binary search step (a.k.a. “explore”
step), and posts a price pt which is halfway between the seller’s minimum and the maximum possible
valuations. Then, we update the seller’s uncertainty set as follows: if the seller accepts the sale, it
implies that x⊤    s                                           s        s        ⊤ s
               t θ ≤ pt , and we define the half-ellipsoid Kt+1 = Et ∩ {θ : xt θ ≤ pt }. Otherwise,
           s         s         ⊤ s
we set Kt+1 = Et ∩ {θ : xt θ > pt }. Finally, we round this half-ellipsoid by replacing it by its
                                                            s
Löwner-John ellipsoid, i.e., the ellipsoid containing Kt+1       with the smallest volume. We proceed
similarly for the buyer (Line 9). If the highest and lowest possible valuations of both the buyer and
seller are close to each other, and the buyer’s minimum valuation is lower than the seller’s maximum
valuation, then the difference of valuations between the two parties is small, resulting in a negligible
gain from trade. Therefore, in this case, we can safely post an arbitrary price (Line 12).
Proposition 1. Assume that the seller’s and buyer’s valuations follow Equation (2). Under Assump-
tion 1, Algorithm 1 with ϵ = ABd2 /T has regret bounded by RT ≤ 10ABd2 log 20(d + 1)T d−2 .



Proof. The proof of Proposition 1 relies on the fact that when the algorithm updates Ets or Etb , it
behaves as the E LLIPSOID P RICING algorithm of Cohen et al. (2020). More precisely, we first note
that under Assumption 1, E1s and E1b contain θs and θb , respectively. Moreover, straightforward


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


induction shows that if Ets contains θs , then Kt+1
                                                s
                                                    also contains θs , and so does Et+1
                                                                                    s
                                                                                        (similar
                      b      b
reasoning applies to θ and Et ).
This implies that for all rounds, st ≤ st ≤ st , and bt ≤ bt ≤ bt . In particular, if the condition in
Line 5 is verified, we have st ≤ pt ≤ bt , and so the instantaneous regret at that round is 0.
We also underline that Algorithm 1 only explores to estimate θs (Line 6) if the condition
                                   maxs x⊤              ⊤
                                          t θ − mins xt θ ≥ ϵ
                                        θ∈Et        θ∈Et
is verified, or equivalently if
                                            x⊤
                                             t          x⊤   ϵ
                                       maxs    θ − mins t θ ≥ .
                                       θ∈Et B      θ∈Et B    B
                                  x⊤
Since the normalized contexts Bt are bounded in norm by 1 by Assumption 1, we can apply Lemma
1 by Cohen et al. (2020). This Lemma states that Algorithm 1 will execute the steps in Lines 7-8 at
most 2d2 log(20A(d + 1)/ Bϵ ) times, after which the condition in Line 6 will never be verified again.
A similar reasoning allows us to bound the number of exploration rounds for the buyer’s parameter
θb (Line 9). Therefore, the total number of exploration rounds is bounded by 2 × 2d2 log(20A(d +
1)/ Bϵ ). We notice that Assumption 1 also implies that the valuations are in [−AB, AB], and so the
instantaneous regret is bounded by 2AB. Thus, the regret of the exploration phase (Lines 6 and 9)
is bounded by 8ABd2 log(20A(d + 1)/ Bϵ ).
Finally, if the conditions on Lines 5, 6 and 9 are not verified, it implies that
                                       bt − st ≤ bt − st
                                             ≤ bt + ϵ − st + ϵ
                                             ≤ 2ϵ.
Then, the instantaneous regret at that round is at most 2ϵ, and the total regret for these steps is at
                             2
most 2ϵT . Choosing ϵ = ABdT   yields the result.

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
In order to prove Theorem 1, we provide a more detailed version of the E XPLORE -O R -C OMMIT
algorithm in Algorithm 5. Note that we adopt the convention 1/0 = +∞.
Before analyzing the E XPLORE -O R -C OMMIT algorithm, we define the various quantities used
within it. Specifically, Ttpar represents the set of indices from previous rounds that were dedicated to
estimating the parameters θs and θb (Line 8). We denote by θbts and θbtb the estimates for the param-
eters, and Vt is the corresponding empirical covariance matrix at the beginning of round t. The set
T int contains the indices of the rounds used to estimate the integrals I and J (Line 13). Moreover,
Ibk is the estimate of I(kϵ), and Jbk is the estimate of J(kϵ). The quantities Fbk and Db k represent our
estimates of F s (kϵ) and Db (kϵ), respectively.
We use the following lemma to bound the total duration of the parameter exploration phase (the
proof can be found in Appendix E.2).
Lemma 4. Almost surely, the length of exploration phase TTpar   is bounded as
                                                      T +d
                                                             +1
                                                d log d
                                     |TTpar
                                         +1 | ≤              .
                                                     µ2
The following lemma provides bounds on the estimation errors for θs , θb , I, J, F s , and Db for the
values of µ, Tint , and TFD specified in Theorem 2. Let E be the event
                            n
                       E := ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈   / T par ∪ T int x⊤ (θbb − θb ) ≤ ϵ and
                                               T             t   t

                                                           x⊤  bs    s
                                                            t (θt − θ )   ≤ ϵ and

                                                           Ibk − I (kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ and
                                                                            o
                                                           Jbk − J(kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ .


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 5 E XPLORE -O R -C OMMIT (detailed version)
 1: Input: parameter µ > 0, length of exploration phases Tint and TFD , discretization size ϵ, confi-
      dence level δ.
                     par
 2: Initialize: T1 = T int = ∅, θb1s = 0d , θb1b = 0d , V1 = Id , K = ⌈2P/ϵ⌉ + 3, K = J−K, KK,
      Tk = Tk = ∅ for all k ∈ K, Fbk = D
        F    D                          b k = 0 for all k ∈ K.
 3: while t ≤ T do
 4:   if ∥xt ∥V−1 > µ then                                                          ▷Estimate the parameters θb and θs
                 t
 5:        Draw pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post prices (pt , pt )
                    par
 6:        Update Tt+1  ← Ttpar ∪ {t}
                                              !−1
                                   xl x⊤
                               P
 7:        Update Vt+1 =               l + Id
                                            par
                                        l∈Tt+1
 8:        Update parameter estimates
                       X                    1
                                                                                           X                        1

        s                                                                 b
      θbt+1 = 2P Vt+1         I{pl ≤ sl } −     xl ,                    θbt+1 = 2P Vt+1             I{pl ≤ bl } −           xl
                         par
                                            2                                                 par
                                                                                                                    2
                               l∈Tt+1                                                     l∈Tt+1


 9:     else if |T int | < Tint then                                ▷Estimate the integrals I and J
10:        Draw pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post prices (pt , pt )
11:        Update T int ← T int ∪ {t}
12:        if |T int | = Tint then
13:            Compute estimate of integrals I and J
14:            for k ∈ K do
                 2P X n                            o        2P X n                            o
        Ibk = int           I kϵ + x⊤  bb
                                     l θ ≤ p l ≤ bl ,  Jbk = int      I sl ≤ pl ≤ kϵ + x⊤   bs .
                                                                                          l θ
                 T l∈T int                                  T l∈T int

15:     else if for some k ∈ K, |TkF | < TFD then                                                          ▷Estimate Fk
16:        Set pt = x⊤    bs
                        t θ + kϵ and post (pt , pt )
17:        Update Tk ← TkF ∪ {t}
                       F

18:        if |TkF | = TFD then set
                                        Fbk = T2P
                                                     P
                                                  FD  l∈T F I {sl ≤ pl }
                                                                       k


19:     else if for some k ∈ K, |TkD | < TFD then                                                          ▷Estimate Fk
20:        Set pt = x⊤   bb
                       t θ + kϵ and post (pt , pt )
21:        Update Tk ← TkD ∪ {t}
                      D

22:        if |TkD | = TFD then set
                                        b k = 2P    P
                                        D       TFD  l∈T D I {pl ≤ bl }k


23:     else           (                                                                              ▷Post greedy price
                                                          ⊤                     )
                                                         xt (θbts −θbtb )+kϵ
24:        set At =            (k, k ′ ) ∈ K2 : k ′ =             ϵ
                                            ′
25:                                                    b k′ .
           kt = arg maxk:∃k′ ,(k,k′ )∈At Ibk Fbk + Jbk D
26:        Set pt = x⊤ θbs + kt ϵ and post (pt , pt )
                           t     t


                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Let us define the exploitation (i.e., commit) phase as
                                                                                                !
                                                                          [
                                  C
                                                      TTpar ∪ T int             TkF ∪ TkD

                              T       := JT K \                                                     .
                                                                          k∈K
Moreover, let E EOC be the event
             n                                                                        o
                                                              b k − Ds (kϵ) ≤ (L + 1)ϵ .
E EOC := E ∩ ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈ T C , Fbk − F s (kϵ) ≤ (L + 1)ϵ and D
Then, we can lower bound the probability of event E EOC as follows (the proof is postponed to
Appendix E.3).
                                  q                         −1
                                                  2T
Lemma 5. For the choice µ = ϵ P d log 1+B       δ      + A     , Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , and
TFD = 2 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 , it holds that
                                P E EOC ≥ 1 − 2δ − 8δ(2K + 1).


                                                       −1
Note that the choice δ = T (74 + 32P ϵ−1 )                   ensures that the event E EOC happens with probability
at least 1 − T −1 .
The following Lemma bounds the error for estimating the gain from trade of a price p = x⊤ bs
                                                                                        t θt + kϵ
                                EOC
on the high-probability event E     (the proof is presented in Appendix E.4).
Lemma 6. On the event E EOC , for all t ∈ T C , and all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At ,
                   ′
                              b k′ − EGFT(xt , x⊤ θbs + kϵ) ≤ (10P L + 4P + 7)ϵ.
                Ibk Fbk + Jbk D                                 t    t

Next, we bound the discretization error. Let us define
                           (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ arg max EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs
                                                              t θt + kϵ).
                                               (k,k′ )∈At
Then, the following result holds (see Appendix E.5 for its proof).
Lemma 7. On the event E EOC , we have that
                       max EGFT(xt , p) − EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗
                                                     t θt + kt ϵ) ≤ 2LP ϵ.
                          p


We are now ready to prove Theorem 1. For p ∈ R, x ∈ Rd , we define
                         ∆(x, p) := max
                                      ′
                                         EGFT(x, p′ ) − EGFT(x, p).
                                                  p
We begin by decomposing the regret as
                      X                  X
               RT =        ∆(xt , pt ) +   ∆(xt , pt )+
                         t∈TTpar+1                    t∈T int
                                                                                  
                         X           X                       X                              X
                                          ∆(xt , pt ) +                 ∆(xt , pt ) +                 ∆(xt , pt ).
                         k∈K       t∈TkF                     t∈TkD                         t∈T C

Using the fact that ∆(xt , pt ) ≤ 2P , we obtain
                                                      X
                      RT ≤2P |TTpar      int
                                 +1 | + T + 2|K|T
                                                 FD
                                                     +  ∆(xt , pt ).
                                                                                   t∈T C
                                                            d log( T +d
                                                                     d )
On the one hand, Lemma 4 implies that |TTpar      +1 | ≤         µ2      . For the choice µ =
                      1/2
                              −1
               2
ϵ P d log 1+Bδ
                 T
                          +A     , Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 , and TFD = 2 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 , this im-
plies that
                               s                         !2
                                        1 + B2T

                    T +d
       RT ≤2P d log          P d log                  + A ϵ−2 + 16P 3 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 +
                       d                    δ

                 4P                   X
           8P       + 9 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 +       ∆(xt , pt ).
                  ϵ                       C            t∈T



                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Note that the first term is of order ϵ−3 when ϵ is small enough. On the other hand, on the event E EOC ,
by Lemma 7 we have
    X
        ∆(xt , pt )
    t∈T C
            X                                X
        =           ∆(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗
                            t θt + kt ϵ) +           EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗                 ⊤ bs
                                                                t θt + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , xt θt + kt ϵ)
            t∈T C                            t∈T C
                          X
        ≤ 2T LP ϵ +              EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗                 ⊤ bs
                                            t θt + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , xt θt + kt ϵ) ,
                         t∈T C

Moreover, our choice of kt ensures that for kt′ such that (kt , kt′ ) ∈ At ,
                                     ′                         ′                  ′
                                                   b kt′ ≥ Ibkt∗ Fbkt∗ + Jbkt∗ D
                                  Ibkt Fbkt + Jbkt D                           b kt∗ .

By Lemma 6, this implies that, on event E EOC ,
              EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗                 ⊤ bs
                         t θt + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , xt θt + kt ϵ) ≤ (20P L + 8P + 14)ϵ.


Thus, on the event E EOC ,
                                    s                       !2
                                             1 + B2T

                         T +d
       RT ≤2P d log                P d log              + A ϵ−2 + 16P 3 log(1/δ)/ϵ2
                            d                    δ

                       P
              + 8P         + 3 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 + 2T LP ϵ + T (20P L + 8P + 14)ϵ.
                       ϵ
Substituting the values of ϵ and δ as per Theorem 1 and using Lemma 5 allows us to conclude the
proof. In particular, the result in Theorem 1 holds with C̃ = 22P L + 26P + 15, provided that
T ≥ 74 + 32P , that T ≥ 1 + B 2 , that T ≥ d, 5P 2 d log(T ) ≥ 1, and that 160P 2 d2 + 36P 3 ≤
T 1/4 log(T )5/4 .

D     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
D.1    D ETAILED A LGORITHM

In order to prove Theorem 2, we provide a more detailed version of the S COUTING BANDIT WITH
I NFORMATION P OOLING algorithm in Algorithm 6. Note that in Lines 16 an 17, we adopt the
convention 1/0 = +∞ when computing the upper- and lower- confidence bounds for increment
levels k, k ′ that have not yet been selected.
Before analyzing the SBIP algorithm, we introduce the different quantities appearing in the algo-
rithm. In words, Ttpar is the set of indices of the previous rounds that have been spent estimating
the parameters θs and θb at the beginning of round t. Similarly, θbts , θbtb , and Vt are the estimates
of the parameters and the corresponding empirical covariance matrix at the beginning of round t.
The set T int consists of the indices of the rounds used to estimate the integrals I and J. Moreover,
Ibk estimates I(kϵ), and Jbk estimates J(kϵ). The quantities Fbtk and D     b tk represent our estimates of
F (kϵ) and D (kϵ) at the beginning of round t. Similarly, Nt (resp., Ntb,k ) counts the number of
   s           b                                                   s,k

rounds in the successive elimination phase where the increment pl − x⊤           bs
                                                                               l θl was equal to kϵ (resp.,
                             ⊤ bb
where the increment pl − xl θl was close to kϵ), and where we gained information on F s (kϵ) (resp.,
on Db (kϵ)). The set At collects the pairs (k, k ′ ) ∈ K such that x⊤   bs           ⊤ bb    ′
                                                                      t θt +kϵ ≈ xt θt +k ϵ is a possible
price (within [−P, P ]). Then, for (k, k ′ ) ∈ At , the quantities UCBt (k, k ′ ) and LCBt (k, k ′ ) provide
upper and lower confidence bounds on the expected gain from trade corresponding to this price.
The third phase is a successive elimination phase: at each round, we consider a set of possible op-
timal prices, with corresponding upper confidence bound larger than the highest lower confidence
bound. This set is denoted by Kt . In order to ensure sufficient exploration of all potentially optimal
price increments (kϵ, k ′ ϵ) for (k, k ′ ) ∈ Kt , we choose the price increment with the widest confi-
                                                                                                      ′
dence interval: this corresponds to choosing the pair (k, k ′ ) ∈ Kt such that either Nts,k or Ntb,k


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 6 S COUTING BANDITS WITH I NFORMATION P OOLING (SBIP) (detailed version)
 1: Input: parameter µ > 0, length of scouting phase Tint , discretization size ϵ, confidence level δ.
                  par
 2: Initialize: T1 = T int = ∅, θb1s = 0d , θb1b = 0d , V1 = Id , K = ⌈2P/ϵ⌉ + 3, K = J−K, KK,
        SE
      Ts,k     SE
           = Tb,k = ∅ for all k ∈ K, N1s,k = N1b,k = 0 for all k ∈ K, Fb1k = D
                                                                             b k = 0 for all k ∈ K.
                                                                               1

 3: while t ≤ T do
 4:   if ∥xt ∥V−1 > µ then                                                               ▷Estimate the parameters θb and θs
                  t
 5:       Draw pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post (pt , pt )
                   par
 6:       Update Tt+1  = Ttpar ∪ {t}
                           P                         −1
                                            ⊤
 7:       Update Vt+1 =            par xl x
                               l∈Tt+1       l + I d
 8:       Update parameter estimates

          = 2P Vt+1 l∈T par I{pl ≤ sl } − 12 xl ,                                                                  I{pl ≤ bl } − 12 xl
      s
                       P                                                b
                                                                                     P
    θbt+1                                                             θbt+1 = 2P Vt+1 l∈T par
                                  t+1                                                                        t+1


 9:      else if |T int | < Tint then                                                        ▷Estimate the integrals I and J
10:         Draw pt ∼ U([−P, P ]) and post (pt , pt )
11:         Update T int = T int ∪ {t}
12:         if |T int | = Tint then
13:             for k ∈ K do
                                 n                   o                                    n                     o
                                        ⊤ bb                                                               ⊤ bs
       Ibk = 2P                                                      Jbk = 2P
                     P                                                          P
                Tint    l∈T int I kϵ + xl θ ≤ pl ≤ bl ,                    Tint  l∈T int I sl ≤ pl ≤ kϵ + xl θ


14:    else                                                                 ▷Run Successive Elimination
          Set At = (k, k ′ ) ∈ K2 : k ′ = (xt (θbt −θbt )+kϵ)/ϵ
                                           ⊤ s b
15:
16:       for (k, k ′ ) ∈ At do
                                                                                    q
                         k′ b k  k b k′
                ′
                                                                  p
                                                                                                  b,k′
      UCBt (k, k ) = I Ft + J Dt + (12P L + 7)ϵ + 2P
                        b       b                                   2 log(1/δ)/Nt +
                                                                                s,k   2 log(1/δ)/Nt      ,
                                                                                                                   q
                        ′
                                    b tk′ − (12P L + 7)ϵ − 2P
                 ′
                                                                                     p
      LCBt (k, k ) = Ibk Fbtk + Jbk D                                                    2 log(1/δ)/N s,k +        2 log(1/δ)/N b,k′
                                                                                                     t                           t



17:        Set Kt = {(k, k ′ ) n
                               ∈ At : UCBt (k, k ′ ) ≥               ′         ′
                                                     o max{LCBt (l, l ) :n(l, l ) ∈ At }}                ′
                                                                                                                             o
18:        Set kts = arg min Nts,k : (k, k ′ ) ∈ Kt , and ktb = arg min Ntb,k : (k, k ′ ) ∈ Kt
                s,ks       b,kb
19:        if Nt t ≤ Nt t then
20:           kt = kts , and set kt′ to be such that (kt , kt′ ) ∈ Kt
                 SE        SE
21:           Ts,k t
                     = Ts,k  t
                               ∪ {t}
22:        else
23:           kt′ = ktb , and set kt to be such that (kt , kt′ ) ∈ Kt
                 SE        SE
24:           Tb,k ′ = Tb,k ′ ∪ {t}
                   t         t

25:        Set pt = x⊤ θbs + kt ϵ and post (pt , pt )
                       t   t
                                                                             ′
                                                                       k ,b kt       ′
                                  kt ,s b kt
                    kt   N             Ft +I{st ≤pt }       k′        Nt t D
                                                                           b +I{bt ≥pt }
26:        Update Fbt+1 = t               k ,s
                                                         b t =
                                                        ,D t+1
                                                                            t
                                                                                  k′ ,b
                                       Nt t +1                                   Nt t +1
                     kt ,s                              k′ ,b        k′ ,b
27:       Update Nt+1      = Ntkt ,s + 1, and Nt+1
                                                t
                                                   = Nt t + 1
28:     Quantities that have not been updated during round t are kept the same for round t + 1


                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is the lowest of the set. We denote (kt , kt′ ) the pair of increments chosen in such way. In order to
analyze this phase, we store the indexes of the rounds where we chose this pair because Nts,kt was
                          SE                                                                  b,k′
the smallest in the set Ts,k t
                               . Analogously, the rounds where we chose this pair because Nt t was
                                     SE
the smallest are stored in the set Tb,k ′ ).
                                       t



D.2    R EGRET A NALYSIS

The beginning of the proof of Theorem 2 is similar to that of Theorem 1. As in the previous case,
we define the event
              n
        E := ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈  / TTpar    int
                                +1 ∪ T ,       x⊤  bb    b          ⊤ bs    s
                                                t (θt − θ ) ≤ ϵ, xt (θt − θ ) ≤ ϵ,
                                                                                    o
                                             Ibk − I (kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ, Jbk − J(kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ .

Moreover, we define a new event E SBIP as
                \n                                                             q
    E SBIP := E     ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈/ TTpar     int
                                      +1 ∪ T ,                Fbtk − F s (kϵ) ≤ 2 log(1/δ)
                                                                                   Nts,k
                                                                                           + Lϵ,
                                                                               q               o
                                                             b k − Ds (kϵ) ≤ 2 log(1/δ)
                                                             D                      b,k   + 2Lϵ  .
                                                                                 N          t



The following Lemma shows that the event E SBIP happens with large probability. The detailed proof
can be found in Appendix E.6.
                                                       1/2      −1
                                                 2
Lemma 8. For the choice µ = ϵ P d log 1+B      δ
                                                   T
                                                           + A     and Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , it
holds that
                         P E SBIP ≥ 1 − 2δ − 4δ(2K + 1) − 4δ(2K + 1)T.


                                                                            −1
Note that the choice δ = T (38 + 16P ϵ−1 + 16P ϵ−1 T + 36T )                          ensures that the event E SBIP
happens with probability at least 1 − T −1 .
The following Lemma (whose proof is located in Appendix E.7) shows that the upper and lower
confidence bounds used in Algorithm 6 hold conditioned on the high-probability event E SBIP .
Lemma 9. Under the assumptions of Lemma 8 and conditioned on the event E SBIP , we have that for
      / TTpar
all t ∈          int             ′
           +1 ∪ T , and all (k, k ) ∈ At ;

                     LCBt (k, k ′ ) ≤ EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs                   ′
                                                 t θt + kϵ) ≤ UCBt (k, k ).

Moreover, it holds that (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ Kt , where we recall that

                              (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ arg max EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs
                                                                 t θt + kϵ).
                                           (k,k′ )∈At


Finally, we bound the number of times a sub-optimal price increment kϵ can be selected. For p ∈ R,
x ∈ Rd , recall that we defined
                              r(x, p) = max
                                         ′
                                            EGFT(x, p′ ) − EGFT(x, p).
                                           p


Lemma 10. Conditioned on the event E SBIP , if t ∈ Ts,k
                                                     SE
                                                        , then the following condition holds
                                                             s
                                                                2 log(1/δ)
                     r(xt , pt ) ≤ (50P L + 28)ϵ + 16P                     .
                                                                   Nts,k
                    SE
Similarly, if t ∈ Tb,k ′ , then the following condition holds

                                                                    s
                                                                        2 log(1/δ)
                           r(xt , pt ) ≤ (50P L + 28)ϵ + 16P                      ′     .
                                                                          Ntb,k

                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The proof for this result can be found in Appendix E.8.
We are now ready to bound the regret of SBIP. We begin by decomposing the regret as
                        X                   X                X
                RT =          r(xt , pt ) +    r(xt , pt ) +       r(xt , pt ).
                             t∈TTpar+1               t∈T int                  / Tpar+1 ∪T int
                                                                             t∈T

Since the gain from trade is bounded by 2P , this implies
                                                                          X
                           RT ≤ 2P |TTpar          int
                                       +1 | + 2P |T | +                                 r(xt , pt ).
                                                                      / Tpar+1 ∪T int
                                                                     t∈T

                                                                                   1/2      −1
                                                                             2
Then, using Lemma 4, by setting µ                     =        ϵ P d log 1+B
                                                                           δ
                                                                               T
                                                                                       + A     and Tint                         =
8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 we have
                                 s                      !2 
                                                 2T

                         T + d             1 + B
  RT ≤ ϵ−2 2P d log             P d log              + A +
                           d                   δ
                                                                                                       X
                                                                 16ϵ−2 P 3 log(1/δ) +                              r(xt , pt ). (7)
                                                                                                 / Tpar+1 ∪T int
                                                                                                t∈T

To bound the third term (i.e., the regret of the successive elimination phase), we decompose it as
                   X                       X X                     X X
                            r(xt , pt ϵ) =           r(xt , pt ) +           r(xt , pt ).
                 / Tpar+1 ∪T int
                t∈T                                      SE
                                                 k∈K t∈Ts,k                      k′ ∈K t∈T SE ′
                                                                                             b,k

                              SE                           SE       SE
For k ∈ K, let us partition Ts,k as follows. We denote by Ts,k = |Ts,k |, and we define t1 , . . . , tTs,k
                                                                                                       SE

                       SE                                                                             SE
the rounds where t ∈ Ts,k                                            SE , and {t1 , ..., tT SE } = T
                          . More formally, we have t1 < t2 < ... < tTs,k                   s,k       s,k .
We define a = ⌊− log2 (2(50P L + 28)ϵ)⌋, and for a ∈ J1, aK, we define
                                                                              2
                                           ta = 2 log(1/δ) · (32P 2a ) .
With these notation, we have
       X                   X
            r(xt , pt ) =                 r(xti , pti )
           SE
       t∈Ts,k                       SE
                             i≤t1 ∧Ts,k

                             a−1
                             X                X                                             X
                         +                                     r(xti , pti ) +                              r(xti , pti ).
                             a=1 ta ∧T SE <i≤ta+1 ∧T SE                                    SE ≤i≤T SE
                                                                                  (ta +1)∧Ts,k
                                      s,k           s,k                                           s,k

                             SE
For 1 ≤ a ≤ a, if ta ≤ i ≤ Ts,k , by definition of ta , we have
                                                    s
                                                        2 log(1/δ)   2−a
                           (50P L + 28)ϵ ≤ 16P               s,k
                                                                   ≤     ,
                                                           Nt i       2

and Lemma 10 implies that, conditioned on the high-probability event E SBIP ,
                                                 r(xti , pti ) ≤ 2−a .
Using the fact that r(xt , pt ) ≤ 2P , we obtain
                   X                                 a−1
                                                     X
                          r(xt , pt ) ≤ 2P t1 +            2−a (ta+1 − ⌈ta ⌉ + 1) + 2−a · Ts,k
                                                                                           SE

                     SE
                 t∈Ts,k                              a=1

                                                     a−1
                                                     X
                                         ≤ 2P t1 +         2−a (ta+1 − ta + 1) + 2−a · Ts,k
                                                                                        SE
                                                                                            .
                                                     a=1



                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Then,
                               a−1
                               X                                                      a−1
                                                                                      X
                                                                                2
                                     2−a (ta+1 − ta ) = 6 log(1/δ) · (32P )                 2a
                               a=1                                                    a=1
                                                                                2      a
                                                        = 6 log(1/δ) · (32P ) 2
                                                                                  2
                                                            3 log(1/δ) · (32P )
                                                        ≤
                                                               (50P L + 28)ϵ
Moreover, we have that
                                        2−a · Ts,k
                                               SE                   SE
                                                   ≤ 2(50P L + 28)ϵTs,k .
Therefore,
                                                                  2
   X                                        2  3 log(1/δ) · (32P )                       SE
         r(xt , pt ) ≤ 4P log(1/δ) · (128P ) +                      + 1 + 2(50P L + 28)ϵTs,k .
      SE
                                                  (50P L + 28)ϵ
    t∈Ts,k
                                       P
We proceed similarly to bound                 SE r(xt , pt ), and we obtain that
                                          t∈Tb,k

                                                                                2
      X                                             2       3 log(1/δ) · (32P )                      SE
             r(xt , pt ) ≤ 4P log(1/δ) · (128P ) +                              + 1 + 2(50P L + 28)ϵTb,k .
        SE
                                                               (50P L + 28)ϵ
    t∈Tb,k

Summing over k ∈ K and k ′ ∈ K, and using the fact that                        SE     SE
                                                                     P
                                                                          k∈K Ts,k + Tb,k ≤ T , we find
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                  2
             X                                                         3 log(1/δ) × (32P )
                                                                          2
                           r(xt , pt ϵ) ≤ 2|K| 4P log(1/δ) × (128P ) +                     +1
                                                                           (50P L + 28)ϵ
         / Tpar+1 ∪T
        t∈T            int


                                  + 2(50P L + 28)ϵT.                                                          (8)
Combining Equations (7) and (8), we find that, conditioned on the event E SBIP ,
                          q                          2
                                     1+B 2 T
        2P d log T +d

                         P    d  log           +  A
                   d                    δ                 18P 3 log(1/δ)
  RT ≤                         2
                                                       +
                             ϵ                                   ϵ2      !
                                                                    2
                                          2    3 log(1/δ) × (32P )
        + 2|K| 4P log(1/δ) × (128P ) +                                + 1 + 2(50P L + 28)ϵT.
                                                   (50P L + 28)ϵ

                                 1                                  −1
By setting ϵ = (d2 log(T )2 /T ) 3 and δ = (38 + 16P ϵ−1 )(T + 1)2     , and using the definition of
                                           ′
K, we find that there exists a constant C depending on A, B C, and L such that with probability
                                         e
1 − 20T −2/3 ,
                                                  e ′ (d log(T )T ) /3 .
                                             RT ≤ C
                                                                      2


This concludes the proof of Theorem 2. Note that we can choose C e = 461P 3 + 100P L + 56, and
the result holds provided that T is large enough (namely, that T ≥ 2(38 + 16P ), that 10 ≤ P/ϵ,
that P 2 × 16                        3                   2                              2 1/3
            3 d log(T ) ≥ A, that P log(T ) ≥ 1, that B + 1 ≤ T , and that (T / log(T ) )     ≥
    2          2
331 /102 × P ).

E     P ROOFS OF AUXILIARY LEMMAS
E.1     P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Lemma 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the expected gain from trade for x at price p is given by
                           EGFT(x, p) = I(δ b )F s (δ s ) + J(δ s )Db (δ b ),                                 (4)
                                                RC b                          Rδ
where δ s := p − x⊤  s b          ⊤ b                                            s
                  t θ , δ := p − xt θ , I(δ) := δ D (u)du, and J(δ) := −C F (u)du.


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The proof relies on the characterization of the gain from trade given by Lemma 4.1 in Cesa-
Bianchi et al. (2021). Recall that, under Assumption 1, we have ξts ∈ [−C, C], and ξtb ∈ [−C, C].
Then, denoting f s and f b the densities of ξts and ξtb , we have
EGFT(x, p)
     Z
   =                                                                 (b − s)I{s ≤ p ≤ b}f b (x⊤ θb − s)f s (x⊤ θs − s) ds db.
          (s,b)∈[x⊤ θ s −C,x⊤ θ s +C]×[x⊤ θ b −C,x⊤ θ b +C]

Let f˜b : b 7→ f b (x⊤ θb − s) and f˜s : s 7→ f s (x⊤ θs − s) be the densities of st and bt conditionnally
on xt = x, and note that outside of [x⊤ θb − C, x⊤ θb + C] × [x⊤ θs − C, x⊤ θs + C], f˜s (s)f˜b (b) = 0.
With these notation, we have  Z
               EGFT(x, p) =                              (b − s)I{s ≤ p ≤ b}f˜b (b)f˜s (s) ds db
                                   (s,b)∈[−P,P ]2
                                  Z                                     Z b                Z s       !
                              =                                                 du −              du f˜s (s)f˜b (b) ds db.
                                   (s,b)∈[−P,p]×[p,P ]                   −P                 −P
Thus,
                                      Z                  Z                                                            !
                   EGFT(x, p) =                                                              f˜s (s)f˜b (b) ds db du
                                       [−P,P ]           (s,b)∈[−P,p]×[p∨u,P ]
                                           Z                 Z                                             !
                                      −                                                    ˜s   ˜b
                                                                                           f (s)f (b) ds db du.
                                             [−P,p]               (s,b)∈[u,p]×[p,P ]

This yields
                                       Z                 Z                                                 !
                   EGFT(x, p) =                                                            ˜s   ˜b
                                                                                           f (s)f (b) ds db du
                                          [−P,p]             (s,b)∈[−P,p]×[p,P ]
                                            Z                Z                                                      !
                                       +                                                    ˜s       ˜b
                                                                                            f (s)f (b) ds db du
                                               [p,P ]         (s,b)∈[−P,p]×[u,P ]
                                            Z                 Z                                             !
                                       −                                                    ˜s   ˜b
                                                                                            f (s)f (b) ds db du.
                                               [−P,p]             (s,b)∈[u,p]×[p,P ]
This, in turn, implies that
                                       Z                 Z                                                        !
                   EGFT(x, p) =                                                            ˜s       ˜b
                                                                                           f (s)f (b) ds db du
                                           [−P,p]            (s,b)∈[−P,u]×[p,P ]
                                            Z                Z                                              !
                                       +                                                    ˜s   ˜b
                                                                                            f (s)f (b) ds db du
                                                [p,P ]           (s,b)∈[−P,p]×[u,P ]
                                       Z                            Z            Z
                                   =                f˜b (b) dd                               f˜s (s) ds du
                                           [p,P ]                     [−P,p]      [−P,u]
                                            Z                            Z             Z
                                       +                     ˜s
                                                         f (s) ds                                f˜b (b) db du.
                                                [−P,p]                        [p,P ]   [u,P ]
By using the change in variables ξ s = s−x⊤ θs , us = u−x⊤ θs , ξ b = b−x⊤ θb , and ub = u−x⊤ θb ,
and the definition of f˜s and f˜b , we get
                  Z                                     Z        Z
  EGFT(x, p) =                             f (ξ b ) dd                                   f (ξ s ) dξ s du
                    [p−x⊤ θ b ,P −x⊤ θ b ]                [−P,p] [−P −x⊤ θ s ,u−x⊤ θ s ]
                      Z                                        Z      Z
                  +                              f (ξ s ) dξ s                                f (ξ b ) dξ b du
                       [−P −x⊤ θ s ,p−x⊤ θ s ]                  [p,P ] [u−x⊤ θ b ,P −x⊤ θ b ]
                  Z                                      Z                        Z
                =                          f (ξ b ) dξ b                                               f (ξ s ) dξ s dus
                    [p−x⊤ θ b ,P −x⊤ θ b ]                 [−P −x⊤ θ s ,p−x⊤ θ s ] [−P −x⊤ θ s ,us ]
                      Z                                        Z                     Z
                  +                              f (ξ s ) dξ s                                          f (ξ b ) dξ b dub .
                          [−P −x⊤ θ s ,p−x⊤ θ s ]                             [p−x⊤ θ b ,P −x⊤ θ b ]      [ub ,P −x⊤ θ b ]



                                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Now, under Assumption 1, f b and f s are null outside of [−C, C]. Moreover, P − x⊤ θb ≥ C and
−P − x⊤ θs ≤ −C. Thus,
                Z                         Z              Z
                                   b
   EGFT(x, p) =                f (ξ ) dd                           f (ξ s ) dξ s dus
                 [p−x⊤ θ b ,C]             [−C,p−x⊤ θ s ] [−C,us ]
                   Z                            Z           Z
                                        s     s
                +                   f (ξ ) dξ                         f (ξ b ) dξ b dub
                           [−C,p−x⊤ θ s ]                 [p−x⊤ θ b ,C]    [ub ,C]
                                       Z p−x⊤ θs                                             Z C
                 =Db (p − x⊤ θb )                   F s (us ) dus + F s (p − x⊤ θs )                     Db (ub ) dub .
                                            −C                                                p−x⊤ θ b

Using the definition of δ s = p − x⊤ θs and δ b = p − x⊤ θb , we obtain the desired result.

E.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

Lemma 4. Almost surely, the length of exploration phase TTpar
                                                           +1 is bounded as

                                              d log T +d

                                   |TTpar
                                       +1 | ≤
                                                      d
                                                           .
                                                   µ2

Proof. The elliptical potential Lemma (see, e.g., Proposition 1 in Carpentier et al. (2020)) implies
that almost surely,
                                                       v                             !
                                                       u                  par
                  X                                    u par          |T T +1  | + d
                        ∥xt ∥ P                   −1 ≤ t|T
                                                          T +1 |d log                 .
                                   par xl x⊤ +Id                              d
                    par         l∈Tt       l
                 t∈TT +1

Since for all t ∈ TTpar
                     +1 , ∥xt ∥ P
                                                         −1 ≥ µ, this implies that
                                        par xl x⊤ +Id
                                     l∈Tt       l

                                             v                                     !
                                                                      |TTpar
                                             u
                                                                          +1 | + d
                                    par
                                             u
                                 |TT +1 |µ ≤ t|T par |d log
                                                    T +1                            .
                                                                             d

Now, almost surely, |TTpar
                        +1 | ≤ T . This implies in particular that

                                                  d log T +d

                                          par             d
                                       |TT +1 | ≤               ,
                                                       µ2
which concludes the proof.

E.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 5
                               q                                                 −1
                                                            1+B 2 T
                                                                                      , Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , and

Lemma 5. For the choice µ = ϵ P d log                         δ           +A
TFD = 2 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 , it holds that
                                     P E EOC ≥ 1 − 2δ − 8δ(2K + 1).



Proof. The Lemma is a consequence of the following two auxiliary results, bounding respectively
the error for estimating the parameters θs and θb , and the integrals I and J.
Lemma 11. Let E1 be the event :
                 n                                                                                     o
          E1 := ∀t ∈  / TTpar
                           +1 ,              x⊤  bb    b
                                              t (θt − θ ) ≤ ϵ             and        x⊤
                                                                                      t (θbs − θs ) ≤ ϵ .
                                                                                           t
                                               1/2     −1
                                     1+B 2 T
Then, for the choice µ = ϵ P d log     δ           +A     , we have P (E1 ) ≥ 1 − 2δ.

The proof of the above lemma is deferred to Appendix E.9.


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Lemma 12. Let E2 be the event:
           n                                                                        o
     E2 := |T int | < Tint or ∀k ∈ K          Ibk − I (kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ and Jbk − J(kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ ∩ E1 .
                                               1/2     −1
                                     1+B 2 T
Then, for the choice µ = ϵ P d log     δ           +A     and Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , we have

                                     P (E2 ) ≥ 1 − 2δ − 4δ(2K + 1).

The proof of the above lemma is deferred to Appendix E.10.
Next, we control the error |Fbk − F s (kϵ)| uniformly for k ∈ K. The results for |D
                                                                                  b k − Db (kϵ)|
follow from similar arguments. To do so, we rely on the following well known result (for the sake
of completeness, we provide a proof in Appendix E.11).

Lemma 13. Let (yt )t≥1 be a sequence of random variables adapted for a filtration Ft , such that
yt − E P[yt |Ft−1 ] ∈ [m, M ]. Assume that for t ∈ N∗ , ιt ∈ {0, 1} is Ft−1 -measurable, and define
                               −1 P
Nt  :=     l≤t ιl , and µ
                        bt := Nt    l≤t ιl (yl − E [yl |Fl−1 ]) if Nt ≥ 1. Then, for any t ∈ N∗ and
δ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                       s            
                                                           log(1/δ)
                       P Nt = 0 or |bµt | ≤ (M − m)                  ≥ 1 − 2tδ.
                                                              2Nt

Moreover, for any t > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                            s            
                                                                 log(1/δ) 
                      P Nt = t and |b
                                     µt | ≥ (M − m)                         ≤ 1 − 2δ.
                                                                   2Nt


For t ≤ T , we define ιt := I t ∈ TkF , yt := I {st ≤ pt }, and we observe that for Ft =
σ ((x1 , . . . , xt+1 , (I{s1 ≤ p1 }, I{b1 ≤ p1 }), . . . , (I{st ≤ pt }, I{bt ≤ pt })), ιt is Ft−1 -measurable,
and yt is Ft adapted. Moreover,

                              ιt E [yt | Ft−1 ] = ιt P x⊤   t θ s
                                                                  + ξt
                                                                      s
                                                                        ≤  x⊤ bs
                                                                             θ
                                                                            t t  + kϵ

                                                       s      ⊤ bs       s
                                                = ιt F xt θt − θ + kϵ .

Using Lemma 13, we find that with probability 1 − 2δ, either |TkF | < TFD , or

                                     s    ⊤ bs       s
                        P
                               ι   F    x    θ   − θ     + kϵ
                                                                  r
                           s≤t   t        t    t                     2 log(1/δ)
                   k
                 Ft −
                 b
                                            FD                  ≤               .
                                           T                             TFD

Moreover, on the event E1 , for all t ∈/ T par , |x⊤  bs    s                             s
                                                   t (θt − θ )| ≤ ϵ. Using the fact that F is L-Lipschitz,
we find that

                             F s x⊤  t
                                         bs − θs + kϵ − F s (kϵ) ≤ Lϵ.
                                         θ t


Thus, with probability 1 − 2δ, either |TkF | < TFD , or
                                                   r
                                  k     s             2 log(1/δ)
                               Ft − F (kϵ) ≤
                                b                                + Lϵ.
                                                          TFD
Using Lemma 11 and 12, along with a union bound over k ∈ K yields the desired result for the
choice TFD = 2 log(1/δ)ϵ−2 .


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.4   P ROOF OF L EMMA 6

Lemma 6. On the event E EOC , for all t ∈ T C , and all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At ,
                     ′
                                b k′ − EGFT(xt , x⊤
                  Ibk Fbk + Jbk D                   bs
                                                  t θt + kϵ) ≤ (10P L + 4P + 7)ϵ.


Proof. The proof relies on the following result :
Lemma 14. On the event E ETC , for all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At , and p = x⊤ bs
                                                                 t θt + kϵ, we have
                   ′
   EGFT(xt , p) − Ibk Fbk + Jbk D b k′ ≤ 6P Lϵ + 3ϵ + 2P |∆F       b | + |∆D|
                                                                          b      + |∆I|
                                                                                    b + |∆J|
                                                                                         b

                b = I(k ′ ϵ) − Ibk′ , ∆J
where we define ∆I                    b = J(kϵ) − Jbk , ∆F
                                                        b = F (kϵ) − Fbk , ∆D             b k′ .
                                                                           b = D(k ′ ϵ) − D

The proof of this intermediate result is in Appendix E.12.
To conclude the proof of Lemma 6, it remains to bound the gaps ∆F
                                                                b , ∆D,
                                                                    b   ∆I,
                                                                        b and ∆J  b on the
       ETC                            ETC
event E . By definition of the event E , on this event ∆I ≤ 2ϵ, ∆D ≤ (L + 1)ϵ, ∆J ≤ 2ϵ and
                                                       b        b               b
b ≤ (L + 1)ϵ. Thus, on the event E ETC ,
∆F
                               ′
                                          b k′ ≤ 6P Lϵ + 3ϵ + 4P (L + 1)ϵ + 4ϵ.
             EGFT(xt , p) − Ibk Fbk + Jbk D
This concludes the proof.

E.5   P ROOF OF L EMMA 7

Lemma 7. On the event E EOC , we have that

                        max EGFT(xt , p) − EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗
                                                      t θt + kt ϵ) ≤ 2LP ϵ.
                          p


Proof. By definition of At ,
                               sup       EGFT(xt , p) ≥ EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs    ∗
                                                                   t θt + kt ϵ).
                             p∈[−P,P ]

Since the mapping p 7→ EGFT(x, p) is continuous, we can define
                                                                                         
                                      $
                                         ∗      ⊤ bs
                                                     %                 x⊤ θbs − θbb + k̃ 
                                        p  −  x  θ                       t   t     t     t
    p∗t ∈ arg max EGFT(xt , p), k̃t =    t      t t
                                                                      
                                                       , and k̃ ′ t =                    .
              p                              ϵ                                  ϵ

We now show that (k̃t , k̃t′ ) ∈ At . By Lemma 1, we have that p∗t − x⊤   s             ∗   ⊤ b
                                                                       t θ ≥ −C, and pt − xt θ ≤ C
                         ∗                               ∗      ⊤ s
(otherwise EGFT(xt , pt ) = 0). This implies that pt − xt θ ∈ [−2P, 2P ], and similarly that
p∗t − x⊤  b
       t θ ∈ [−2P, 2P ].

On the one hand, on the event E ETC , x⊤  t   θs − θbts ≤ ϵ, so p∗t − x⊤ bs
                                                                       t θt ∈ [−2P − ϵ, 2P + ϵ]. Thus,

k̃t ∈ K. On the other hand,

          x⊤t   θbts − θbtb + k̃t ϵ = x⊤ bs            ∗     ∗    ⊤ b      ⊤
                                       t θt + k̃t ϵ − pt + (pt − xt θ ) + xt   θb − θbtb .
Then, on the event E ETC ,

                               x⊤
                                t
                                    bs − θbb + k̃t ϵ ∈ [−2P − 2ϵ, 2P + 2ϵ],
                                    θ t    t

, so kt′ ∈ [−2P − 3ϵ, 2P + 3ϵ]. Therefore, k̃t′ ∈ K. This implies that (k̃t , k̃t′ ) ∈ At , so
                        EGFT(xt , x⊤ θbs + k ∗ ϵ) ≥ EGFT(xt , x⊤ θbs + k̃t ϵ).
                                           t   t   t                 t   t
Finally, Lemma 1 and Assumption 2 imply that the function p 7→ EGFT(xt , p) is 2LP -Lipschitz
continuous. This, in turn, implies that
                         EGFT(xt , p∗ ) − EGFT(xt , x⊤ θbs + k̃t ϵ) ≤ 2LP ϵ.
                                           t                t   t
This proves the statement.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.6    P ROOF OF L EMMA 8
                                                1/2      −1
                                          2
Lemma 8. For the choice µ = ϵ P d log 1+B
                                        δ
                                            T
                                                    + A     and Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , it
holds that
                          P E SBIP ≥ 1 − 2δ − 4δ(2K + 1) − 4δ(2K + 1)T.



Proof. The proof relies on Lemma 11 and 12. On top of these results, we have to control the
error |Fbtk − F s (kϵ)|    uniformly      for k ∈ K. To do so, we rely on Lemma 13. For t ≤ T ,
we define ιt = I t ∈        / T int ∪ TTpar
                                          +1 and kt = k , yt = I {st ≤ pt }, and we note that for Ft =
σ ((x1 , . . . , xt+1 , (I{s1 ≤ p1 }, I{b1 ≤ p1 }), . . . , (I{st ≤ pt }, I{bt ≤ pt })), ιt is Ft−1 -measurable,
and yt is Ft adapted. Moreover,

                               ιt E [yt | Ft−1 ] = ιt P x⊤  t θ s
                                                                  +   ξ s
                                                                        t ≤ x ⊤ bs
                                                                               θ
                                                                              t t  + kϵ

                                                 = ιt F s x⊤  t   θbts − θs + kϵ .

Using Lemma 13, we find that with probability 1 − 2δt, either Nts,k = 0 or

                                     s    ⊤ bs        s
                         P
                                                  −
                                                                   s
                           s≤t ι t F    x t   θ t   θ     + kϵ       2 log(1/δ)
                 Fbtk −                     s,k
                                                                 ≤
                                          Nt                            Nts,k

                                                                                              / T par ,
(where we recall that we adopt the convention 1/0 = ∞). Moreover, on the event E1 , for all t ∈
  ⊤ bs     s                s
|xt (θt − θ )| ≤ ϵ. Since F is L-Lipschitz, this implies

                           |F s x⊤ t
                                      bs − θs + kϵ − F s (kϵ) | ≤ Lϵ.
                                      θ t

Thus, with probability 1 − 2δt,
                                                         s
                                                              2 log(1/δ)
                                   Fbtk − F s (kϵ) ≤                       + Lϵ.
                                                                Nts,k
                                     / T int ∪ TTpar
Using a union bound over k ∈ K and t ∈            +1 yields the desired result.


Next, we can bound |D     b k − Db (kϵ)| using similar arguments. In particular, we define ιt =
                            t
                par
    / T ∪ TT +1 and kt′ = k , yt = I {bt ≥ pt } and note that
       int
I t∈

        ιt E [yt | Ft−1 ] = ιt P x⊤
                                  t θ b
                                        + ξ b
                                            t ≥ x ⊤ bs
                                                    θ
                                                  t t  + kt ϵ F t−1
                                                                                       !!
                                b   ⊤ bb

                                                b
                                                              x⊤  bs    ⊤ bb
                                                                t θt − xt θt + kt ϵ
                          = ιt D xt θt − θ + kϵ + ϵ                                 −k    .
                                                                        ϵ
                                                              x⊤ bs   ⊤ bb
                                                               t θt −xt θt +kt ϵ
By definition of At , we have that if ιt = 1, then                    ϵ          −k   ≤ 1. Using the Lipschitz
                 b
continuity of D , this implies that, conditioned on the event E1 ,
                                    ιt E [yt | Ft−1 ] − Db (kϵ) ≤ 2Lϵ.
The rest of the proof follows similarly.

E.7    P ROOF OF L EMMA 9

Lemma 9. Under the assumptions of Lemma 8 and conditioned on the event E SBIP , we have that for
      / TTpar
all t ∈          int             ′
           +1 ∪ T , and all (k, k ) ∈ At ;

                      LCBt (k, k ′ ) ≤ EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs                   ′
                                                  t θt + kϵ) ≤ UCBt (k, k ).
Moreover, it holds that (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ Kt , where we recall that
                               (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ arg max EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs
                                                                  t θt + kϵ).
                                            (k,k′ )∈At


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Let us prove the first part of Lemma 9. By Lemma 14, and by definition of the event E SBIP ,
                                           / TTpar
we have for all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At , and all t ∈          int
                                                +1 ∪ T ,
                    ′
 EGFT(xt , p) − Ibk Fbk + Jbk D    b k′
                                                          s               s                    !
                                                            2 log(1/δ)      2 log(1/δ)
                                   ≤ 6P Lϵ + 3ϵ + 2P                    +            ′    + 3Lϵ + 4ϵ
                                                               Nts,k           Ntb,k
                                                           s                s              !
                                                               2 log(1/δ)      2 log(1/δ)
                                   ≤ (12P L + 7)ϵ + 2P                    +             ′    .
                                                                  Nts,k           Ntb,k

This concludes the first part of Lemma 9. The second claim follows immediately by noticing that
by definition, (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ∈ At , and that, for all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At ,
      LCBt (k, k ′ ) ≤ EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs                    ⊤ bs    ∗             ∗ ′∗
                                  t θt + kϵ) ≤ EGFT(xt , xt θt + kt ϵ) ≤ UCBt (kt , kt ).

This concludes the proof.

E.8     P ROOF OF L EMMA 10

Lemma 10. Conditioned on the event E SBIP , if t ∈ Ts,k
                                                     SE
                                                        , then the following condition holds
                                                             s
                                                                2 log(1/δ)
                     r(xt , pt ) ≤ (50P L + 28)ϵ + 16P                     .
                                                                   Nts,k
                    SE
Similarly, if t ∈ Tb,k ′ , then the following condition holds

                                                                      s
                                                                          2 log(1/δ)
                            r(xt , pt ) ≤ (50P L + 28)ϵ + 16P                       ′   .
                                                                            Ntb,k

                             SE
Proof. Assume that t ∈ Ts,k     . Then, our choice of kt together with Lemma 9 ensures that, condi-
                      SBIP
tioned on the event E      ,
                                    UCBt (kt , kt′ ) ≥ LCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ).
This implies that

  LCBt (kt , kt′ ) + (UCBt (kt , kt′ ) − LCBt (kt , kt′ )) ≥
                                                   UCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) + (LCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) − UCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ )) .
Using again Lemma 9, this implies that
  EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs                       ′                 ′              ∗ ′∗              ∗ ′∗
             t θ + kt ϵ) + (UCBt (kt , kt ) − LCBt (kt , kt )) + (UCBt (kt , kt ) − LCBt (kt , kt ))

                         ≥ EGFT(xt , x⊤ θbs + k ∗ ϵ).
                                               t         t

Thus,
 EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs   ∗                 ⊤ bs
            t θ + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , xt θ + kt ϵ)
                            ≤ (UCBt (kt , kt′ ) − LCBt (kt , kt′ )) + (UCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) − LCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ )) .
Then, conditioned on the event E SBIP ,
                                                                       s                        s                 !
                                                                           2 log(1/δ)               2 log(1/δ)
      UCBt (kt , kt′ ) − LCBt (kt , kt′ ) ≤ 2(12P L + 7)ϵ + 4P                              +                 ′       .
                                                                              Nts,k                   Ntb,k
                                   b,kt′
            SE
Since t ∈ Ts,k , we know that Nt           ≥ Nts,kt . Then, we have that
                                                                                 s
                                                                                        2 log(1/δ)
                 UCBt (kt , kt′ ) − LCBt (kt , kt′ ) ≤ 2(12P L + 7)ϵ + 8P                             .
                                                                                            Nts,k


                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                   b,kt′∗                               s,kt∗
                       SE
Similarly, since t ∈ Ts,k , we have that Nt                 ≥ Nts,kt , and Nt
                                                                        ≥ Nts,kt , so we also have
                                                                            s
                                                                              2 log(1/δ)
               UCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) − LCBt (kt∗ , kt′∗ ) ≤ 2(12P L + 7)ϵ + 8P                .
                                                                                   Nts,k
Thus,
                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                     2 log(1/δ)
      EGFT(xt , x⊤ bs   ∗                 ⊤ bs
                 t θ + kt ϵ) − EGFT(xt , xt θ + kt ϵ) ≤ 4(12P L + 7)ϵ + 16P                                                       .
                                                                                                                       Nts,k
By Lemma 7, this implies
                                                                                           s
                                                                                                2 log(1/δ)
                       r(xt , x⊤ bs
                               t θ + kt ϵ) ≤ (50P L + 28)ϵ + 16P                                             .
                                                                                                   Nts,k
The proof of the second claim follows from similar arguments.

E.9     P ROOF OF L EMMA 11

Lemma 11. Let E1 be the event :
                    n                                                                    o
              E1 := ∀t ∈/ TTpar
                             +1 , x ⊤ bb
                                    t ( θ t −   θ b
                                                    ) ≤ ϵ    and     x ⊤ bs
                                                                       t (θ t − θ s
                                                                                    ) ≤ ϵ .
                                                  1/2        −1
                                            2
Then, for the choice µ = ϵ P d log 1+B    δ
                                              T
                                                       +  A     , we have P (E1 ) ≥ 1 − 2δ.


Proof. Let us prove the bound |x⊤   bs   s                                             ⊤ bb     b
                                t (θt − θ )| ≤ ϵ with high probability; the bound on |xt (θt − θ )|
will follow from similar arguments.
We introduce the variables

                              par                                       par                                     1
            x̃t := xt I t ∈ Tt+1             and      ỹt := 2P I t ∈ Tt+1                       I {pt ≤ st } −
                                                                                                                2
and the σ-algebra Ft = σ ((x1 , . . . , xt+1 , (I{s1 ≤ p1 }, I{b1 ≤ p1 }), . . . , (I{st ≤ pt }, I{bt ≤ pt })) .
                                                     par
With these notation, we have that x˜t and {t ∈ Tt+1      } are Ft -measurable. Moreover,
                                                  Z P                                !
                                    par                                  du
          E [ỹt |Ft−1 ] = I t ∈ Tt+1 · 2P             P [u ≤ st |Ft−1 ]       −P
                                                   −P                    2P
                                              Z P Z C                                             !
                                    par
                                                         I u ≤ x⊤     s          s

                         = I t ∈ Tt+1 ·                            t θ + ξ f (ξ) dξ du − P
                                                     −P       −C
                                                   Z C Z ξ+x⊤
                                                            t θ
                                                                s
                                                                                                      !
                                       par                                          s
                        =I       t ∈ Tt+1    ·                                 duf (ξ) dξ − P
                                                     −C       −P
                                                                   Z C                      !
                                       par
                                                   x⊤  s
                                                                              ξf s (ξ) dξ

                        =I       t ∈ Tt+1    ·      t θ +
                                                                       −C
                                      par
                                            x⊤    s

                            = I t ∈ Tt+1      t θ
                                              RC
where in the last equality we used that −C ξf s (ξ) dξ = E [ξts ] = 0. Thus, conditionally on Ft−1 ,
ỹt − x̃⊤  s
        t θ is centered and it belongs to [−P, P ], which implies that it is P -subgaussian. Now, for
all t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, we have
                                                      −1
                                   X                       X                   1

                      θbts = 2P          xl x⊤
                                              l  +  Id
                                                               I {pt ≥ st } −     xl
                                     par                    par
                                                                               2
                                  l∈TT +1                              s∈TT +1
                                                 !−1
                            X                           X
                      =           x̃l x̃⊤
                                        l + Id                    ỹl x̃l .
                            l<t                             l<t



                                                                  28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Using the fact that, for all t ≤ 1, ∥x̃t ∥ ≤ B and ∥θs ∥ ≤ A, and applying Theorem 2 by Abbasi-
Yadkori et al. (2011), we find that for all t ≥ 0, with probability 1 − δ,
                                                      s
                                                                1 + B2T

                          s    s
                       ∥θbt − θ ∥Ps<t x̃l x̃⊤
                                            l +Id
                                                  ≤ P   d log              + A.
                                                                    δ
Note that our definitions of x̃t and ỹt ensure that
                         ∥θbts − θs ∥P       par xl x⊤
                                                     l +Id
                                                                = ∥θbts − θs ∥Ps<t x̃l x̃⊤
                                                                                         l +Id
                                                                                               .
                                         s∈T
                                            T +1


Moreover, for all t,
            |x⊤  bs    s       ⊤
              t (θt − θ )| ≤ ∥xt ∥ P
                                                                       bs − θs ∥ P
                                                                   −1 ∥θ
                                                                        t
                                                                                                              .
                                                par xl x⊤
                                                        l +Id                            s∈T
                                                                                             par xl x⊤
                                                                                                     l +Id
                                            s∈T                                             T +1
                                               T +1


                    / TTpar
In particular, if t ∈           ⊤
                         +1 , ∥xt ∥ P
                                                                 −1 ≤ µ, so with probability 1 − δ,
                                         s∈T
                                               par  xl x⊤
                                                        l +Id
                                               T +1

                                                          s                                !
                                                                          1 + B2T

                          |x⊤  bs    s
                            t (θt − θ )| ≤ µ          P       d log                     +A .
                                                                             δ
                      q                                     −1
                                      1+B 2 T

For the choice µ = ϵ P d log            δ             +A         , this implies that

                                                |x⊤  bs    s
                                                  t (θt − θ )| ≤ ϵ,

which concludes the proof.

E.10    P ROOF OF L EMMA 12

Lemma 12. Let E2 be the event:
           n                                                                            o
     E2 := |T int | < Tint or ∀k ∈ K              Ibk − I (kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ and Jbk − J(kϵ) ≤ 2ϵ ∩ E1 .
                                             1/2      −1
                                       2
Then, for the choice µ = ϵ P d log 1+B
                                     δ
                                         T
                                                 + A     and Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , we have

                                      P (E2 ) ≥ 1 − 2δ − 4δ(2K + 1).

Proof. We control the error Ibk − I (kϵ) uniformly for k ≤ K; the result for Jbk − J(kϵ) can be
proved analogously.
                                                                   n                      o
For k ≤ K, and t ≤ T , let us define ιt = I t ∈ T int , yt = 2P I kϵ + x⊤

                                                                              bb ≤ pl ≤ bt and
                                                                              θ
                                                                            t t
note that for Ft = σ ((x1 , . . . , xt+1 , (I{s1 ≤ p1 }, I{b1 ≤ p1 }), . . . , (I{st ≤ pt }, I{bt ≤ pt })), ιt is
Ft−1 -measurable, and yt is Ft -adapted. Moreover,
                                            h                                i
                  E [yt |Ft−1 ] = 2P P kϵ + x⊤        θbb ≤ pt ≤ bt | Ft−1
                                                     t t
                                         Z P         Z C
                                                                                          du
                                                          I x⊤      b             b

                                 = 2P                          t θ + ξ ≥ u f (ξ) dξ
                                                ⊤  b
                                           kϵ+xt θt −C
                                                  b                                      2P
                                     Z P
                                                D b u − x⊤      b

                                 =                          t θ     du.
                                     kϵ+x⊤ bb
                                         t θt


Using the change in variables u′ = u − x⊤     b
                                           t θ , this implies that
                                             Z P −x⊤t θ
                                                        b

                            E [yt |Ft−1 ] =                   Db (u′ ) du′ .
                                                      kϵ+x⊤ bb   ⊤ b
                                                          t θt −xt θ


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Moreover, under Assumptions 1 and 2, P − x⊤   b              ′           ⊤ b     b ′
                                           t θ ≥ C and, for u ∈ [C, P − xt θ ], D (u ) = 0.
Thus,
                                         Z C
                         E [yt |Ft−1 ] =             Db (u′ ) du′
                                               kϵ+x⊤ bb   ⊤ b
                                                   t θt −xt θ

                                           = I(kϵ + x⊤ bb    ⊤ b
                                                     t θt − xt θ ).

Finally, note that yt − E [yt |Ft−1 ] is in [−2P, 2P ]. Then, using Lemma 13, we find that
                                                                                            
                                                            ⊤ bb        b
                                    P
                                                I   kϵ +  x     θ   − θ
                                                                                  r
                                        t∈T int             t     t                 log(1/δ)
     P |T int | = Tint and Ibk −                                            ≥ 4P             ≤ 2δ.
                                                       Tint                           2Tint

To conclude our proof, note that on the event E1 , for all t ∈ T int , |x⊤  bb    b
                                                                         t (θt − θ )| ≤ ϵ, so with
                             int   int
probability 1 − 2δ, either |T | < T or
                                             Z kϵ+x⊤  bb   b
                                                   t (θt −θ )
               I kϵ + x⊤   bb − θb − I(kϵ) =                  1 − F b (λ) dλ

                       t   θt
                                                          kϵ
                                                        Z kϵ+x⊤  bb   b
                                                              t (θt −θ )
                                                   ≤                       dλ
                                                          kϵ

                                                   ≤ xt θbtb − θb
                                                   ≤ ϵ.
Using the same reasoning to control the error in estimating J, taking a union bound for k ∈ K, and
using Lemma 11, we find that on an event E2 ⊂ E1 of probability larger than 1 − 2δ − 4δ(2K + 1),
either |T int | < Tint or
                                                    r
                                 k                    log(1/δ)
                               I − I(kϵ) ≤ 4P
                               b                                 +ϵ
                                                         2Tint
and
                                                        r
                                                            log(1/δ)
                                  Jbk − J(kϵ) ≤ 4P                   +ϵ
                                                              2Tint
simultaneously for all k ∈ K. For the choice Tint = 8P 2 log(1/δ)/ϵ2 , we obtain the desired result.


E.11    P ROOF OF L EMMA 13

Lemma 13. Let (yt )t≥1 be a sequence of random variables adapted for a filtration Ft , such that
yt − E P[yt |Ft−1 ] ∈ [m, M ]. Assume
                                  P that for t ∈ N∗ , ιt ∈ {0, 1} is Ft−1 -measurable, and define
Nt := l≤t ιl , and µ   bt := Nt−1 l≤t ιl (yl − E [yl |Fl−1 ]) if Nt ≥ 1. Then, for any t ∈ N∗ and
δ ∈ (0, 1),                                                       
                                                      s
                                                         log(1/δ)
                      P Nt = 0 or |b µt | ≤ (M − m)                ≥ 1 − 2tδ.
                                                            2Nt

Moreover, for any t > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                           s            
                                                                log(1/δ) 
                     P Nt = t and |b
                                    µt | ≥ (M − m)                         ≤ 1 − 2δ.
                                                                  2Nt

                           P
Proof. Let us define Zt :=  l≤t ιl (yl − E [yl |Fl−1 ]), and for all x ∈ R let Mt :=
            1 2
                       2
exp x Zt − 8 x (M − m) Nt . We begin by showing that Mt is a super-martingale. Indeed,


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


we have that
   h                                      i      h                                            i
 E exp{x ιt (yt − E [yt |Ft−1 ])}     Ft−1 = E ιt exp{x(yt − E [yt |Ft−1 ])} + (1 − ιt ) Ft−1
                                                       2
                                                      x (M − m)2

                                            ≤ ιt exp                  + (1 − ιt )
                                                            8
                                                     2
                                                    x (M − m)2 ιt

                                            ≤ exp                   ,
                                                          8

where we use the fact that (yt − E [yt | Ft−1 ]) is bounded in [m, M ] together with the conditional
version of Hoeffding’s Lemma. Noticing that

                                                                x2 (M − m)2 ιt

                  Mt = Mt−1 exp x ιt (yt − E [yt |Ft−1 ]) −                      ,
                                                                      8

this proves that Mt is a super-martingale, and so E [Mt ] ≤ E [M0 ] = 1.


Now, for all ϵ > 0 and all l ∈ N, and all x > 0, by a Markov-Chernoff argument,

          P (Zt ≥ ϵ and Nt = l) = P I {Nt = l} exZt ≥ eϵx


                                   ≤ e−ϵx E I {Nt = l} · exZt


                                            x2 (M −m)2 l                       x2 (M −m)2 l
                                   = e−ϵx+        8      E I {Nt = l} · exZt −       8        .

Using the previous result, we have that

                                    x2 (M −m)2 l                             x2 (M −m)2 Nt
                              xZt −                                    xZt −
            E I {Nt = l} · e              8        = E I {Nt = l} · e               8



                                                              x2 (M −m)2 Nt
                                                        xZt −
                                                   ≤E e              8



                                                   = E(Mt )
                                                   ≤ E(M0 ) = 1.

This yields
                                                                x2 (M −m)2 l
                            P (Zt ≥ ϵ and Nt = l) ≤ e−ϵx+             8        .
                               q
In particular, for ϵ = (M − m) l·log(1/δ)
                                     2    and x = l(M4ϵ
                                                      −m)2 ,
                                             r                             !
                                                 l · log(1/δ)
                        P Zt ≥ (M − m)                        and Nt = l           ≤ δ.
                                                       2

This proves the first part of the Lemma. Summing over the values of l from 1 to t, we find that
                                          r                         !
                                            Nt log(1/δ)
                       P Zt ≥ (M − m)                   and Nt ≥ 1 ≤ tδ.
                                                 2

Similar arguments can be used to prove that
                                          r                                    !
                                                 Nt log(1/δ)
                      P −Zt ≥ (M − m)                        and Nt ≥ 1             ≤ tδ.
                                                      2

In order to conclude the proof we observe that Zt = µ̂t Nt , we normalize by Nt , and observe that
adding the case Nt = 0 can only increase the probability.


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.12    P ROOF OF L EMMA 14

Lemma 14. On the event E ETC , for all (k, k ′ ) ∈ At , and p = x⊤ bs
                                                                 t θt + kϵ, we have
                   ′
   EGFT(xt , p) − Ibk Fbk + Jbk D b k′ ≤ 6P Lϵ + 3ϵ + 2P |∆F       b | + |∆D|
                                                                          b      + |∆I|
                                                                                    b + |∆J|
                                                                                         b

                b = I(k ′ ϵ) − Ibk′ , ∆J
where we define ∆I                    b = J(kϵ) − Jbk , ∆F
                                                        b = F (kϵ) − Fbk , ∆D             b k′ .
                                                                           b = D(k ′ ϵ) − D


Proof. By Lemma 1, for any price p = x⊤ bs          ′               ′              s     ⊤ s
                                      t θt +kϵ and k such that (k, k ) ∈ At , and δ = p−xt θ ,
 b        ⊤ b
δ = p − xt θ , we have that

                          EGFT(xt , p) = I(δ b )F s (δ s ) + J(δ s )Db (δ b ).

Then,

            EGFT(xt , p) = I(k ′ ϵ) + I(δ b ) − I(k ′ ϵ) (F s (kϵ) + F s (δ s ) − F s (kϵ)) +


                          (J(kϵ) + J(δ s ) − J(kϵ)) Db (k ′ ϵ) + Db (δ b ) − Db (k ′ ϵ) .



Moreover, by letting ∆I = I(δ b ) − I(k ′ ϵ), ∆F = F s (δ s ) − F s (kϵ), ∆J = J(δ s ) − J(kϵ) and
∆D = Db (δ b ) − Db (k ′ ϵ), this yields

                    EGFT(xt , p) =I(k ′ ϵ)F s (kϵ) + J(kϵ)Db (k ′ ϵ) + I(δ b )∆F +
                                     F s (kϵ)∆I + J(δ s )∆D + Db (k ′ ϵ)∆J.

Since I and J are bounded by 2P , and F and D are bounded by 1, this implies that

    EGFT(xt , p) − I(k ′ ϵ)F s (kϵ) + J(kϵ)Db (k ′ ϵ) ≤ 2P |∆F | + |∆I| + 2P |∆D| + |∆J|.



Now, let us introduce es = δ s − kϵ, and eb = δ b − k ′ ϵ. Then, we have

                                es = x⊤   bs                     ⊤ s

                                        t θt + kϵ − kϵ + xt θ

                                     = x⊤  bs    s
                                        t (θt − θ ).

On event E ETC we have |es | ≤ ϵ. Since F is L-Lipschitz continuous, and ∆F = F s (kϵ + es ) −
F s (kϵ), this implies |∆F | ≤ Lϵ. Similarly, J is 1-Lipschitz continuous, and ∆J = J(kϵ + es ) −
J(kϵ), so |∆J| ≤ ϵ. Similarly,

                          eb = x⊤   bs             ⊤ b     ′

                                  t θt + kϵ − xt θ + k ϵ

                             = x⊤    bs bb               ′      ⊤ bb    b
                                  t (θt − θt ) + kϵ − k ϵ + xt (θt − θ ).


By definition of At , under the event E ETC we have |eb | ≤ 2ϵ. Since D is L-Lipschitz continuous
and ∆D = Db (k ′ ϵ + eb ) − Db (k ′ ϵ), |∆D| ≤ 2Lϵ. Similarly, I is 1-Lipschitz continuous, ∆I =
I(k ′ ϵ + eb ) − I(k ′ ϵ), so this implies that |∆I| ≤ 2ϵ. Putting everything together, we find that on the
event E ETC ,

                     EGFT(xt , p) − I(k ′ ϵ)F s (kϵ) + J(kϵ)Db (k ′ ϵ) ≤6P Lϵ + 3ϵ.



Similarly, denoting ∆I b = I(k ′ ϵ) − Ibk′ , ∆D
                                             b = D(k ′ ϵ) − D b k′ , ∆J
                                                                     b = J(kϵ) − Jbk and ∆F
                                                                                         b =
             k
F (kϵ) − F , we have
           b
                                         ′
                                                      b k′ ≤ 2P |∆F
   I(k ′ ϵ)F s (kϵ) + J(kϵ)Db (k ′ ϵ) − Ibk Fbk + Jbk D          b | + |∆I|
                                                                        b + 2P |∆D|
                                                                                 b + |∆J|.
                                                                                         b

This concludes the proof.


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    M OTIVATING EXAMPLE

Lemma 1 emphasizes that the expected gain from trade at a given price p depends on the quantities
δ s = p − x⊤   s      b         ⊤ b
           t θ and δ = p − xt θ . Remember that the difference in average valuations ∆ is given
           ⊤ b      ⊤ s
by ∆ = xt θ − xt θ , and with this notation, δ b = δ s − ∆. Therefore, the expected gain from
trade can be rewritten as a function of the pair (δ s , ∆). As an immediate consequence, we see that
the optimal increment δ s only depends on the difference in average valuations ∆: if p = x⊤ θs + δ s
maximizes EGFT(x, p), and if x′ is such that x′⊤ θb − x′⊤ θs = x⊤ θb − x⊤ θs , then p′ = x′⊤ θs + δ s
maximizes EGFT(x′ , p′ ).
On the other hand, the following example shows that there no explicit dependence of the optimal
price increment δ s on the difference in average valuations ∆. In words, when ∆ is small, we
might prefer to choose an increment δ s that leads to trade happening with lower probabilities but
corresponds to higher rewards. By contrast, as ∆ increases, similar values of the increment δ s will
correspond to higher gains if the trade happens. Then, we might choose to post prices corresponding
to a smaller increment δ s to increase the probability that the trade happens.
This reasoning demonstrates that knowing that an increment δ s is optimal for a difference in average
valuations ∆ does not allow us to determine the optimal increment δ ′ corresponding to a different
value ∆′ of the difference in average valuations. This implies that to precisely identify the optimal
price increment δ s for all differences in average valuations ∆, it may be necessary to have accurate
estimates of the functions F s and I for a broad range of values of δ s . Similar arguments can be
employed to argue that precise estimates of the value of Db and J for a wide range of values of
δ b = ∆ − δ s might also be necessary.
To illustrate this phenomenon, we construct an example where different levels of ∆ lead to entirely
different choices of the optimal price increment δ s . Specifically, we consider a scenario where, for
certain values of (s1 , s2 , s3 ) ∈ R3 , (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ R3 , (α1 , α2 , α3 ) in the simplex, and θ > 0 (to be
defined later), the density f s (resp. f b ) of the seller’s noise ξ s (resp. buyer’s noise ξ b ) is given by:
                   I{x ∈ [s1 , s1 + θ] ∪ [s2 , s2 + θ] ∪ [s3 , s3 + θ]}
         f s (δ) =
                                             3θ
                   α 1 I{x ∈ [b 1 , b1 + θ]} + α2 I{x ∈ [b2 , b2 + θ]} + α3 I{x ∈ [b3 , b3 + θ]}
         f b (δ) =                                                                               .
                                                         θ
The setting in illustrated in figure 1.
We assume that (s1 , s2 , s3 ) and (b1 , b2 , b3 ) verify s1 +θ < b1 , b1 +θ < s2 , s2 +θ < b2 , b2 +θ < s3 ,
and s3 + θ < b3. Then, it is straightforward to see that while ∆ > 0, and ∆ is small enough so that
b1 + θ + ∆ < s2 and b2 + θ + ∆ < s3 , the optimal increment belongs to the set {δ1 , δ2 , δ3 }, where
δ1 , δ2 , and δ3 belong respectively to [s1 + θ, b1 ], [s2 + θ, b2 ], and [s3 + θ, b3 ].
We also assume that α1 is much larger than α2 , which in turn is much larger than α3 . Then, the
increment δ1 is such that the trade happens with the highest probability: indeed, if δ s = δ b > b1 ,
the buyer rejects the trade with a high probability. For the same reasons, the probability of a trade
happening at an increment δ2 is much lower, and the probability of a trade happening at increment
δ3 is the lowest.
Finally, we assume that b3 −s3 is much larger than b2 −s2 , which in turn is much larger than b1 −s1 .
Then, the gain from any trade happening at increment δ1 is small compared to the gain from trades
happening at increment δ2 , which in turn is small compared to the gain from a trade happening at
increment δ3 .
For some well-chosen values of the parameters specified below, when the average gain from trade
of the seller and the buyer are both zero (x⊤    s      ⊤ b
                                             t θ = xt θ = 0), the most profitable increment is δ3 :
the probability of the trade happening is less likely, but when it occurs, it is more profitable.
Now, to obtain the probability of a price p = x⊤ θs +δ s being accepted by the buyer, it is sufficient to
translate the cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of ξ b (represented in Figure 1) by the quantity
∆ = x⊤ (θb − θs ). In particular, when ∆ > 0 is small enough so that b1 + θ + ∆ < s2 and
b2 + θ + ∆ < s3 , we observe that, on the one hand, the probability that the trade happens for the
increments δ s ∈ δ1 , δ2 , δ3 remains unchanged; however, the corresponding gains if the trade occurs
all increase with ∆. For some well-chosen values of the parameters, if ∆ is positive but sufficiently


                                                      33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: Illustration for the c.d.f. f s and f b corresponding to the example described in Section F.
The c.d.f. f s is represented in red, the c.d.f. f b is represented in blue.


small, the expected gain from trade is maximized by δ s = δ 2 . When ∆ is large, the expected gain
from trade is maximized by choosing δ s = δ 1 : in other words, this choice of increment ensures
that the sale happens with the highest probability, and each sale leads to a reward of at least ∆. In
Figure 2, we plot the expected gain from trade for different values of ∆ as a function of δ s . The
values chosen for the parameters are as follows: (s1 , s2 , s3 ) = (0, 2, 6), (b1 , b2 , b3 ) = (0.01, 3, 20),
(α1 , α2 , α3 ) = (0.85, 0.11, 0.04), and θ = 0.001. With these values, for ∆ = 0, the optimal
increment is δ 3 = 10; for ∆ = 1, it is δ 2 = 2.5; and for ∆ = 1.5, it is δ 3 = 0.01.


Figure 2: Expected gain from trade for different values of increment δ s and difference in average
valuations ∆.


G    P ROOFS OF S ECTION 5
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                         t −st )
Lemma 2. For each round t ∈ T B such that bt ≥ st , it holds: E[P ROFITt (pt , qt )] ≥ (b         2
                                                                                       8P log T − T ,
where the expectation is with respect to the choice of (pt , qt ).

Proof. To simplify notation, and since we focus on a single round t ∈ T B , we omit the explicit
dependence on t from pt , qt , it , st , and bt . We consider two cases. First, if b−s ≤ 2/T , the inequality
is immediately satisfied since the lhs is non-negative while the rhs is ≤ 0. Second, if b − s > 2/T ,


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


let E be the event in which p ∈ [s, (s + b)/2]. Since p ∼ U([0, P ]) we have P(E) = (b − s)/2P .
Moreover, we have
                                                1                1
                                P i = log             |A =           ,
                                              b−p              log T
which is well defined since
                                             s+b            1
                                        p≤          ≤b− .
                                               2           T
Let E ′ denote the event in which i = ⌊log(1/(b − p))⌋. Under E and E ′ we get
                                                                            b−p    p+b
        q = p + 2−i = p + 2−⌊log(1/(b−p))⌋ ≥ p + 2−(log(1/(b−p))+1) = p +        =      .
                                                                               2     2
Therefore, when b ≥ s + 2/T ,
                                                            b−s
                             E[P ROFIT(p, q)] = (q − p)
                                                         2P log T

                                                   p+b            b−s
                                              ≥          −p
                                                     2          2P log T
                                                  (b − s)2
                                              ≥            .
                                                 8P log T
This concludes the proof.
Lemma 3. For τ ≥ log T , it holds with probability at least 1 − 1/T that
                                  α
    X                                    X                 s             X
                                                      +
        P ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≥               [bt − st ] − 4P 2 log(T )      [bt − st ]+ − 2.
                              8P log(T )
      t∈Jτ K                                             t∈Jτ K                                     t∈Jτ K


Proof. First, we observe that given the sequence (bt , st )t∈JT K , and a time step τ , by Azuma-
Hoeffding inequality we have that, with probability at least 1 − δ,
            X                                             s            X
                P ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≥ E[P ROFITt (p, q)] − 2 log(1/δ)      ([bt − st ]+ )2 .
                t∈Jτ K                                                                         t∈Jτ K

Then, by applying a union bound, the above inequality holds simultaneously for all possible τ with
probability at least 1 − δT . Then, by setting δ = T 2 , with probability at least 1 − 1/T , it holds:
  X
      P ROFITt (pt , qt )
 t∈Jτ K
     X                                   s               X
 ≥            E[P ROFITt (p, q)] −           4 log(T )            ([bt − st ]+ )2
     t∈Jτ K                                              t∈Jτ K
     X   ([bt − st ]+ )2             2
                                                 s                   X
 ≥                               −           −       4 log(1/δ)              ([bt − st ]+ )2                     (by Lemma 2)
                    8P log T         T
     t∈Jτ K                                                         t∈Jτ K
     X ([bt − st ]+ )2             s                 X
 ≥                             −       4 log(T )              ([bt − st ]+ )2 − 2
                8P log T
     t∈Jτ K                                          t∈Jτ K
          X 1 ([bt − st ]+ )2            s                X
 =τ                                  −       4 log(T )            ([bt − st ]+ )2 − 2
                τ     8P log T
       t∈Jτ K                                            t∈Jτ K
                                            2
      τ        X [bt − st ]+         s             X
 ≥                              − 4 log(T )            ([bt − st ]+ )2 − 2                            (by Jensen’s Inequality)
   8P log T              τ
              t∈Jτ K                              t∈Jτ K

       α       X                 s           X
 ≥                  [bt − st ]+ − 4 log(T )       ([bt − st ]+ )2 − 2                                          (by Definition 1)
   8P log(T )
              t∈Jτ K                        t∈Jτ K

       α       X                 s              X
 ≥                  [bt − st ]+ − 4P 2 log(T )        [bt − st ]+ − 2.
   8P log(T )
                      t∈Jτ K                                        t∈Jτ K



                                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This concludes the proof.

Theorem 3. Given the two-bit algorithm A, the corresponding one-bit learning algorithm satisfies
global budget balance and, with probability at least 1 − 1/T , has regret
                                       (1 bit)                         (2)
                                                 ≤ O α−3 T E log4 T + RT .

                                   RT


Proof. The one-bit algorithm is global budget balanced by construction (see choice of B).
Then, we condition the high probability regret bound on the following events:


      • With probability 1 − 1/T the two-bit EOC algorithm guarantees a number of exploration
                                                       (2)
        rounds smaller than |T E | and regret at most RT ;

      • With probability 1 − 1/T , it holds the inequality in Lemma 3

      • By Azuma-Hoeffding, with probability at least 1 − 1/T it holds
                           τ
                           X                                     τ
                                                                 X              p
                                 max EGFT(xt , p) ≤                [bt − st ]+ + 16P 2 τ log(T ).
                                   p
                           t=1                                   t=1


Then, the regret can be bounded as follows
                   T
                   X                                  T
                                                      X
           RT =          max EGFT(xt , p) −                  EGFT(xt , pt )
                           p
                   t=1                                t=1
                   τ
                   X                        T
                                            X
               ≤         max EGFT(xt , p) +    max EGFT(xt , p) − EGFT(xt , pt )
                           p                                            p
                   t=1                                t=τ +1
                    τ
                                                                    (2)
                   X
               ≤         max EGFT(xt , p) + 2T E + RT
                           p
                   t=1
                   τ
                                                                               (2)
                   X                      p
               ≤         [bt − st ]+ +           16P 2 τ log(T ) + 2T E + RT
                   t=1
                   τ
                                                                  (2)
                   X
               ≤         [bt − st ]+ + ατ + 2T E + RT
                   t=1
                     τ
                                                         (2)
                    X
               ≤2         [bt − st ]+ + 2T E + RT ,
                    t=1

where in the second-to-last inequality we use that, since τ ≥ B/2P , it holds that τ ≥
16P 2 α−2 log T (by Equation (5)). The last inequality is by definition of α on the interval Jτ K.
                                   Pτ                   Pτ
Then, by Lemma 3 and since t=1 [bt − st ]+ ≥ t=1 P ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≥ 2048P 4 α−2 log3 T , we
have
                                       α
       X                                       X                 s              X
                                                              +
             P ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≥                  [bt − st ] − 4P 2 log(T )        [bt − st ]+ − 2
                                   8P log(T )
      t∈Jτ K                                  t∈Jτ K                           t∈Jτ K

                                       α       X                 s              X
                                 ≥                  [bt − st ]+ − 8P 2 log(T )       [bt − st ]+
                                   8P log(T )
                                                    t∈Jτ K                              t∈Jτ K
                                       α              X
                               ≥                               [bt − st ]+ .
                                   16P log(T )
                                                      t∈Jτ K



                                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                           Pτ
Then, since B ≤ 2048P 4 α−2 T E log3 T and t=1PP ROFITt (pt , qt ) ≤ B + 2P , by substituting in the
expression above we obtain the desired bound on t∈Jτ K [bt − st ]+ . In particular, we have
                                 τ
                                                               (2)
                                 X
                        RT ≤ 2         [bt − st ]+ + 2|T E | + RT
                                 t=1
                              32P log T X                               (2)
                            ≤             P ROFITt (pt , qt ) + 2T E + RT
                                 α
                                               t∈Jτ K
                                    5      4
                               P log T E               (2)
                            ≤M           T + 2T E + RT ,
                                  α3
with M is a numeric constant independent on the problem instance.

H    A LTERNATIVE ALGORITHM FOR NOISY VALUATIONS WITH TWO - BIT
     FEEDBACK

The regret of Algorithm 3 is primarily driven by the estimation of the c.d.f. F s and demand function
Db uniformly over a grid of increments. We now present an alternative sub-optimal approach.
Specifically, to leverage the fact that the optimal increment δ s only depends on the difference in
average valuations ∆t , we could first execute the sub-routines E ST-PAR and E ST-I NT, yielding
estimates of x⊤   s   ⊤ b                                    e −2 ) samples. Then, we could round
               t θ , xt θ , I and J up to precision ϵ using O(ϵ
                                   −1
the value of ∆t on a grid of size ϵ , and run independent Scouting Bandit algorithms (as described
in Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2024)) for each of the ϵ−1 rounded values.
The grid size implies a discretization error of order O(ϵ). The highest regret occurs when each of
the ϵ−1 independent Scouting Bandit algorithms runs for the same number of rounds Tϵ = T ϵ. Each
algorithm incurs a regret O(Te ϵ2/3 ), so their combined regret is O(T e ϵ2/3 · ϵ−1 ) = O(T
                                                                                        e 2/3 ϵ−1/3 ). For
      −1/4                                                       3/4
ϵ=T        , this strategy also results in a regret of order O(T
                                                             e       ).


                                                        37
