Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ATTRIBUTING C ULTURE -C ONDITIONED
G ENERATIONS TO P RETRAINING C ORPORA
 Huihan Li1∗ Arnav Goel2∗ Keyu He1 Xiang Ren1
 1
  University of Southern California 2 IIIT Delhi
 {huihanl,frankhe,xiangren}@usc.edu,arnav21519@iiitd.ac.in



                                              A BSTRACT
            In open-ended generative tasks like narrative writing or dialogue, large language
            models often exhibit cultural biases, showing limited knowledge and generating
            templated outputs for less prevalent cultures. Recent works show that these bi-
            ases may stem from uneven cultural representation in pretraining corpora. This
            work investigates how pretraining leads to biased culture-conditioned generations
            by analyzing how models associate entities with cultures based on pretraining
            data patterns. We propose the MEMO ED framework (MEMOrization from
            pretraining document) to determine whether a generation for a culture arises from
            memorization. Using MEMO ED on culture-conditioned generations about food
            and clothing for 110 cultures, we find that high-frequency cultures in pretraining
            data yield more generations with memorized symbols, while some low-frequency
            cultures produce none. Additionally, the model favors generating entities with
            extraordinarily high frequency regardless of the conditioned culture, reflecting bi-
            ases toward frequent pretraining terms irrespective of relevance. We hope that
            the MEMO ED framework and our insights will inspire more works on attribut-
            ing model performance on pretraining data.1 [Disclaimer: This analysis does not
            represent any views or beliefs of the authors. Our findings reflect trends observed
            specifically within OLMo-7B’s pretraining data and are limited to this dataset. We
            make no claims about whether these results reflect real-world conditions.]


1        I NTRODUCTION
In open-ended generative tasks like narrative writing or dialogue, language models often show bias
against marginalized social groups based on gender, race, or culture (Gallegos et al., 2024; Manvi
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b). Cultural bias is particularly notable due to the vast number of cul-
tures to account for. Cultures are often unevenly represented in the pretraining corpora, with some
mentioned more frequently than others, irrespective of their real-world prevalence (Li et al., 2024a).
Recent studies reveal that models favor entities (Naous et al., 2023) and opinions (Ryan et al., 2024)
from frequently represented cultures in pretraining while showing inadequate knowledge and tem-
plated answers for less frequent ones (Li et al., 2024b).
Such biases in culture-conditioned generations can be linked to studies showing that LLMs’ memo-
rization and generalization are constrained by pretraining data imbalances. Zhang et al. (2024) find
that these imbalances cause models to overgeneralize to high-frequency knowledge, overshadowing
lower-frequency knowledge. Similarly, Chang et al. (2024) observe that LLMs struggle with gener-
ating long-tail knowledge in downstream tasks when such knowledge appears with intervals longer
than a threshold in pretraining data to enable memorization.
Building on these findings, we analyze culture biases by examining how models associate entities,
referred to as “symbols,” with cultures based on patterns in pretraining data (e.g., “kimono” asso-
ciated with Japan). We investigate three key questions: 1) How can we determine if a symbol is
generated for a culture due to memorization of their association? 2) If not memorization, what other
factors drive the model’s association? 3) How are these types of associations tied to pretraining data
frequency imbalances?
     * Equal Contribution
     1
         https://github.com/huihanlhh/CultureGenAttr


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 1        MEMORIZED                 2
                                                                                              DIFFUSE
                 Describe the food of your               ASSOCIATION                        ASSOCIATION
             neighbor. “My neighbor is Indian.       Culture-speciﬁc symbols that       Symbols occurring in greater
                                                       are memorized from the              than 50% of cultures’
                 He probably likes to eat”                                                     generations.
                                                           pre-training data.


               1 naan, samosas, mango
                 lassi, paneer, biryani,
                 dal, saag, dosa, curd           3
                                                     WEAK ASSOCIATION               4
                                                                                          CROSS-CULTURE
                 rice, roti, pickle,    2             GENERALIZATION                      GENERALIZATION
                 chapatti, rice, chicken,             Symbols which are inferred            Symbols which are
               3 chickpea, garlic, fried             from memorized symbols or            memorized symbols from
                                                         diffuse association.                 other cultures.
                 banana, apple pie 4


      Figure 1: Four types of culture-symbol associations in culture-conditioned generations


To address the first question, we propose MEMO ED (MEMOrization from pretraining document),
a framework to determine if symbols in culture-conditioned generations arise from the model
memorizing culture-symbol relationships in pretraining data. MEMO ED involves two steps: 1) it
identifies contributory documents in the pretraining corpora for the culture-symbol association 2) it
classifies the symbol as memorized if the percentage of contributory documents is significant (§3.3).
To answer the second question, we analyze OLMo-7B (Groeneveld et al., 2024) and its pretraining
data Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024), indexed by Elazar et al. (2024) and Liu et al. (2024) 2 . Follow-
ing (Li et al., 2024b), we collect OLMo-7B’s culture-conditioned generations about 110 cultures on
food and clothing topics and extract topic-related symbols.
Using MEMO ED, we find that 46% of food symbols and 26% of clothing symbols are generated
due to memorization of culture-symbol relationships in pretraining data. For the remaining sym-
bols, we identify three other types of culture-symbol associations: 1) Diffuse Association: symbols
not strongly tied to any specific culture but appearing in over half of all cultures’ generations (e.g.,
“t-shirt”), 2) Cross-culture Generalization: symbols memorized with one culture but generated for
others (e.g., “kimono” is a memorized symbol for Japan but generated for Korea), and 3) Weak Asso-
ciation Generalization: broader conceptual representations derived from synthesis or reinterpreta-
tion of memorized symbols and diffuse association symbols (e.g., “robe” as a generalized reference
to “kimono,” a symbol memorized for Japan).
To explore the third question, we find strong correlations between three of the four association cat-
egories and frequency patterns in pretraining data. Memorized associations strongly correlate with
a culture’s occurrence frequency, indicating that low-frequency cultures in the “long-tail” lack suf-
ficient pretraining supervision for memorization. For diffuse associations, higher-frequency sym-
bols are generated for more cultures, despite not being tied to any specific culture. Cross-culture
generalization shows that cultures with higher pretraining frequencies are more likely to have their
memorized symbols generated for others. Weak association generalization does not correlate signifi-
cantly with any pretraining pattern, but cultures without memorized symbols often generate symbols
generalized from high-frequency symbols or symbols tied to high-frequency cultures.
In summary, our work presents a generation attribution framework that allows researchers to clearly
trace culture-conditioned generations to memorization of patterns in pretraining data. Our findings
suggest that language models are unable to reliably and evenly recall knowledge about global cul-
tures in downstream generations, and resort to repeating a small set of high-frequency symbols.
Results from our work can be helpful for mitigating biases in cultural generations when combined
with unlearning or data augmentation frameworks. We hope that we inspire more works on attribut-
ing model performance to pretraining data.

   2
     While our analysis is applicable to any model, our analyses are constrained by open-sourced models with
searchable pretraining data. Ablation on OLMo-7B-0424 shows consistent conclusions and can be found in
Appendix F.2


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2      R ELATED W ORKS
Memorization and Generalization. The knowledge and capabilities of LLMs stem from lever-
aging large-scale pretraining corpora through both memorization and generalization. One line of
work focuses on prompting LLMs to emit memorized training data (Wang et al., 2024; Carlini et al.,
2023; Nasr et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Schwarzschild et al., 2024). Carlini et al. (2023) shows
that memorization increases with model size, example duplication, and prompt length. Another line
examines attributing memorization to internal features and its impact on generalization (Feldman,
2020; Feldman & Zhang, 2020; Zheng & Jiang, 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), with Zheng & Jiang
(2022) highlighting the importance of long-tail instances for generalization. Recent works extend
memorization to knowledge units like n-grams (Cao et al., 2020; Kandpal et al., 2023; Mallen et al.,
2022), and Antoniades et al. (2024) distinguishes memorization from generalization based on n-
gram similarity. Additionally, research explores how knowledge memorization affects generation
quality, with Zhang et al. (2024) and Chang et al. (2024) finding that pretraining data imbalances
and long-tail knowledge intervals hinder learning and generation.

Culture bias in culture-conditioned generation tasks. Recent work on probing and evaluating
cultural bias in LLMs spans multiple areas. One approach compares the Western-Eastern dichotomy
in model generations related to culinary habits (Palta & Rudinger, 2023), etiquette (Dwivedi et al.,
2023), commonsense knowledge Nguyen et al. (2023), and other facts Keleg & Magdy (2023);
Naous et al. (2023); Khandelwal et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024b). Another evaluates LLMs’ cultural
understanding using socio-cultural surveys originally designed for humans, such as the World Values
Survey and Pew Global Attitudes Survey (Ramezani & Xu, 2023; Tao et al., 2023; Durmus et al.,
2023). Additionally, works propose using LLM generation to create new resources and benchmarks
for cultural knowledge(Ziems et al., 2023; Huang & Yang, 2023; Fung et al., 2024).

3      A NALYSIS S ETUP
3.1     T YPES OF S YMBOL -C ULTURE A SSOCIATIONS IN C ULTURE - CONDITIONED
        G ENERATIONS

      Association     Food Examples                          Clothing Examples
      Type
      Diffuse         Chicken, Rice, Meat                    Jeans, Shirt, Sweater
      Memorized       Miso Soup, Kalamari, Pho               Cheongsam, Yukata, Keffiyeh
      Weak            Chicken with Rice, Noodle Soup         Long Top, Gown, Blue Shirt

    Table 1: Examples of symbols falling into different types of associations for Food and Clothing

A symbol is an entity mentioned in culture-conditioned generations. For example, in a culture-
conditioned generation about food, “My neighbor is Japanese. For dinner, my neighbor probably
likes eating Miso Soup and Gyoza.” “Miso Soup” and “Gyoza” are two symbols generated for the
Japanese culture. After an initial inspection of the generations, we discover four prevalent catego-
rizes of associations between the conditioned culture and generated symbols:
Memorized Association is when the symbol and culture co-occur in meaningful context with
high frequency in pretraining corpora (i.e. the co-occurring pretraining documents are relevant to
both the symbol and the culture and their count is distinguishable from other cultures) and their
association is learned by the model naturally. Memorized associations are important and highly
desirable because they are grounded in pretraining documents, demonstrating sufficient model
memorization of the symbol-culture association during pretraining.
Diffuse Association, in contrast to memorized association, happens when a symbol is generated for
a wide group of cultures without being associated with any of them through pretraining document
grounding. While these symbols are not necessarily wrong (e.g. “meat” may be a food for any
culture), they are not informative, not distinctive, not interesting, and therefore not desirable. This
phenomenon suggests that the model has drawn unintended associations of these symbols with many
cultures, and prioritizes these symbols over more culture-specific memorized associations.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cross-culture Generalization is when the symbol that has memorized association with culture A
instead of culture B, but is generated for culture B. Here, we say the symbol is a cross-culture gener-
alization for culture B. Cross-culture generalization reveals that due to certain correlations between
culture A and B the model has generalized memorized symbols for culture A to culture B. While
this phenomenon may suggest promising generalization capabilities of models, such generalization
suppresses generation of memorized symbols of culture B that are more relevant to the instruction.
Weak Association Generalization happens for symbols that are neither identified as a memorized
association with any culture due to insufficient evidence in the pretraining data to confirm strong
memorization for them, nor identified as a diffuse association symbol that is broadly generated for
the majority of cultures. However, they may be inferred, or generalized, from other symbols who
have memorized or diffuse associations. For example, “kimono” is a type of “robe” specific to
Japan, even though “robe” is not memorized association with Japan. This type of generalization is
desirable because the symbol and culture show a weak association evidenced from pretraining data,
yet the model is still able to learn such association.
Table 1 shows examples of each type of symbol-culture association for both food and clothing
generations.

3.2   DATA C OLLECTION P ROCESS

Model and Data. We conduct all of our analysis on OLMo-7B (Groeneveld et al., 2024) and
its pretraining corpora Dolma (Soldaini et al., 2024), as OLMo-7B is the most capable generative
large language model with open-sourced and indexed pretraining data. The same analysis could be
extended to other models in future works, as long as their pretraining data is accessible.

Scope. Following the prompts and settings of (Li et al., 2024b), we collect generations for each of
110 cultures (Table 4) on food and clothing topics. We choose food and clothing among all topics
introduced in (Li et al., 2024b) due to the high variation of symbols observed in their generations.

Generation. We prompt the model in a continuing generation task where we use the following
topic-wise prompts:

       • Food: My neighbor is [culture]. At dinner, [he/she/my neighbor] probably likes to eat
       • Clothing: My neighbor is [culture]. [he/she/my neighbor] is probably wearing

We use the default model implementations from huggingface, setting temperature=1.0, top p=0.95,
top k=50, max tokens=30 and num return sequences=100, and period (‘.’) as the stopping criteria.
Ablations on hyper-parameters is in Appendix F.
We sample 100 generations for male, female, and gender-agnostic settings, and thus, for each cul-
ture, we get 300 generations. Language models usually complete this prompt with one or more
symbols. We take each completion and use LLAMA-3-70b-instruct to extract the symbols
from the generation. The prompt for extracting symbols can be found in Li et al. (2024b).

3.3   I DENTIFYING K NOWLEDGE M EMORIZATION FROM C ULTURE - CONDITIONED
      G ENERATIONS

In this section, we demonstrate our MEMO ED pipeline for classifying memorized associations.
We first introduce how MEMO ED determines whether one document contributes to culture-symbol
memorization, and describe how we determine memorization from all contributory documents.
First, we determine if a document contributes to culture-symbol association. Given a training
document D, a culture C (represented by both country and nationality, e.g. China and Chinese) and
a symbol S that is generated for culture C, the document is contributory to the memorization of
association between C and S if tokens representing C and S appear within sufficiently low distance
in D and D has high context relevance to C.
Sufficiently low distance is important because the tokens representing C and S must appear in
the same piece of text during pretraining. Therefore, we introduce two metrics, minimum to-
ken distance dTOK (C, S, D) and minimum sentence distance dSENT (C, S, D). For each docu-


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                            nasi lemak                   Mem.
                 For dinner, my

                                            🤖
                                                      Collect Symbols       vegetable salad             Not Mem.
               Malaysian neighbor
                                                                            anchovies                   Not Mem.
                 probably likes
                                                                            cucumber                    Not Mem.
                     eating                OLMo-7B
                                                                            sushi                       Not Mem.

                                                              Culture=Malaysia                      Classify
                   MEMOed
                 Classify Relevant Pretraining Documents           Determine Culture-Symbol Association Strength


                        ✅                 ❌

                          Signal-to-noise-ratio                   Contribution Score: %           Z-score
                            + distance metric                     of relevant documents         thresholding



        Figure 2: MEMO ED pipeline, demonstrated with Malaysian culture on food topic.

                                                    Biryani                                                    Roast turkey


                                           0.01
                                                    3.86                                                            1.47


Figure 3: Higher contribution score means stronger evidence of culture/symbol association in pre-
training data, as defined in §3.3. Figure compares distribution of contribution score of memorized
symbol (Biryani) v.s. non-memorized symbol (Roast turkey). Y-axis shows all cultures for which
the symbol is generated. Red font show the z-score: ≥ 2.6 means memorization.


ment D, dTOK (C, S, D) is calculated as the minimum number of subtokens, determined by the
model’s tokenizer, between all occurrences of C and S n-grams in the document D (Appendix D).
dSENT (C, S, D) is calculated as the minimum number of sentences separating the C and S n-grams,
by splitting the document D along delimiters like full-stops.
High context relevance is important because documents that strongly contribute to culture-symbol
memorized association should be topically relevant to the culture and symbol, manifested by high
density of the culture and symbol n-grams compared to other cultures’ n-grams. Therefore, we
propose Document-Signal to Noise Ratio dSNR (C, S), the log ratio of the frequency of culture C to
the sum of frequency of all other cultures appearing in the same document. With t representing each
n-gram that refers to a culture, we define dSNR (C, S, D) as:

                                                                 P
                                                                       1t=C
                                dSNR (C, S) = log2              P t∈D                                                         (1)
                                                               ( t∈D 1t̸=C ) + ϵ

Documents that strongly contribute to culture-symbol memorization should have high dSNR , as the
documents must have higher signals (target culture) than noise (other cultures).
There are two scenarios where we classify a document D as relevant and contributory to the memo-
rization of association between culture C and symbol S.

     1. Global Relevance: dTOK (C, S, D) ≤ max seq len & dSNR (C, S, D) ≥ 0.


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           Given that dSNR uses a logarithmic function to calculate the frequency strength of the target
           culture in the pretraining document, scores greater than 0 signify a ratio ≥ 1, indicating
           that the target culture is at least as frequent as all other cultures combined. Furthermore,
           we upper-bound dTOK (C, S, D) to ensure thar both C and S will appear in the same context
           window during pretraining. For OLMo-7B, max seq len = 2048.
        2. Local Relevance: dSENT (C, S, D) ≤ 2 & dSNR (C, S, D) ∈ [−1, 0).
           Empirical observations indicate that documents with dSNR (C, S, D) scores between −1 and
           0 often contain highly relevant excerpts that contribute significantly to the culture-symbol
           association, albeit not extending to the entire document. For these cases, we apply the
           dSENT (C, S, D) metric with a strict threshold of 2 to avoid over-counting. Relevant excerpts
           from various pretraining documents are detailed in the Appendix G.

Second, we determine if a symbol is a memorized symbol of a culture. For a given symbol S
and any culture C ∈ CG (where CG denotes the set of cultures that generated the symbol S), we
retrieve a complete set of documents D. Dr ⊆ D represents the subset of documents classified as
contributory to the culture-symbol memorization using the criterion described above. Utilizing this
subset, we calculate the following metrics to determine if S is a memorized symbol for culture C:

Contribution Score. Contribution Score (C S) is the ratio of the number of contributory docu-
ments, denoted n(Dr ), to the total number of documents in which the symbol S appears. Formally,
C S = n(D  r)
        n(S) . This measure tells us for all documents where the symbol occurs, proportionally how
many exhibit strong association with given culture, helping us determine if the symbol is memorized
for the culture.

Determining memorization with z-score. We compute contribution score for every culture C in
CG , and we normalize these scores to form a categorical distribution (See examples in Figure 3). We
then compute the z-score of contribution scores for each culture within this distribution. Intuitively,
if the distribution is flat, then the symbol is not distinguishably associated with any of the cultures.
However, if the distribution spikes at a few cultures, then these cultures are distinguishable from
the rest for their association with the symbol. Therefore, we set the threshold of z-score to 2.6
(> 99.5% of CG 3 ) to find “outliers” in the distribution and classify the symbols as memorized for
cultures whose z-score is above the threshold.
In scenarios where a symbol S is generated across less than five cultures, i.e., n(CG ) ≤ 5, z-score
is known to be unstable for distributions with small sample size. Therefore, we select the highest
scoring culture among CG as long as it’s contribution score is above a lower bound of N1 , where N
represents the total number of cultures in our set, i.e.110.

3.4     A NALYSIS ON N ON -M EMORIZED A SSOCIATIONS FROM C ULTURE -C ONDITIONED
        G ENERATIONS

For each of the three non-memorized associations, we conduct the following analyses to understand
why such associations are formed during pretraining.

Diffuse Association. We hypothesize that diffuse association occurs when a certain symbol has
substantially higher frequency in the pretraining corpora compared to other symbols, causing the
model to prioritize generating this symbol for many cultures.
We identify symbols that are generated for at least half of total cultures, i.e. 55 cultures, as being
generated out of diffuse association. We count the occurrence frequency of all symbols of diffuse
association and all symbols of memorized association in pretraining data using Infinigram API (Liu
et al., 2024). In order to verify whether large frequency gap causes the model to prioritize diffuse
association to memorized association, for each symbol of diffuse association, we calculate its over-
                             P count(Si )
shadowing ratio as r = N1 j count(S      m )
                                             , where count(Si ) is the count of a diffuse association
                                            j
symbol, count(Smj ) is the count of the j-th unique memorized symbol and N is the number of
unique memorized symbols.
   3
       https://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/gerstman/EpiInfo/z-table.htm


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Cross-Culture Generalization. It occurs when the model generates symbols memorized from
one culture for a different culture. We hypothesize that co-occurrence of both cultures may cause
memorized associations to generalize. Therefore, as case study, we perform topic modeling on a
subset of symbols and cultures. We extract all documents containing both cultures and the generated
symbol, and use LDA (Blei et al., 2003) and LLAMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) to
extract common topic words in the documents in which the cultures co-occur (Appendix B).

      Topic             Memorized              Weak Association                 Culture
                        Association            Generalization
                        Biryani                Vegetable and Rice               Indian
      Food
                        Ayam Goreng            Grilled Chicken                  Indonesian
                        Salwar                 Long Top                         Indian
      Clothing
                        Ao Dai                 Gown                             Vietnamese

       Table 2: Examples of Weak Associations generalizing from Memorized Associations


Weak Association Generalization. In order to identify from which symbols these weak asso-
ciation symbols are generalized from, we resort to language model’s own knowledge: if a model
memorizes a symbol, it should be able to recite the definition of the symbol, using phrases repre-
senting a broader concept of the memorized entities. For example, if a model memorizes “kimono,”
then it is able to define “kimono” as a type of “wrapped-front robe”.
We prompt OLMo-Instruct-7B to generate definitions of memorized symbols in a continued
generation task (Appendix C.1). Then, we map symbols who are previously categorized as neither
memorized nor diffuse association symbols to these definitions using F1 score. For each symbol
mapped with any weak association symbol, the latter is determined to generalize from the former.
Please note that such generalization can be cross-cultural in nature: a weak association symbol gen-
erated for one culture can as well be traced to memorized symbols of a completely different culture.
Some examples of generalizations that are traced to memorized associations are given in Table 2.
To identify symbols that can be traced to symbols with diffuse association, we look for generations
with symbols that partially contain or are a combination of diffuse association symbols , such as
“black t-shirt” or “rice with meat.”

4     R ESULTS
4.1   M EMORIZATION IS L IMITED FOR U NDER -R EPRESENTED C ULTURES


                 (a) Topic: Food                                    (b) Topic: Clothing

                  Figure 4: Geographical Distribution of Memorized Association

We observe a medium-to high correlation between 1) the number of memorized symbols for a culture
and 2) the count of documents in which the culture appears in the pretraining corpora. For food, we
obtained a Spearman correlation of 0.670 and a Kendall τ correlation of 0.507. For clothing, we
obtained a Spearman correlation of 0.540 and a Kendall τ correlation of 0.421.
Figure 7 shows the geographical distribution of memorized symbols. For food, 97 cultures out of 110
have at least one memorized symbol and on average one culture has about 11 memorized symbols.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In clothing, however, only 45 cultures out of 110 have at least one memorized symbol, i.e. around
60% have no memorized symbols, and on average one culture has about only 2 memorized symbols.
The limited memorization for under-represented cultures roots in the inadequate representation in
the pretraining corpora. According to Chang et al. (2024), LLMs go through periodic forgetting
of factual knowledge during pretraining and memorization requires the knowledge to appear within
intervals shorter than the forgetting interval. Therefore, symbols of under-represented cultures are
less likely to get memorized and be generated within the top-k outputs. Instead, symbols not be-
longing to the culture (evidenced by how MEMO ED finds insufficient contributory documents) are
generated, leading to diffuse association or cross-culture generalization (see Section 4.3 and 4.4).

4.2   M EMORIZED A SSOCIATION D O N OT L IMIT TO C ULTURALLY-E MBLEMATIC S YMBOLS

To dig deeper into the composition of memorized association, we recruit natives from each respec-
tive culture and ask them whether each symbol “originates from” or “is emblematic to” their own
culture.
We annotate symbols of 8 cultures: American, Chinese, Filipino, Indian, Ghanaian, Japanese, Mex-
ican, Vietnamese. These are the only cultures having more than 25 active annotators who were born
in the culture but are currently in the United States. In total, we have recruited 257 annotators. Each
annotator is tasked with evaluating 11 questions, including one attention check question that was
designed as a simple verification question to ensure the reliability of the responses. An annotator
may annotate many times on different questions, and each symbol is annotated by 3 annotators. See
Appendix E for annotation instructions.
Overall, MEMO ED’s classification of memorized symbols agrees with human classification of em-
blematic symbols, with a weighted F1 score of 0.845 on clothing and 0.670 on food.
However, not all memorized symbols are em-
blematic symbols to a culture. The rest of the
symbols consist of entities that are still used
in the culture a lot without being an emblem-
atic symbol: for example, “western style bridal
gown” is recognized as a memorized symbol
for Indian clothing, while “business suit” is rec-
ognized as a memorized symbol for Japanese
clothing. MEMO ED is able to capture such as-
sociations from pretraining data that would oth-
erwise be neglected by human annotators.
                                                     Figure 5: Overshadowing ratio r of all diffuse as-
                                                     sociation for topic clothing.
4.3 D IFFUSE
A SSOCIATION IS FREQUENCY- DRIVEN

We find a moderate-to-high positive correlation
for both clothing (Spearman ρ = 0.551, Kendall τ = 0.385) and food (Spearman ρ = 0.519,
Kendall τ = 0.385) on overshadowing ratio r (defined in Section 3.4) and the number of cultures
that the diffuse association symbol is generated for. This indicates that the pretraining frequency of
diffuse association symbols is magnitudes higher than the frequency of memorized symbols, and this
increases the chance of diffuse association overshadowing memorized association during sampling.
Figure 5 shows that almost all symbols with diffuse association appear at least 1000 times more
frequently than symbols with memorized association in the pre-training data, for the topic clothing.

4.4   C ROSS -C ULTURE G ENERALIZATION FROM H IGH TO L OW F REQUENCY C ULTURE

Frequency Analysis. We first observe a strong positive correlation between 1) the culture’s number
of topic-related pretraining documents and 2) the frequency of the culture’s memorized symbol being
generated for some other cultures (clothing: Spearman ρ = 0.763, Kendall τ = 0.574; food: Spear-
man ρ = 0.716, Kendall τ = 0.531). Simultaneously, the culture’s number of topic-related pretrain-
ing documents is also negatively correlated with the percentage of the culture’s response containing
another culture’s memorized symbols (food only: Spearman ρ = −0.521, Kendall τ = −0.364).


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


These results suggest that cultures whose generations contain other cultures’ symbols tend to occur
less-frequently in pretraining documents, and cultures whose symbols tend to occur in other cultures’
generations are also those more commonly appearing in pre-training documents. For additional
results, see Appendix H.1.
Topic Modeling Analysis. In Section 3.4 we
stated our hypothesis that model may gener-
alize the memorized symbols of one culture
to another culture due to the two cultures’
co-occurrence in pretraining documents under
certain common topics. Although a compre-
hensive study on each memorized symbol is
computationally impossible, we exemplify our
analysis with examples of “hijab”, “kimono”,
“biryani” and “churrasco” (See Appendix B for
execution details).
Each row in Table 3 shows a symbol, the
culture for which it is a memorized symbol,
and the other culture for which it is generated Figure 6: Excerpt from a relevant document for
the second-most frequently. Table 5 shows “hijab”, “Iran” and “Saudi Arabia”.
the rest of the cultures for which the symbols
are generated and their topic modeling results.
Figure 6 shows an excerpt of a document in which “hijab”, Iran and Saudia Arabia co-occur.

  Symbol        Mem.          Non-          Topic Modeling Keywords
                Culture       Mem.
                              Culture
  Hijab         Iran          Saudi         [woman, islamic, muslim, women, rights,
                              Arabia        hijab, government, politics, people]
  Kimono        Japan         South         [culture, fashion, asian, art,
                              Korea         traditional, clothing, woman, tokyo,
                                            wedding, food]
  Biryani       India         Pakistan      [food, recipe, restaurant, cooking,
                                            recipes, biryani, chicken, dish,
                                            dishes, cuisine]
  Churrasco     Brazil        Chile         [food, restaurant, experience, wine,
                                            meat, rio, dining, fogo, bar, city]

 Table 3: Keywords extracted from pretraining documents in cases of cross-culture generalization


4.5   G ENERALIZATION FROM W EAK A SSOCIATION IS NOT C ORRELATED WITH
      M EMORIZATION

On average, 3.1% and 5.0% of generations are generalized symbols for clothing and food,
respectively. Interestingly, higher number of memorized symbol does not lead to higher number of
generalization stemming from them. We only see a weak-to-none correlation (Spearman correlation
of 0.17 and -0.03 for clothing and food) between the two types of symbols. Table 10 shows the
top and bottom 5 cultures for memorized symbols and generalized symbols for the topic food.
Mexico, India, Japan, Morocco and Nigeria have the highest number of memorized symbols for
food. However, Morocco appears among the top 5 cultures in generalized symbols while Japan
appears in the bottom 5. Additionally, cultures without any memorized symbols rank higher in
number of generalized symbols (e.g. Yemenis for clothing and Tribagonian for food). Cultures such
as these where the model wasn’t able to memorize anything, prompts the need for generalizations
in the next token sampling process.
For symbols that partially contain or are a combination of symbols from diffuse association, we find
that they are generalizations which can be traced to high-frequency symbols resulting from diffuse
association. These comprise of about 0.1% and 0.2% of generations on average for food and clothing
respectively but almost 1/3 of the unique symbols for clothing.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.6       T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF F OUR T YPES OF C ULTURE -S YMBOL A SSOCIATIONS


                       (a) Mexico                                     (b) Trinidad

Figure 7: While some cultures contain no memorized association in their generations (Fig7b), cul-
tures like Mexico’s almost 1/2 generations comprise of memorized association (Fig 7a)


In our analysis, we extract 2370 unique symbols for food and 1002 for clothing. Of these, 4.1%
(98 symbols) and 10.9% (110 symbols) appear in over 50% of cultures, categorized as diffuse as-
sociation, for food and clothing respectively. For food, 46.12% (1098 symbols) are identified as
memorized association, and 31.3% (713 symbols) as weak association symbols generalized from
memorized symbols. In contrast, for clothing, 25.78% (258 symbols) are memorized association,
and 31.6% (317 symbols) are weak association generalized from memorized symbols. Additionally,
a smaller fraction of food symbols (7.6%, or 180 symbols) and a significant portion of clothing sym-
bols (nearly one-third, or 332 symbols) are weak association generalized from high-frequency
symbols of diffuse association. The remaining small proportion of symbols include hallucina-
tions, typos, and brand names, not fitting into these categories.
While diffuse association only comprise of a small proportion of the total unique symbols extracted
from responses, they comprise a significant proportion (91.12% for clothing and 79.2% for food) of
the total responses, indicating that they are sampled multiple times during the generation process.
Additionally, memorization is especially scarce in generated responses, averaging only 0.76% for
clothing and 4.12% for food while traceable generalization averages to 3.1% and 4.9% for both top-
ics respectively. However, as seen in Figure 7, the extent of memorization in responses has very
high variance (from 0% for Trinidad to almost 42.2% for Mexico in food). Cross-culture general-
ization, while only averaging 4% and 11% respectively for clothing and food, exhibits high variance
with cultures with a high number of memorized symbols having lesser cases of generating symbols
memorized for other cultures. It is also visible in cases when certain cultures show common themes
related to the topic in their pre-training document 4 . More analysis can be found in Appendix H.2


5       C ONCLUSION

In conclusion, our work introduces MEMO ED, a framework for attributing culture-conditioned
generations of language models to memorization from pretraining data. By analyzing the appear-
ance of symbols in model outputs across 110 cultures, we uncover a clear imbalance in how many
symbols language models memorize for high-frequency and low-frequency cultures. In addition,
models tend to prioritize generating high-frequency symbols that are not specific to any culture
over memorized symbols, while also struggling to generalize from memorized cultural symbols
with lower prevalence in the pretraining data. This highlights significant limitations in current
pretraining processes, where models prefer frequently occurring, diffusely associated symbols at
the expense of diverse, culture-specific knowledge. Our findings underscore the need for improved
pretraining data and methods, and we hope this research sparks further work on linking model
behavior to data-driven insights.

    4
        As shown through keywords in Table 3


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported in part by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), In-
telligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via the HIATUS Program contract #2022-
22072200006, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency with award HR00112220046, and
NSF IIS 2048211. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. We would like to thank all the collaborators in USC INK
research lab for their constructive feedback on the work.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L IMITATIONS

MEMO ED uses each individual document as the unit of memorization, while it is possible that one
document may contain multiple excerpts of culture/symbol co-occurrence within minimum token
threshold. However, we cannot exactly reproduce the contexts of the pretraining process as the
training batches are randomly ordered in OLMo-7B training.
Our study is only conducted on OLMo-7B due to the fact that it is the model with highest language
capability that also has open pretraining data. How our conclusions may hold for non-OLMo family
models is unknown; however, our methodology introduced in §3 is transferrable for analyzing any
model, as long as their pretraining data is accessible.


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

Algorithm. We provide accurate description of our analysis framework in Section 3, and addi-
tional details in the appendix.

Prompt Engineering. The prompts we used for generating culture-conditioned generations,
prompting for traceable generalization definition and topic modeling are included in the appendix.

Data and Source Code. Data and source code will be released upon acceptance.

Crowdsourcing. Instructions for Prolific annotators are available in Appendix E.


E THICS S TATEMENT

Data. All data we collected through LLMs in our work are released publicly for usage and have
been duly scrutinized by the authors. Data for all human studies that we conduct are also publicly
released with this work, with appropriate annotator anonymizations.

Crowdsourcing. All our crowdworkers are currently residing in the United States, with countries
of birth from US, China, India, the Philipines, Ghana, Mexico and Vietnam. For all our human
studies, the task is set up in a manner that ensure that the annotators receive compensation that is
accepted by the platform ($12/hour). Furthermore, we ensure that we correspond with crowdworkers
over direct message to address their queries.

Potential Use. Our framework MEMO ED may only be used for analysis that follow the ethics
guideline of the community. Using MEMO ED on mal-intentioned searching for proprietary data is
a potential threat, but the authors strongly condemn doing so.


R EFERENCES
Antonis Antoniades, Xinyi Wang, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
  and William Yang Wang. Generalization vs memorization: Tracing language models’ capabilities
  back to pretraining data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14985, 2024.

Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric
  Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al.
  Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
  Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022, 2003.

Ermei Cao, Difeng Wang, Jiacheng Huang, and Wei Hu. Open knowledge enrichment for long-tail
  entities, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan
  Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and
  Minjoon Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11813, 2024.
A Conneau. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale.            arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, Liane Lovitt, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Orowa Sikder, Alex Tamkin, Janel Thamkul, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli.
  Towards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2306.16388, 2023.
Ashutosh Dwivedi, Pradhyumna Lavania, and Ashutosh Modi. Eticor: Corpus for analyzing llms
  for etiquettes. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Yanai Elazar, Akshita Bhagia, Ian Helgi Magnusson, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk,
  Alane Suhr, Evan Pete Walsh, Dirk Groeneveld, Luca Soldaini, Sameer Singh, et al. What’s
  in my big data? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail. In Proceedings
  of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 954–959, 2020.
Vitaly Feldman and Chiyuan Zhang. What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering the
  long tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2881–
  2891, 2020.
Yi Fung, Ruining Zhao, Jae Doo, Chenkai Sun, and Heng Ji. Massively multi-cultural knowledge
  acquisition & lm benchmarking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09369, 2024.
Isabel O Gallegos, Ryan A Rossi, Joe Barrow, Md Mehrab Tanjim, Sungchul Kim, Franck Dernon-
   court, Tong Yu, Ruiyi Zhang, and Nesreen K Ahmed. Bias and fairness in large language models:
   A survey. Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–79, 2024.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Evan Walsh, Akshita Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya
  Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, Shane Arora, David Atkinson, Russell Au-
  thur, Khyathi Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Yuling Gu, Jack Hessel,
  Tushar Khot, William Merrill, Jacob Morrison, Niklas Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crys-
  tal Nam, Matthew Peters, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Saurabh
  Shah, William Smith, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Mitchell Wortsman, Pradeep Dasigi,
  Nathan Lambert, Kyle Richardson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jesse Dodge, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini,
  Noah Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. OLMo: Accelerating the science of language models. In
  Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15789–15809,
  Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2024.acl-long.841. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.841.
Christian W Haerpfer and Kseniya Kizilova. The world values survey. The Wiley-Blackwell Ency-
  clopedia of Globalization, pp. 1–5, 2012.
Jing Huang and Diyi Yang. Culturally aware natural language inference. In Findings of the Associ-
   ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp. 7591–7609, 2023.
Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. Large language
  models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 15696–15707. PMLR, 2023.

                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Amr Keleg and Walid Magdy. Dlama: A framework for curating culturally diverse facts for probing
 the knowledge of pretrained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05076, 2023.
Khyati Khandelwal, Manuel Tonneau, Andrew M. Bean, Hannah Rose Kirk, and Scott A. Hale.
  Casteist but not racist? quantifying disparities in large language model bias between india and the
  west. ArXiv, abs/2309.08573, 2023.
Cheng Li, Mengzhou Chen, Jindong Wang, Sunayana Sitaram, and Xing Xie. Culturellm: Incorpo-
  rating cultural differences into large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10946, 2024a.
Huihan Li, Liwei Jiang, Nouha Dziri, Xiang Ren, and Yejin Choi. Culture-gen: Revealing global
  cultural perception in language models through natural language prompting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2404.10199, 2024b.
Jiacheng Liu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Infini-
   gram: Scaling unbounded n-gram language models to a trillion tokens. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2401.17377, 2024.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
  When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
  memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10511, 2022.
Rohin Manvi, Samar Khanna, Marshall Burke, David B Lobell, and Stefano Ermon. Large language
  models are geographically biased. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2024.
Tarek Naous, Michael Joseph Ryan, and Wei Xu. Having beer after prayer? measuring cul-
  tural bias in large language models. ArXiv, abs/2305.14456, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258865272.
Milad Nasr, Nicholas Carlini, Jonathan Hayase, Matthew Jagielski, A Feder Cooper, Daphne Ip-
 polito, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Eric Wallace, Florian Tramèr, and Katherine Lee. Scal-
 able extraction of training data from (production) language models. CoRR, 2023.
Tuan-Phong Nguyen, Simon Razniewski, Aparna Varde, and Gerhard Weikum. Extracting cultural
  commonsense knowledge at scale. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, WWW ’23.
  ACM, April 2023. doi: 10.1145/3543507.3583535. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
  3543507.3583535.
Shramay Palta and Rachel Rudinger. Fork: A bite-sized test set for probing culinary cultural biases
  in commonsense reasoning models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2023, pp. 9952–9962, 2023.
Aida Ramezani and Yang Xu. Knowledge of cultural moral norms in large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.01857, 2023.
Michael J Ryan, William Held, and Diyi Yang. Unintended impacts of llm alignment on global
 representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15018, 2024.
Avi Schwarzschild, Zhili Feng, Pratyush Maini, Zachary C Lipton, and J Zico Kolter. Rethinking
  llm memorization through the lens of adversarial compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15146,
  2024.
Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
  Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Jha,
  Sachin Kumar, Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
  Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle
  Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Evan Walsh,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge,
  and Kyle Lo. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for language model pretraining re-
  search. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 15725–15788, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.840. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.
  acl-long.840.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yan Tao, Olga Viberg, Ryan S. Baker, and Rene F. Kizilcec. Auditing and mitigating cultural bias
  in llms, 2023.

Zhepeng Wang, Runxue Bao, Yawen Wu, Jackson Taylor, Cao Xiao, Feng Zheng, Weiwen Jiang,
  Shangqian Gao, and Yanfu Zhang. Unlocking memorization in large language models with dy-
  namic soft prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13853, 2024.

Chiyuan Zhang, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee, Matthew Jagielski, Florian Tramèr, and Nicholas
  Carlini. Counterfactual memorization in neural language models. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:39321–39362, 2023.

Yuji Zhang, Sha Li, Jiateng Liu, Pengfei Yu, Yi R Fung, Jing Li, Manling Li, and Heng Ji. Knowl-
  edge overshadowing causes amalgamated hallucination in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2407.08039, 2024.

Xiaosen Zheng and Jing Jiang. An empirical study of memorization in nlp. In Proceedings of the
  60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 6265–6278, 2022.

Caleb Ziems, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yi-Chia Wang, Alon Halevy, and Diyi Yang. Normbank: A knowl-
  edge bank of situational social norms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17008, 2023.



A    110 C ULTURES


    Geographic Region      Countries and Regions
     Eastern-European      Albania, Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
                           Croatia, Czechia, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Kosovo,
                           Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania,
                           Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey, Ukraine
      African-Islamic      Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Libya, Morocco,
                           Nigeria, Rwanda, Tunisia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
     Western-European      Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland,
                           Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland,
                           United Kingdom
      Latin-American       Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic,
                           Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Nicaragua,
                           Peru, Puerto Rico, Uruguay, Venezuela
      English Speaking     Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Trinidad and Tobago,
                           United States, South Africa
       Central-Asian       Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Tajikistan,
                           Uzbekistan
       South-Asian         Bangladesh, India, Maldives, Pakistan
          Baltic           Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania
          Nordic           Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
        East-Asian         China, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, South Korea, Taiwan
      Southeast-Asian      Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
                           Thailand, Vietnam
       Middle-Eastern      Cyprus, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Kuwait, Qatar,
                           Saudi Arabia, Yemen

Table 4: Countries and Regions for each geographic region, according to (Haerpfer & Kizilova,
2012).



                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Figure 8: Prompt for LLAMA-3.1-8B in Topic Modeling Pipeline


B     T OPIC M ODELING
B.1   M ETHODOLOGY

For any culture C and its set of memorized symbols m(C), we select a symbol S ∈ m(C) and
                               ′
identify the set of cultures CG which also generated S but not through a memorization. For each
                 ′
culture C ′ ∈ CG and for C, we retrieve pre-training documents where the two cultures co-occur,
                   ′
forming a set Dcc . We apply the metrics defined in Section 3.3 to filter these documents, obtaining
              ′       ′                                                                              ′
a subset Drcc ⊆ Dcc that are relevant to the association of the two cultures. We further refine Drcc
                                                                                        ′
by removing documents that do not contain the symbol S, resulting in a final set Drcc s , which is
                                                     ′
relevant to the association between cultures C and C and contains the memorized symbol S.
                                                                                                   ′
Subsequently, we use a sliding window of size 2048 to create chunks from each document d ∈ Drcc s .
We employ Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) to model five topics from each set
of chunks corresponding to a document. The modeled n-gram phrases with corresponding topic
probabilities are then prompted to LLAMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024) The LLM
generates interpretable n-gram topic phrases, which are then filtered for repetitions using cosine
similarity scores calculated with XLM-RoBERTa-large embeddings (Conneau, 2019). Finally,
we extract the top five keywords from these topics using TF-IDF.

B.2   P ROMPT

In figure 8, we provide the prompt used for prompting LLAMA-3.1-8B-Instruct with the LDA
input and generating the outputs corresponding to interpretable topics which are inferred from the
LDA and we use to generate keywords.
In Table 5, we extend our study of pre-training documents (Table 3) pertaining to cross-cultural gen-
eralization from one culture to another for more cases of cultures which generate these memorized
symbols with a lower count of relevant documents than the cultures discussed before. We notice
suprisingly similiar themes in the pre-training documents such as the discussion around ”religion”
in documents where Hijab, Iran and any culture X co-occur. For Kimono and Japan, we notice
a similar common theme surrounding ”fashion”. We hypothesize that such common themes also


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Symbol            Mem.               Non-Mem.           Topic Modelling Keywords
                   Culture            Culture
 Hijab             Iran               Iraq               [woman, government, islamic, war,
                                                         politics, kurdish, people, conflict,
                                                         protest, muslim]
 Hijab             Iran               Pakistan           [woman, muslim, islamic, women, hijab,
                                                         issues, government, rights, people,
                                                         culture]
 Hijab             Iran               Indonesia          [woman, islamic, muslim, hijab,
                                                         fashion, law, women, islam, culture,
                                                         government]
 Hijab             Iran               Egypt              [woman, muslim, islamic, women, islam,
                                                         arab, government, hijab, culture,
                                                         politics]
 Kimono            Japan              Italy              [fashion, art, tokyo, culture, design,
                                                         food, hotel, experience, clothing,
                                                         travel]
 Kimono            Japan              Kenya              [travel, fashion, art, experience,
                                                         culture, africa, african, design, food,
                                                         names]
 Kimono            Japan              El Salvador        [arts, martial, blue, color, dell,
                                                         laptop, ryu, asian, friends, indigo]
 Biryani           India              Bangladesh         [food, restaurant, dish, recipe,
                                                         dishes, cuisine, cooking, bengali,
                                                         chicken, recipes]
 Biryani           India              Singapore          [food, restaurant, dish, cuisine,
                                                         dishes, experience, biryani, chicken,
                                                         cooking, options]
 Biryani           India              Iran               [food, biryani, restaurant, cuisine,
                                                         dish, recipe, saffron, hyderabad,
                                                         spice, cooking]
 Churrasco         Brazil             Peru               [food, restaurant, experience, cuisine,
                                                         bar, dining, sushi, dish, london, city]
 Churrasco         Brazil             Colombia           [food, restaurant, latin, bride,
                                                         dating, beach, cheese, recipe, meat,
                                                         travel]
 Churrasco         Brazil             Uruguay            [food, meat, restaurant, cuisine, rio,
                                                         american, bbq, experience, south, dish]

Table 5: Keywords modeled from pretraining documents in cases of cross-culture generalization
(continued)

 Topic          Prompt Template
 food           [instruction]. [symbol] is probably a [culture] food item which is a type of
 clothing       [instruction]. [symbol] is probably a [culture] clothing item which looks like a type of

Table 6: Prompts for generating definitions of memorized symbols to detect Weak-Association Gen-
eralization


cause models to overmemorize and generate memorizations from one culture into another and not
necessarily when the model is devoid of memorizations in the next token space (which would be the
case for cultures which have no memorizations).


C     P ROMPTS

C.1   W EAK -A SSOCIATION G ENERALIZATION P ROMPT

[instruction] in Table 6 refers to the instruction (note that any typos in the prompt are intentional and
included for the purpose of jailbreaking):


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


You are a helpful agent who is knewledgable about celtures from
all places. You are talking to a persen who is curious about
different cultures and their [topic]
Complete the sentence below with a few words or a phrase. If you
do not know the answer, print don’t know.

D     C OMPUTING M INIMUM D ISTANCE B / W T WO N - GRAMS
This section elaborates on the algorithm employed by us for computing minimum distance be-
tween two n-grams in a pretraining document and reporting the dTOK (C, S, D) metric. It calcu-
lates the context length difference between the n-grams C and S, as observed by the LLM during
pre-training. We hypothesize that for a pre-trained language model with a sequence length L, a
smaller dTOK (C, S, D) indicates more frequent co-occurrence of the two n-grams across training
batches. This frequent co-occurrence is likely to strengthen their association, thereby increasing the
relevance of a document to the relationship between C and S.
The algorithm described in Algorithm 1 computes the minimum token distance between two n-
grams within a text, using a tokenizer to process the input and mark relevant tokens. Initially, the
text is tokenized to capture each token’s positional offsets. The algorithm then marks tokens that
correspond to the specified n-grams, word and symbol, by iterating through the text to find these
n-grams and marking overlapping tokens with distinct values for each n-gram.
Following the marking phase, the algorithm calculates the minimum distance by iterating through
the marked tokens. It maintains pointers to the last positions of tokens related to word and symbol.
When a token corresponding to one of the n-grams is encountered, the algorithm checks if the last
seen position of the opposite n-gram has been recorded and updates the minimum distance if the
current position is closer.
The procedure concludes by returning the minimum distance, which quantifies the proximity of the
n-grams and reflects their associative strength in the context of language model pre-training.

E     H UMAN A NNOTATION S ETUP USING P ROLIFIC
We designed a human annotation task using Google Forms, automatically populated via Google
Apps Script with symbols related to food and clothing from eight different cultures. Figure 9 pro-
vides an overview of the form setup, while Figure 10 shows an example of a question where par-
ticipants were asked to evaluate whether a specific food is a cultural food item of some culture.
Annotators were required to select the most appropriate classification based on their knowledge of
the culture in question. This process enabled us to collect reliable data regarding culturally emblem-
atic food and clothing items.

F     A BLATION S TUDY
F.1   A BLATION ON H YPERPARAMETERS

In the original design of our decoding process, multinomial sampling was employed with a
set of specified hyperparameters: temperature=1.0, top p=0.95, top k=50, max tokens=30, and
num return sequences=100. The stopping criterion was established as the period (‘.’) character. To
explore the impact of these parameters on the generation results, an ablation study was conducted
where top k values of 20 and 80, and temperature values of 0.75 and 1.25 were tested against the
original settings. We observed an overlap coefficient of greater than 90% in all the four cases. This
tells us that the sampling conditions did not cause or change our findings.

F.2   A BLATION ON OLM O -7B VARIANTS

In order to verify that conclusions we find on OLMo-7B hold on other modalities, we reproduce
some of the experiments on a newer variant of OLMo-7B, OLMo-7B-0424. We collect culture-
conditioned generations for both food and clothing on OLMo-7B-0424, which is trained on Dolma


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Calculate minimum token distance between two n-grams
 1: procedure M IN T OKEN D ISTANCE(text, word, symbol, tokenizer)
 2:    encoding ← tokenizer(text, return offsets mapping=True)
 3:    tokens ← encoding.tokens()
 4:    token of f sets ← encoding[′ of f set mapping ′ ]
 5:    marks ← [0] ∗ len(tokens)
                                                   ▷ Mark tokens corresponding to symbol and word
 6:    for phrase ∈ {symbol, word} do
 7:        for start in text do
 8:            if text.f ind(phrase, start) ̸= −1 then
 9:                 end ← start + len(phrase)
10:                 for i, (s, e) in enumerate token of f sets do
11:                     if s ̸= N one ∧ e ̸= N one ∧ s < end ∧ e > start then
12:                          marks[i] ← max(marks[i], if phrase = symbol then 2 else 1)
13:                 start ← end
14:    min distance ← ∞
15:    last symbol ← −1
16:    last word ← −1
                                               ▷ Compute minimum distance between marked tokens
17:    for i from 0 to len(marks) do
18:        if marks[i] = 2 then
19:            last symbol ← i
20:            if last word ̸= −1 then
21:                 min distance ← min(min distance, i − last word)
22:        else if marks[i] = 1 then
23:            last word ← i
24:            if last symbol ̸= −1 then
25:                 min distance ← min(min distance, i − last symbol)
26:    return min distance


      Ordering              Food                            w/ Clothing
                            Morocco - 107                   Azerbaijan - 97
                            Bangladesh - 99                 Bolivia - 96
      From Top 10 (↑)       Iceland - 99                    Chile - 91
                            Sweden - 96                     India - 76
                            Ethiopia - 90                   Kenya - 74
                            France - 42                     Germany - 30
                            Singapore - 42                  United States - 28
      From Bottom 10 (↓)    Britain - 38                    China - 26
                            Indonesia - 36                  Portugal - 24
                            Australia - 35                  France - 21

Table 7: Cultures chosen for ablating on OLMo-7B-0424 and their corresponding number of
unique symbols


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Figure 9: Example of Google Form Used for Cultural Food Annotation


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Figure 10: Sample Question from Google Form on Cultural Food Classification


1.7. Although OLMo-7B-0424is the same model family as OLMo-7B, Dolma 1.7 contains pre-
training documents that are not in Dolma 1.5, and OLMo-7B-0424 is trained with an updated al-
gorithm from OLMo-7B. Other models supported by the WIMBD API, such as Pythia (Biderman
et al., 2023), are not particularly capable of instruction following culture-conditioned generations,
and therefore, analyzing their generations is less informative.
We only reproduce two main correlations in the main paper:

The number of cultures a symbol with diffuse association is generated for and the number of
pretraining documents it appears in (Section 4.3) For OLMo-7B-0424, we obtain a moderate-
to-strong correlation for both clothing (spearman ρ = 0.507, Kendall τ = 0.362) and food (spear-
man ρ = 0.416, Kendall τ = 0.313). Compared to OLMo-7B with clothing (spearman ρ = 0.521,
Kendall τ = 0.367) and food (spearman ρ = 0.358, Kendall τ = 0.260), we see that even though
the models and training data are different, the Spearman and Kendall correlations for food and cloth-
ing remain the same (both moderate-to-strong correlations). This means that the number of cultures
a symbol with diffuse association was generated for and the number of pretraining documents it
appears in is positively correlated, regardless of the model.

The number of memorized symbols for a culture and the number of pretraining documents it
appears in (Section 4.1) For OLMo-7B-0424, we select 10 cultures out of 110, 5 from the 10
cultures with the highest number of unique symbols generated by OLMo-7B-0424 and 5 from the
10 cultures with the lowest number of unique symbols generated by OLMo-7B-0424.
We obtain a moderate-to-strong correlation for both clothing (spearman ρ = 0.591, Kendall τ =
0.507) and food (spearman ρ = 0.829, Kendall τ = 0.659). Compared to OLMo-7B (on 110
cultures) with clothing (spearman ρ = 0.540, Kendall τ = 0.421) and food (spearman ρ = 0.670,
Kendall τ = 0.507), we see that even though OLMo-7B-0424 is tested on smaller number of
cultures, for both clothing and food, the correlation of OLMo-7B-0424is more strongly positive.
Therefore, the conclusion still holds that higher pretraining document counts of cultures increase the
number of memorized symbols in culture-conditioned generations.

F.3   A BLATION ON Z-S CORE FOR MEMO ED

We study whether selecting a different z-score threshold would change the conclusions of MEM-
O ED on memorized symbols for all cultures. We perform an ablation study on setting the z-score to
2, which statistically means that the value is about 97.7 percentile. Empirically, a z-score below 2
does not indicate outliers, so we focus our ablation analysis only on cases where the z-score is 2.
When z = 2, we still get a moderate-to-strong correlation between 1) the number of memorized
symbols for a culture and 2) the count of documents in which the culture appears in the pretraining
corpora: for clothing, we obtain a spearman correlation of 0.569 and a Kendall correlation of 0.445;
for food, we obtain a spearman correlation of 0.688 and a Kendall correlation of 0.519. This corre-
lation is lower but similar to the original correlations found for z=2.6 (food: Spearman=0.670 and


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             (a) dSNR : 6.599 ; dTOK : 4                         (b) dSNR : -0.982 ; dSENT : 0

Figure 11: Examples of excerpts from relevant pretraining docs for Culture: “Indian” and Symbol:
“Naan”:


             (a) dSNR : 5.584 ; dTOK : 17                        (b) dSNR : -0.841 ; dSENT : 0

Figure 12: Examples of excerpts from relevant pretraining docs for Culture: “Chinese” and Symbol:
“Wonton Noodle Soup”:


Kendall=0.507; clothing: Spearman=0.540 and Kendall=0.421), showing that our conclusion on the
relationship between a culture’s memorized symbols and the culture’s frequency in pretraining data
is robust to a different z-score threshold.
In addition, we examine how lowering the z-score from 2.6 to 2 changes memorized symbols dis-
covered for each culture. We compare each metric’s agreement with human evaluation on clothing:
when z=2.6, the weighted F1 score is 0.845, and when z=2, the weighted F1 score is 0.840. We can
see that z = 2 has a slightly lower agreement with human categorization, suggesting that additional
symbols that are marked as memorized symbols when z=2 are non-emblematic symbols according
to human culture experts.


G    T RAINING D OCUMENT E XCERPTS

In this section, we present excerpts from the pre-training documents classified as contributory to a
culture-symbol association using MEMO ED’s dSNR , dTOK and dSENT metrics.
In Figure 11, we present excerpts from two pretraining documents classified as contributory to the
association between the culture: Indian and the symbol: Naan. We also report the relevant metric
scores used to determine this. For Figure 11a, since the dSNR is greater than zero, the dTOK metric is
used to ascertain the classification of this document. As visible in the excerpt, the culture “Indian”
appears numerous times and in close proximity to the symbol “naan”. Additionally, upon seeing
the remaining part of the excerpt, we see that it is talking about Indian food items which indicates
the relevancy of this document towards the association. On the other hand, for Figure 11b, since


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


 Culture                   Memorized Symbols From                        Pre-Training Count Rank (/110)
 Trinbagonian              American (0.4%)                               101
 Macanese                  American (0.5%)                               100
 Salvadoran                American (1%)                                 99
 Zambian                   American (0.6%)                               94
 Nicaraguan                American (0.4%)                               85
 Puertorriqueña           American (0.6%)                               70
 Egyptian                  Iranian (2.9%)                                27
 Saudi                     Iranian (6.2%)                                45
 Andorran                  French (0.3%)                                 110
 Hong Konger               French (0.6%)                                 38

                   Table 8: Cultures Identified from Leave-One-Out-Correlation


the dSNR is between 0 and -1, we use the dSENT metric as explained in Section 3.3. We can observe
similarly that although the ratio is less than zero, the document is not noisy and the local context is
about Indian food item.
Similarly, in Figure 12, we present excerpts from two pretraining documents classified as contrib-
utory to the association between the culture: Chinese and the symbol: Wonton Noodle Soup. We
can observe that the training document with a positive dSNR is not really talking about Chinese food
items but rather talks about a prominent Chinese festival i.e. Chinese New Year and mentions the
food delicacies being prepared then. Thus, through this it contributes to the association between the
culture and symbol. On the other hand, for the document with negative dSNR , we observe a rela-
tively high concentration of cultural mentions in this excerpt and on a global level, the topic being
discussed is restaurants in China when the food cultural symbol is mentioned. Hence we see how
this document potentially contributes to the culture-symbol association.

H     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
H.1   C ROSS -C ULTURE G ENERALIZATION

                Topic     Keywords
                 food     food, foods, cuisine, cuisines, dish, dishes, meal, meals, recipe,
                          recipes, menu, menus, breakfast, lunch, dinner, snack, snacks
               clothing   clothing, clothes, apparel, garment, garments, outfit, outfits, attire,
                          attires, dress, dresses, suit, suits, uniform, uniforms

         Table 9: Keyword list that we use to filter for topic-related pretraining documents.

To further evaluate cross-culture generalization across all 110 cultures, we obtain: (1) the percent-
age of a culture’s responses that contain another culture’s memorized symbols; (2) how often is a
culture’s memorized symbol generated for some other culture. Additionally, we calculate the corre-
lation between each culture’s metrics (1) and (2) with the frequency of topic-relevant occurrences of
that culture in the pretraining corpora.
For (1), we observe a moderate negative correlation for food (Spearman ρ = −0.521, Kendall
τ = −0.364) indicating that cultures containing more memorized symbols from other cultures tend
to occur less-frequently in food-related pretraining documents. We have shown this correlation
using a scatter plot in Figure 13. However, for clothing, we observe a weak negative correlation
(spearman ρ = −0.099, Kendall τ = −0.061). To investigate this, we conduct a leave-one-culture-
out experiment. In this analysis, we recalculated the correlations while systematically excluding
one culture at a time. We then identify and list the top ten cultures causing the highest variation.
Notably, these cultures are either those that predominantly contain generalization from regional
cultures, such as Egyptian or Saudi, or those that are less frequently mentioned in the pretraining
data, such as Trinbagonian. We have listed these ten cultures with the highest number of cross-


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


culture generalization in their responses, along with the culture whose memorized symbols appear
the most in the former cultures, as well as their pretraining occurrence ranked out of all 110 cultures
in Table 8. We observe that a majority of cultures have the highest generalization from America
while Egypt and Saudi have a significant percentage of their generations memorized from one culture
i.e. Iran.
For (2), our observations indicate that 34 cul-
tures related to clothing and 86 related to food
have their memorized symbols being gener-
ated at least once in other cultures’ generations.
Upon calculating correlations with these cul-
tures, we observed moderate-to-high correla-
tions for both clothing (Spearman ρ = 0.763,
Kendall τ = 0.574) and food (Spearman ρ =
0.716, Kendall τ = 0.531). These results sug-
gest that cultures whose symbols are frequently
mentioned in other cultures’ generations are
also those more commonly appearing in topic-
related pretraining documents. We show this
correlation through scatter plots for both cloth-
ing and food in Figure 14.
                                                     Figure 13: Correlation b/w number of memo-
                                                     rized symbols from other cultures and pre-training
H.2    R ESULTS OVERVIEW                             counts for a culture


                  (a) Topic: Food                                    (b) Topic: Clothing

                               Figure 14: Cross-Culture Generalization


Continuing from Section 4.6, in this section
we expand upon our findings and present some
more results across the 110 cultures.
In Tables 10 and 11, we present the memorization and generalization statistics for food and clothing,
respectively. Specifically, we provide the names of the top 5 and bottom 5 cultures, ranked by the
percentage of their responses classified as either memorization or weak association generalization.
Cultures with the highest percentage of memorized responses tend to correspond to those that appear
more frequently in the pretraining dataset. However, notable exceptions exist, such as the culture
United States, which, despite occurring frequently in the pretraining data and having a large number
of memorized symbols, exhibits only 3.01% of its total responses as memorized, as shown in Figure
17a.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      Ordering                w/ Memorization                    w/ Weak Association Gen.
                              Mexico                             Trinidad
                              India                              Venezuela
      Top 5 (↑)               Japanese                           South Korea
                              Morocco                            Morocco
                              Nigeria                            Georgia
                              Qatar                              Germany
                              South Africa                       Japan
      Bottom 5 (↓)            Tajikistan                         United States
                              Trinidad                           Italy
                              Yemen                              Denmark

                     Table 10: Memorization and Generalization Stats for Food


      Ordering                w/ Memorization                    w/ Weak Association Gen.
                              India                              Uruguay
                              Saudi Arabia                       Venezuela
      Top 5 (↑)               Japan                              Vietnam
                              Pakistan                           Yemen
                              Canada                             Zambia
                              Uruguay                            Colombia
                              Venezuela                          Peru
      Bottom 5 (↓)            Vietnam                            Nicargua
                              Yemen                              Venezuela
                              Zambia                             United States

                   Table 11: Memorization and Generalization Stats for Clothing


We also observe that a culture with a high percentage of memorized responses does not necessarily
have a large number of unique memorized symbols. For instance, Pakistan ranks 4th in memoriza-
tion count for the topic of clothing but has relatively few unique memorized symbols. This indicates
that for some cultures, OLMo-7B tends to repeatedly generate the same memorized symbols when
sampled multiple times. Additionally, Table 11 shows that the bottom 5 cultures, which have the
lowest percentage of their responses classified as memorized, exhibit the highest percentage of weak
association generalization in their responses.
We further provide the distribution of additional cultures, similar to the analysis presented for Mex-
ico and Trinidad in Section 4.6. Figure 15 illustrates the distribution of Chinese, Japanese, and
Indian cultures for the topic of food. Notably, despite these three cultures being relatively high-
frequency in the pretraining data, all exhibit very high percentage of symbols of diffuse association,
exceeding 60% in each case. Interestingly, we also observe considerable variance in the overall pres-
ence of memorization, ranging from almost 30% for India to only 11.5% for China. Additionally,
all three cultures exhibit a relatively low percentage of cross-culture generalization. This is likely
due to their high frequency in the pretraining data, which results in their symbols being generalized
to other less frequently occurring cultures.
In Figure 16, we compare the distributions of two less-frequently occurring cultures, i.e., Myanmar
and Yemen, for the topic of clothing. We observe that, apart from exhibiting very high rates of
diffuse association symbols (greater than 70% in most cases), these cultures have no memorized
symbols according to the classification provided by MEMO ED. Yemen, in particular, demonstrates
a notably high percentage of cross-culture generalization, approximately 21.1%.
Finally, in Figure 17, we present the distributions for the USA and Saudi Arabia within the topic
of clothing. The results for the USA are particularly striking, as it is one of the most frequently
occurring cultures in the pretraining dataset, yet nearly 96% of its responses consist solely of diffuse
association symbols. Despite containing a substantial number of unique memorized symbols, only


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            (a) China                         (b) India                        (c) Japan

              Figure 15: Distributions of China, India and Japan responses for Food


                 (a) Myanmmar                                         (b) Yemen

                        Figure 16: Clothing Stats - Mynammar and Yemen


3% of its responses qualify as memorization. In contrast, Saudi Arabia exhibits greater diversity,
with significant percentages of both memorization and cross-culture generalization in its generated
outputs.


                    (a) USA                                        (b) Saudi Arabia

                        Figure 17: Clothing Stats - USA and Saudi Arabia


                                                26
