Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A NY T OUCH : L EARNING U NIFIED S TATIC -DYNAMIC
R EPRESENTATION ACROSS M ULTIPLE V ISUO - TACTILE
S ENSORS
    Ruoxuan Feng1         Jiangyu Hu2,3   Wenke Xia1 Tianci Gao1 Ao Shen1 Yuhao Sun3
                                         Bin Fang3∗ Di Hu1∗
             1
               Renmin University of China 2 Wuhan University of Science and Technology
                        3
                          Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications



                                             A BSTRACT

          Visuo-tactile sensors aim to emulate human tactile perception, enabling robots to
          precisely understand and manipulate objects. Over time, numerous meticulously
          designed visuo-tactile sensors have been integrated into robotic systems, aiding
          in completing various tasks. However, the distinct data characteristics of these
          low-standardized visuo-tactile sensors hinder the establishment of a powerful tac-
          tile perception system. We consider that the key to addressing this issue lies in
          learning unified multi-sensor representations, thereby integrating the sensors and
          promoting tactile knowledge transfer between them. To achieve unified represen-
          tation of this nature, we introduce TacQuad, an aligned multi-modal multi-sensor
          tactile dataset from four different visuo-tactile sensors, which enables the explicit
          integration of various sensors. Recognizing that humans perceive the physical en-
          vironment by acquiring diverse tactile information such as texture and pressure
          changes, we further propose to learn unified multi-sensor representations from
          both static and dynamic perspectives. By integrating tactile images and videos, we
          present AnyTouch, a unified static-dynamic multi-sensor representation learning
          framework with a multi-level structure, aimed at both enhancing comprehensive
          perceptual abilities and enabling effective cross-sensor transfer. This multi-level
          architecture captures pixel-level details from tactile data via masked modeling and
          enhances perception and transferability by learning semantic-level sensor-agnostic
          features through multi-modal alignment and cross-sensor matching. We provide a
          comprehensive analysis of multi-sensor transferability, and validate our method on
          various offline datasets and in the real-world pouring task. Experimental results
          show that our method outperforms existing methods, exhibits outstanding static
          and dynamic perception capabilities across various sensors. The code, TacQuad
          dataset and AnyTouch model are fully available at gewu-lab.github.io/AnyTouch/.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Tactile perception is an important sense through which humans perceive the physical world. For
many years, researchers have been working to endow robots with human-like tactile perception
abilities through diverse tactile sensors (Liu et al., 2022; Maiolino et al., 2013; Yuan et al., 2017).
Among them, with high resolution comparable to human touch, various types of visuo-tactile sen-
sors have garnered widespread attention (Yuan et al., 2017; Donlon et al., 2018; Lambeta et al.,
2020). Many studies have attempted to use robots equipped with visuo-tactile sensors to perform
manipulation tasks such as grasping (Xu et al., 2024) and inserting (Li et al., 2014).
However, due to the low standardization of visuo-tactile sensors, different sensors may exhibit dis-
crepancies in perceiving the same tactile information. This variability poses challenges to building
precise robotic tactile systems, as sensor-specific data collection (Yang et al., 2022; Gao et al.,
2023) and model training limit the data scale and diversity for the model of a single sensor and lead
to suboptimal perception capabilities. To address this issue, some initial efforts have explored us-
    * Equal corresponding authors.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ing multi-sensor data collaboratively to enhance cross-sensor knowledge transferability (Yang et al.,
2024; Zhao et al., 2024). Nevertheless, the lack of aligned multi-sensor data has hindered these at-
tempts from effectively integrating disparate sensors and constructing a unified representation space.
Considering this data issue, Rodriguez et al. (2024) collected a dual-sensor paired dataset to enable
cross-sensor generation. However, their focus on specific manipulation tasks limited the variety
of sensors and collected objects. Moreover, they overlooked the potential benefits of paired multi-
modal data for enhancing sensor transferability and achieving comprehensive tactile perception.
To enhance support for multi-sensor integration, we collect TacQuad, an aligned multi-modal multi-
sensor tactile dataset containing 72,606 contact frames, using four different visuo-tactile sensors.
We select these representative sensors from publicly available sensors, self-made sensors, and force
field sensors to ensure diversity. To balance the trade-off between the cost of data collection and the
accuracy of pairing, we collect fine-grained spatio-temporal aligned data on a calibration platform,
while larger-scale coarse-grained spatial aligned data is acquired through the handheld collection, as
shown in Figure 1. Additionally, we capture the objects being touched using a camera and annotate
tactile attribute descriptions for each collection, forming a comprehensive touch-vision-language
dataset. This dataset utilizes paired multi-modal data as a bridge to mitigate the impact of sensor
variability on the understanding of tactile semantic features, and enables the explicit integration of
sensors into a unified multi-sensor space for effective knowledge transfer between sensors.
Building on this solid foundation, we further revisit the challenge of learning unified multi-sensor
representations: How can we obtain unified multi-sensor representations adaptable to a wide array
of tasks? We recognize that the human tactile perception is a combination of static and dynamic
processes, as humans derive comprehensive tactile perception from multiple types of information
such as texture, sliding, and pressure changes. Drawing on this insight, we propose learning unified
representations from both static and dynamic perspectives to accommodate a range of tasks.
To obtain multi-sensor representations of this nature, we introduce AnyTouch, a unified static-
dynamic multi-sensor tactile representation learning framework. This framework integrates the input
forms of tactile images and videos, collectively utilizing them to reinforce the model’s abilities to
perceive both static properties and dynamic changes. Moreover, we design a multi-level architecture
to comprehensively strengthen the model’s capabilities for capturing pixel-level tactile details and
semantic-level sensor-agnostic features. Specifically, we utilize masked modeling (He et al., 2022;
Tong et al., 2022) to maximize the use of multi-sensor data for learning fine-grained, pixel-level
details. Subsequently, we conduct multi-modal aligning and a novel cross-sensor matching task to
understand semantic-level tactile properties of objects across different sensors and extract sensor-
agnostic features. We aim for the multi-sensor representations to share a common space and cluster
by the tactile information of the object they represent, thereby reducing the gap between sensors.
To further promote knowledge transfer across multiple sensors, we propose randomly replacing the
sensor-specific tokens (Yang et al., 2024) with universal sensor tokens during training. This strategy
ensures the model maintains its ability to process and perceive tactile data across various sensors,
while also providing knowledge from all seen sensors for generalization to unseen sensors.
We conduct both quantitative and qualitative experiments to analyze the transferability of multi-
sensor data and assess the impact of our framework on the multi-sensor representation space. Build-
ing on this, we comprehensively evaluate the static and dynamic tactile perception capabilities of
AnyTouch across various tactile datasets and through a real-world experiment: fine-grained pouring.
The experimental results demonstrate the static and dynamic perception abilities and cross-sensor
transferability of AnyTouch. We hope the approach of learning unified multi-sensor representa-
tions from both static and dynamic perspectives will establish a standardized learning paradigm for
visuo-tactile perception and further inspire research in multi-sensor representation learning.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Multi-Source Learning. Learning from multi-source data with greater data scale and diversity is
expected to enhance the model’s performance and generalization ability, but faces challenges in inte-
grating the data representation spaces. Researchers have found that multi-source models often strug-
gle to capture a unified representation suffering from the discrepancies between data sources (Glorot
et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2019). Contrastive learning (Wang et al., 2022b; Zhao et al., 2023) is pro-
posed to learn language-agnostic representations for multi-source language training, while cycle
consistency loss (Zhu et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2022) aligns the target domain distributions in multi-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 TacQuad: Aligned Multi-Modal Multi-Sensor Tactile Dataset

                                                  Four Visuo-tactile Sensors                                                                                 Data Collection
                                                                                                                                       Four
                                                                                                                                      Sensors


                        GelSight Mini                DIGIT                   DuraGel                     Tac3D
                          (Public)                  (Public)               (Self-made)                (Force Field)                    Calibration Platform                                                 Handheld

                                         Fine-grained,Spatio-temporal,Aligned                                                                    Material Distribution
                                                                                                                   25 Objects
                                                                                                                   30 Touches


                                                                                                                                                 Ba m
                                                                                                                 17,524 Frames


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                   rk


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ar
                                                                                                                                                    St
        GelSight Mini                   DIGIT                  DuraGel                    Tac3D                                             Le


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                                af
                  The tactile sensor touches the top center of a glass jar, which has a hard, smooth, and


                                                                                                                                                                                                              ic
                                                                                                                                                                 Pl


                                                                                                                                                                                                             st
                                                                                                                                                                   an
                                       transparent surface with a series of texture.


                                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pl
                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                           Sto
                                                                                                                                                              ne                     Sponge
                                                                                                                                                                                     Porcelain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Soft
                                                Coarse-grained Spatial Aligned                                                                            Glass                      Wool
                                                                                                                                                                                     Fiber
                                                                                                                                                                                     Feather
                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                                                                 (Indoor + Outdoor)                        Pap                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l       Ru
                                                                                                                   99 Objects                                                                                                      stl


                                                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ess


                                                                                                                                                                      bb
                                                                                                                  151 Touches


                                                                                                                                                                                           Food
                                                                                                                                                                   Ru
                                                                                                                                                     ft
                                                                                                                                                So
        GelSight Mini                   DIGIT                  DuraGel                    Tac3D
                                                                                                                 55,082 Frames


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ru
                                                                                                                                                              rd


                                                                                                                                                                                  Vegetables
          The tactile sensor touches the top center of a rough hard orange. The contact point is relatively


                                                                                                                                                            Ha



                                                                                                                                                                           s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fruits
                                                                                                                                                                          Other


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                              hard and firm with roughness and a slightly elastic feel .



Figure 1: TacQuad: an aligned multi-modal multi-sensor tactile dataset from four visuo-tactile
sensors. We select GelSight Mini (Inc.) and DIGIT (Lambeta et al., 2020) from publicly available
sensors, DuraGel (Zhang et al., 2024) from self-made sensors, and Tac3D (Zhang et al., 2022)
from force field sensors for diversity. There is a noticeable gap between the data from these sensors.
We use the four sensors to touch the same position on the same object to obtain aligned data. To
maximize aligned data collection, we use two methods to gather subsets with different alignment
accuracy. We collect fine-grained spatio-temporal aligned data on a calibration platform, while
larger-scale coarse-grained spatial aligned data is acquired through handheld collection.


source image generation. Similarly, to integrate multi-source tactile data from different sensors,
techniques such as multi-sensor joint training (Zhao et al., 2024; Higuera et al., 2024; Gupta et al.,
2025), multi-modal alignment (Yang et al., 2024), and cross-sensor generation (Rodriguez et al.,
2024) have emerged. However, these methods overlook the benefits of jointly utilizing multi-modal
data and aligned multi-sensor data to bridge the sensor gap. In this work, we collect an aligned
multi-modal multi-sensor dataset and propose learning unified multi-sensor representations.
Visuo-tactile Perception. Visuo-tactile sensors have garnered widespread attention due to their high
resolution (Yuan et al., 2017; Donlon et al., 2018; Lambeta et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2024; 2025).
Nowadays, many works utilize visuo-tactile sensors to capture contact deformations, enabling the
completion of dexterous manipulation such as dense packing (Li et al., 2022), grasping (Xu et al.,
2024), and insertion (Li et al., 2014). Visuo-tactile sensors can also collaborate with other sensors
to assist the robot in performing more complex manipulation tasks. For instance, Feng et al. (2024)
dynamically integrates visuo-tactile signals with visual and audio data to collaboratively accomplish
fine-grained manipulation tasks, such as pouring and peg insertion with keyway. In addition to these
tasks requiring dynamic tactile perception, visuo-tactile sensors are also used in static tasks such as
material classification (Yang et al., 2022) and shape reconstruction (Gao et al., 2022b). However, due
to the low standardization of visual-tactile sensors, these methods fail to leverage larger and more
diverse data from other sensors and lack sensor transferability. In this work, we propose learning a
unified multi-sensor representation from both static and dynamic perspectives.
Representation Learning. Representation learning has achieved remarkable success in improving
model generalization in various fields. Techniques like BERT (Devlin, 2018) and masked autoen-
coder (MAE) (He et al., 2022) have enhanced the model’s performance across various downstream
applications. With the rise of multi-modal learning, representation learning has expanded its impact
across fields. Vision-language pre-training (Radford et al., 2021) has seen tremendous success, and
more modalities, including audio (Guzhov et al., 2022), touch (Yang et al., 2024), and 3D point
clouds (Xue et al., 2023), are being integrated. Among them, tactile information from visuo-tactile
sensors can be expressed as images, allowing vision-related techniques to make strides in touch.
Applying MAE (Cao et al., 2023; Higuera et al., 2024) or multi-modal aligning (Yang et al., 2024;
Cheng et al., 2024) has enhanced tactile model capabilities. However, these efforts have not ex-
plored how to obtain a unified visuo-tactile representation suitable for various tasks. Our research
addresses this challenge from both static and dynamic perspectives, enhancing cross-sensor transfer-
ability across various tasks through semantic-level multi-modal aligning and cross-sensor matching.


                                                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3     A LIGNED M ULTI - MODAL M ULTI -S ENSOR TACTILE DATASET
The low standardization of visuo-tactile sensors and the gap between multi-sensor data have resulted
in insufficient data for individual sensors and the poor cross-sensor transferability of tactile models.
Rodriguez et al. (2024) has made an initial attempt to address it by collecting a dataset with 32,256
pairs of tactile images from two sensors with a limited variety of objects for specific manipula-
tion tasks. It does not consider tactile properties such as material and hardness, and overlooks the
potential to enhance cross-sensor transfer capabilities through multi-modal information.
In this work, we present a more comprehensive solution to this problem by providing multi-sensor
aligned data with text and images, explicitly enabling the model to learn semantic-level tactile at-
tributes and sensor-agnostic features to form a unified multi-sensor representation space through
data-driven approaches. We collect TacQuad, an aligned multi-modal multi-sensor tactile dataset
with a greater variety of objects, larger data volume, and more types of sensors. To ensure sensor
diversity, we select GelSight Mini (Inc.) and DIGIT (Lambeta et al., 2020) from publicly available
sensors, DuraGel (Zhang et al., 2024) from self-made sensors, and Tac3D (Zhang et al., 2022) from
force field sensors for data collection. The first three sensors are used to collect tactile images, while
the Tac3D is used to capture deformation force fields. However, considering collecting fine-grained
aligned tactile data is very costly, to collect data on a larger scale while ensuring as much data pairing
as possible, we use both coarse and fine methods to collect aligned data:
Fine-grained spatio-temporal aligned data. We fix the four sensors side by side in a rectangular
container and connect them to the movable end of a calibration platform. We use a program to
control the four sensors to press the same position on the same object in sequence, sharing the same
speed and depth. Consequently, we obtain a set of continuous spatio-temporally aligned contact
frames. Due to the high requirement of precision, the process is time-consuming, thus we try our
best to collect 30 sets of aligned data across 25 objects. This portion of the data contains a total
of 17,524 contact frames, which can be used for fine-grained tasks such as cross-sensor generation.
See more details for the fine-grained data collection in Sec. A.5 of the Appendix.
Coarse-grained spatial aligned data. We collect data in a handheld manner by sequentially press-
ing the same location on the same object with four sensors. While pressing, we introduce some
twisting motions to the handheld sensors to better simulate the authentic dynamic touch experience
of humans. This method allows us to obtain a larger amount of aligned data in a short time. Using
this approach, we collect 151 sets of aligned data from 99 objects, including both indoor and outdoor
scenes. This portion of the data contains a total of 55,082 contact frames.
Each tactile frame in the dataset has a paired visual image and tactile attribute descriptions that
generated using GPT-4o and manually corrected. We aim to bridge the gap between sensors and
achieve a more comprehensive tactile perception by aligning with the multi-modal data. As a result,
we obtain an aligned multi-sensor multi-modal tactile dataset, as shown in Figure 1.

4     M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce AnyTouch, a unified multi-sensor tactile representation learning frame-
work from the perspectives of both static and dynamic perception, as shown in Figure 2. Concretely,
we integrate the input format of tactile images and videos (Sec. 4.1) and focus on learning both fine-
grained pixel-level details for refined tasks (Sec. 4.2) and semantic-level sensor-agnostic features for
understanding properties (Sec. 4.3) and building unified space (Sec. 4.4) by a multi-level structure.
We also propose universal sensor tokens for better knowledge transfer.

4.1   U NIFIED INPUT FORMAT FOR S TATIC AND DYNAMIC TACTILE P ERCEPTION
In daily life, human tactile perception includes both static and dynamic processes. A brief touch
allows quick recognition of properties like material and texture, while tasks such as unlocking a
lock require continuous dynamic perception. These two types of perception complement each other,
enabling us to comprehensively understand the physical surroundings and engage in a variety of
interactions. This inspires us to learn unified multi-sensor representation from the perspective of
combining static and dynamic perception, using tactile images and videos respectively.
Given a static tactile image I ∈ R1×H×W ×3 and a dynamic tactile video clip V ∈ RF ×H×W ×3 , we
consider tactile images as single-frame static videos to unify tactile images and videos. Concretely,
we replicate I along the time axis for F times, and use a unified 4-D tensor XT ∈ RF ×H×W ×3


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Stage 1: Pixel-Level                                                                                                     Universal Sensor Token
         Masked Modeling: Pixel-Level Details                                                                                         Replacing
                                                                                                                                      Probability
                                            (or   )
                                                       Touch       Touch
                                                      Encoder     Decoder
                                                                                                       Video Reconstruction                              Training
           Masked        Masked                                                              Image              &                                          Step
         Tactile Image Tactile Video                                                     Reconstruction    Next Frame
                                                                                                            Prediction
                                                                                                                                       (Linear Increase)

         Stage 2: Semantic-Level                                                                                                            Replace
                                                                                                                                       (Probability =        )
         Multi-Modal Aligning: Semantic-Level Properties
                                                                                         Vision                                           …
                                            (or   )
                                                                                        Encoder
                                                       Touch                                                                        Specific          Universal
                                                      Encoder                                              “The tactile sensor    Sensor Token      Sensor Token
                                                                                         Text                is touching two
            Static       Dynamic                      (Shared)      Multi-Modal         Encoder               iron nails. The
         Tactile Image Tactile Video                             Contrastive Learning
                                                                                        (Anchor)            nails are hard ...”
                                                                                                                                  Legends
         Cross-Sensor Matching: Sensor-Agnostic Features
                                                                                                                                    LoRA Fine-Tuning
                                            (or   )

                                                       Touch           Task                   �                 �                   Universal Sensor Token
                                                      Encoder          Head
                                                                                         Does the two samples come from
                                                                                         the same position of the object?             Specific Sensor Token
            Static       Dynamic                      (Shared)
         Tactile Image Tactile Video                                                                   0/1
                                                                                             Cross-Sensor Matching                  Masked Token       Class Token
          (Positive / Negative Samples)



Figure 2: Overview of AnyTouch. Our framework integrates static tactile images and dynamic tac-
tile videos, aiming to learn a unified multi-sensor representation suitable for various tasks. Through
a multi-level architecture, we employ masked modeling to learn pixel-level tactile details, and use
multi-modal aligning and cross-sensor matching to understand semantic-level sensor-agnostic tac-
tile properties. We also use universal sensor tokens to integrate and transfer sensor information.
to represent both I and V as Girdhar et al. (2022; 2023), where F is the number of frames and
H, W denote the shape of images. We then process XT ∈ RF ×H×W ×3 into spatio-temporal tokens
z ∈ RN ×d through a shared patch projection layer, where N is the length of tokens and d represents
the feature dimension. By unifying the processing of images and videos in this manner, our approach
integrates tactile images and video input, enhancing the model’s ability to comprehend both static
and dynamic information, and endows the model with the potential to accomplish various tasks.
4.2   M ASKED M ODELING : LEARNING P IXEL - LEVEL D ETAILS
Visuo-tactile images are fine-grained data with pixel-level details of subtle tactile deformations and
continuous changes during dynamic processes, especially for refined perception tasks. To enhance
the fine-grained perception capabilities of the tactile representation model, we employ the masked
autoencoder technique (He et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2022), compelling the model to capture pixel-
level details across multiple sensors. Concretely, we randomly mask the tokens of both tactile images
and videos with a masking ratio ρ, and build a decoder to obtain the reconstructed static images Iˆ
and dynamic videos V̂ . The corresponding loss function LSrec and LDrec are mean squared error
(MSE) loss between the original masked tokens and reconstructed ones in the pixel space:
                                                             F
                 1     X
                             ˆ − I(p)|2 , LD           1    X    X
       LSrec =              |I(p)            rec =                    |V̂f (p) − Vf (p)|2 , (1)
               |ΩM |                                F |ΩM |
                                          p∈ΩM                                                         f      p∈ΩM

where p is the token index, ΩM is the set of masked tokens and Vf is the f -th frame in the video V .
We use masked modeling to learn fine-grained tactile deformation features at the pixel level, as well
as the temporal dynamics of tactile changes.
To further enhance the model’s understanding of continuous deformation changes, we introduce an
additional task of predicting the next frame VF +1 while reconstructing the dynamic video V . The
loss function LDpred is MSE loss between the original frame VF +1 and the predicted frame V̂F +1 :
                                           N
                                         1 X
                              LDpred =        |V̂F +1 (p) − VF +1 (p)|2 .                        (2)
                                        N p

4.3   M ULTI - MODAL A LIGNING : UNDERSTANDING SEMANTIC - LEVEL PROPERTIES
After obtaining tactile representations with fine-grained perceptual details via masked modeling,
we aim to further understand semantic-level tactile properties and use paired multi-modal data as
a bridge to narrow the gap between sensors. Therefore, we propose using multi-modal aligning,
which binds data from various sensors with paired modalities for a more comprehensive semantic-
level perception and reduce perceptual differences between sensors. However, differences in data
collection scenarios across various datasets (e.g., simulation vs. reality) make simple vision-tactile


                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


              Touch-Vision                    Touch-Vision-Language
           Contrastive Learning                Contrastive Learning                             UniTouch                               Ours

                                                                                                                               Vision             Touch
             Vision            Touch              Vision            Touch                 Vision             Touch         (Multi-Datasets)   (Multi-Sensors)
        (Single Dataset)   (Single Sensor)   (Single Dataset)   (Single Sensor)       (Multi-Datasets)   (Multi-Sensors)
                                                                                                                                               Object 1 Object 2


                                                                                                                                   Text           Object 3
                                                    Text



Figure 3: Comparison with existing multi-modal aligning methods. Our method not only uses
multi-modal data to bridge the gap between sensors, but also explicitly clusters representations of
the same position on the same object from different sensors together.
alignment less effective in bridging sensor gaps. Therefore, we select the text modality, which
consistently describes tactile attributes across datasets, as an anchor to align touch, vision, and text
modalities. Since tri-modal tactile datasets are rare, with most containing only vision-touch pairs, we
explore two strategies: automatically expanding the amount of text modality pairings and designing
aligning methods that are compatible with missing modalities. We first select representative datasets
for each sensor and then use GPT-4o to generate or expand the text modality within these datasets.
Through this method, we create new text pairs for 1.4 million samples across the four datasets.
Based on these extensive tactile datasets, we develop a modality-missing-aware touch-vision-
language contrastive learning method to leverage the paired data between touch and other modalities
for alignment. We maximize the use of paired data by selecting the largest subset for each modality
combination within the batch for multi-modal aligning. Considering a pair of uni-modal represen-
tations (xT , xV , xL ) derived from uni-modal encoders, where xT ∈ Rd is the touch representation,
xV ∈ Rd ∪ ∅ is the vision representation and xL ∈ Rd ∪ ∅ is the text representation. We then
perform multi-modal alignment (Radford et al., 2021) within the batch as (taking vision-language
aligning with missing modalities as an example):
                                  1       X               exp(x⊤V,i · xL,i /τ )
               LV →L = −                        log P                  ⊤
                                                                                    ,           (3)
                             |ΩV ∩ ΩL |               j∈Ωv ∩ΩL exp(xV,i · xL,j /τ )
                                        i∈Ω ∩Ω                     V       L

where B is the batchsize, ΩV , ΩL are sets of indices for the samples containing vision and text, and τ
is the scalar temperature. The computation of similar LT →V and LT →L is shown in Sec. A.2 of the
Appendix. This approach maximizes the use of paired data with missing modalities by aligning the
sample intersections between modalities. The computation of LV →T , LL→T and LL→V is similar
but in the opposite direction. We then obtain the joint aligning loss as:
                αT V                       αT L                        αV L
     Lalign =        (LT →V + LV →T ) +         (LT →L + LL→T ) +           (LV →L + LL→V ),        (4)
                 2                          2                            2
where αT V , αT L and αV L are hyper-parameters to control the alignment strength.

4.4   C ROSS -S ENSOR M ATCHING : EXTRACTING SENSOR - AGNOSTIC FEATURES
To fully utilize multi-sensor aligned data and build unified space by clustering multi-sensor tactile
representations of the same object, we introduce a novel cross-sensor matching task. In this task, the
model needs to determine whether two tactile images or videos are collected from the same position
on the same object. We aim to cluster representations of the same tactile information from different
sensors while performing multi-modal aligning, thereby enhancing the learning of sensor-agnostic
features and forming a unified multi-sensor representation space, as shown in Figure 3.
We treat data collected from the same object and position by two different sensors as a positive pair,
and data from different objects or positions as a negative pair. The model is trained to distinguish
between positive and negative pairs. For each image and video sample XT in our TacQuad, we
randomly select one sample from the same object at the same location captured by another sensor as
the positive sample XT+ , and choose another sample from any dataset of any other object or location
as a negative sample XT− . We element-wisely multiply the touch representation xT with x+          −
                                                                                          T and xT ,
and then input each result into an MLP to compute the matching scores m+ and m− :
                                                     −                 −
                          m+ = M LP (xT · x+  T ), m = M LP (xT · xT ),                           (5)
                   −                                         −
where xT , x+                                           +
            T and xT are the representations of XT , XT and XT . The loss function Lmatch is a
Binary Cross Entropy Loss similar to Lin et al. (2020):
   Lmatch = −(y + log(m+ ) + (1 − y + ) log(1 − m− )) − (y − log(m− ) + (1 − y − ) log(1 − m− )).                                                                  (6)


                                                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This task requires the model to distinguish features with the same semantics from different sensors,
thus explicitly clustering representations with the same object information form a unified multi-
sensor representation space. As shown in Figure 3, AnyTouch, incorporating this task, differs from
existing multi-modal aligning efforts. The construction of this unified multi-sensor representation
space can explicitly reduce the gap between sensors and aid in generalizing to unseen sensors.
As both this task and multi-modal aligning focus on semantic-level features, we combine them as
the second stage, with masked modeling as the first stage. This multi-level training approach allows
us to develop unified multi-sensor representations adaptable to tasks of varying granularities.
4.5   U NIVERSAL S ENSOR T OKEN
In addition to building a multi-sensor representation space, we aim to extract and store information
related to each sensor to aid the understanding of input data. More importantly, we want to integrate
and effectively transfer this information when generalizing to new sensors. Using sensor-specific
tokens is a method for extracting sensor-specific information, but this approach cannot fully transfer
information from all seen sensors when generalizing to new sensors (Yang et al., 2024).
Therefore, we propose using universal sensor tokens to integrate and store information related to
various sensors, thereby maximizing the utilization of multi-sensor data when generalizing to new
sensors. During training, we randomly replace the sensor-specific tokens with the universal sensor
tokens, expecting them to aid in understanding input data from various sensors. Specifically, we
introduce a set of learnable sensor tokens {sk }K
                                                k=1 ∪ su , where K is the number of sensor types,
sk ∈ RL×d are the sensor-specific tokens for the k-th sensor, su ∈ RL×d are universal sensor tokens
and L is the number of sensor tokens for each sensor. When inputting the tactile token sequence z
from the k-th sensor into the encoder Φenc to obtain its representation xT , we randomly select one
from sk and su to concatenate with z, as follows:
                                s = i · su + (1 − i) · sk , i ∼ B(pu ),
                                                                                                   (7)
                                          xT = Φenc (z, s),
where pu is the probability of using universal sensor tokens su . During inference, we consistently
use universal sensor tokens for data from new sensors.

4.6   T RAINING PARADIGM
Our framework has a multi-level structure, with the training of two stages conducted sequentially.
In the first stage, we simultaneously perform the reconstruction of static tactile images and dynamic
tactile videos, as well as the unique next frame prediction task for tactile videos. The loss for the
first stage Lstage1 is as follows:
                                  Lstage1 = LSrec + LD      D
                                                     rec + Lpred .                                 (8)

In the second stage, we continue to use both tactile images and videos, and simultaneously perform
multi-modal aligning and cross-sensor matching tasks. Hence, the loss function for the second stage
is the sum of the losses from these two tasks:
                                   Lstage2 = Lalign + λLmatch ,                                    (9)
where λ is a hyper-parameter controlling the weight of cross-sensor matching task.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we explore the answers to the following questions through quantitative and qualitative
experiments: (Q1) How much benefit does the data of each sensor provide when it is integrated?
(Q2) What does the unified multi-sensor representation space constructed by AnyTouch look like?
(Q3) Is the unified multi-sensor representation more advantageous in various static and dynamic
perception tasks? We analyze Q1 in Section 5.2, expolore Q2 in Section 5.3, and answer Q3 through
comparisons with existing methods in Sections 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6.

5.1   DATASET AND BASELINES
We use 9 different tactile datasets for training, including: Touch and Go (TAG) (Yang et al., 2022),
VisGel (Li et al., 2019), Cloth (Yuan et al., 2018), ObjectFolder Real (OF Real) (Gao et al., 2023) ,


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: The impact of adding data from multiple sensors on the seen dataset (TAG), the unseen
dataset from seen sensors (Feel), and the unseen dataset from unseen sensors (OF 1.0 and OF 2.0).

                                          Data          TAG                Feel           OF 1.0           OF 2.0
         Tactile Training Data
                                         Volume        Material            Grasp          Material         Material
      No Tactile Pre-training (CLIP)          /         52.96              72.37           41.00                73.16
        TAG, VisGel, Cloth      996k 83.55 (↑30.59) 79.12 (↑6.75) 46.12 (↑5.12) 75.10 (↑1.94)
   TAG, VisGel, Cloth, OF Real  2161k 79.67 (↓3.88) 79.28 (↑0.16) 47.55 (↑1.43) 75.53 (↑0.43)
   TAG, VisGel, Cloth, OF Real,
                                2388k 79.61 (↓0.06) 79.10 (↓0.18) 48.00 (↑0.45) 75.57 (↑0.04)
    TVL, SSVTP, YCB-Slide
   TAG, VisGel, Cloth, OF Real,
                                2427k 79.70 (↑0.09) 79.40 (↑0.30) 48.75 (↑0.75) 75.66 (↑0.09)
  TVL, SSVTP, YCB-Slide, Octopi

                                           AnyTouch                  AnyTouch                AnyTouch
                    CLIP                  (MAE Only)               (MAE + Align)        (MAE + Align + Match)


                                       GelSight Mini       DIGIT              DuraGel

Figure 4: The impact of components in AnyTouch on the multi-sensor representation space.
We use t-SNE to visualize the representations on the unused fine-grained subset of TacQuad, starting
with CLIP and sequentially incorporating the modules. Each color represents a single touch, and
samples from three sensors that touch the same position are connected by dashed lines.

TVL (Fu et al., 2024), YCB-Slide (Suresh et al., 2023) and SSVTP (Kerr et al., 2022), Octopi (Yu
et al., 2024) and the coarse-grained subset of our TacQuad. We leverage the continual frames avail-
able in these datasets for dynamic perception. We also select four datasets: TAG, Feel (Calandra
et al., 2017), ObjectFolder 1.0 (Gao et al., 2022a), ObjectFolder 2.0 (Gao et al., 2022b) as the
downstream datasets. We compare AnyTouch with several single-sensor models: VIT-LENS-2 (Lei
et al., 2024), TLV-Link (Cheng et al., 2024), and Omnibind (Lyu et al., 2024). We also compare
our method with the multi-sensor model UniTouch (Yang et al., 2024). We use the largest subset
of all data that meets the requirements of UniTouch and TLV-Link to train them, remarked as Uni-
Touch† and TLV-Link†. For the real-world dynamic perception task, we compare our method with a
multi-sensor model T3 (Zhao et al., 2024), which is trained on 3M data, more than AnyTouch. The
detailed dataset and baseline introduction are provided in Appendix A.1, A.3 and A.4.

5.2     S ENSOR TRANSFERABILITY ANALYSIS (Q1)
Since we have integrated data from multiple sensors into unified representations, we aim to inves-
tigate the contributes of the knowledge transferred from each sensor’s data to downstream tasks.
Therefore, we incorporate data from GelSight, GelSlim (Donlon et al., 2018), DIGIT and GelSight
Mini into the training of AnyTouch to obtain four different models, and compare them across four
downstream tasks. As shown in Table 1, training with only GelSight data significantly improves
performance on downstream datasets for all sensors, compared to the CLIP model which has not
encountered any tactile data. This indicates that tactile representation pre-training is crucial and
transferable across new sensors. After sequentially integrating data from GelSlim, DIGIT, and Gel-
Sight Mini into the training, we observe performance improvements across the three unseen datasets,
with greater enhancements for unseen sensors than seen sensors. This suggests that the knowledge
from the data of GelSlim, DIGIT, and GelSight Mini can transfer to the GelSight and other sensors.
However, we also observe two interesting phenomena: (1) In the material classification task of the
seen dataset TAG, the model trained solely on GelSight data performs the best, while incorporating
data from more sensors leads to a performance drop. This is because TAG is included in the pre-
training data and integrating more data reduces the proportion of TAG data in pre-training. This
aligns with the CLIP paper’s finding that greater overlap between the downstream task dataset and
the pre-training dataset may improve performance. (2) Although the integrated data volume from


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Evaluation of static perception capabilities on the seen sensor (GelSight). *Note that
Feel is seen for the corresponding UniTouch and AnyTouch models. ‡Note that original TLV-Link
uses frames after grasping which are much easier in Feel, whereas other models use frames during
grasping. AnyTouch achieves a result of 99.0 using frames after grasping.

                                                                     Touch and Go              Feel
      Method              Tactile Training Data
                                                          Material    Roughness Hardness       Grasp
     CLIP                          /                       52.96        84.09       88.34      72.37
  VIT-LENS-2                     TAG                       63.0         85.1        92.0         -
   TLV-Link                    Touch100k                   67.2         84.7         91.3      94.5‡
   OmniBind                      TAG                       67.45          -           -          -
   UniTouch            TAG, Feel*, YCB, OF 2.0              61.3          -           -         82.3
   TLV-Link†      TAG, TVL, SSVTP, OF Real, TacQuad        74.12        85.94       94.18      76.97
      AnyTouch         TAG, Feel*, YCB, OF 2.0             82.74        86.01       94.24      87.17
                   TAG, VisGel, Cloth, TVL, SSVTP,
      AnyTouch                                             80.82        86.74       94.68      80.53
                  YCB-Slide, OF Real , Octopi, TacQuad


DIGIT is larger, the benefits are less compared to incorporating data from GelSight Mini. This may
suggest that the images from DIGIT differ more from the images of GelSight and other sensors than
the images from GelSight Mini do due to the hardware difference.

5.3     M ULTI - SENSOR R EPRESENTATION SPACE (Q2)
To verify whether AnyTouch clusters the representations with the same tactile information from
different sensors together as expected, we use t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to visualize
the tactile representations. We extract one aligned contact frame from each sensor for the 30 touches
in the unused fine-grained subset of TacQuad. We input these samples into the CLIP model and the
AnyTouch model which gradually incorporates masked modeling, multi-modal aligning, and cross-
sensor matching, and visualize their representations in Figure 4. Due to the lack of exposure to tactile
images, CLIP struggles to distinguish the same tactile information from different sensors, instead
clustering samples by sensor. After introducing masked modeling, the representations become more
centralized within each sensor, as this method focuses on pixel-level tactile features, which are
sensor-dependent. However, this is not ideal for cross-sensor generalization, as we want multi-sensor
tactile representations to cluster based on the object’s tactile information they represent, minimizing
sensor gaps. After incorporating multi-modal aligning, the multi-sensor tactile representations begin
to blend and cluster by the objects they represent. This indicates that cross-sensor generalization is
beginning to emerge, but there is still a distinct tendency for sensor-specific clustering. With our
cross-sensor matching task, the representations from different sensors fully mix in a shared multi-
sensor space, clearly clustering by the object’s tactile information. This indicates that our model
possesses the ability to extract sensor-agnostic features, enabling generalization to unseen sensors.

5.4     S TATIC P ERCEPTION ON S EEN S ENSORS (Q3)
To validate the benefit of unified multi-sensor representations in transferring knowledge from multi-
ple sensor data to seen sensors, we compared it to baselines on the seen dataset TAG and the unseen
dataset Feel from the GelSight sensor. Since UniTouch uses different training data, we also train an
AnyTouch model with the same data as UniTouch to ensure a fair comparison. As shown in Table 2,
the TLV-Link† trained with multi-sensor data outperforms all single-sensor models and the original
TLV-Link in all three tasks of TAG. The AnyTouch trained with the same data as UniTouch, outper-
forms UniTouch in all four tasks. With the integration of dynamic perception and more multi-sensor
data, AnyTouch trained on all data achieved the best results in hardness and roughness classifica-
tion in TAG and comparable results to UniTouch in Feel, despite UniTouch having seen this data.
These demonstrate the static perception capabilities of our framework on seen sensors. Notably,
the original TLV-Link uses frames after grasping, while other models use frames during grasping.
AnyTouch achieves a result of 99.0 using frames after grasping. It is worth mentioning that the Any-
Touch trained with less data outperforms the one trained with all data in TAG material classification,
similar to Table 1, while exposure to more multi-sensor data enhances performance in hardness and
roughness classification. This is because these binary hardness and roughness classification tasks


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Evaluation of static perception capabilities on unseen sensors (TACTO and Taxim) using
linear probing. *Note that OF 2.0 is seen for the corresponding UniTouch and AnyTouch models.

                                                               ObjectFolder 1.0   ObjectFolder 2.0
        Method                  Tactile Training Data
                                                                   Material           Material
         CLIP                           /                            41.00              73.16
        UniTouch           TAG, Feel, YCB-Slide, OF 2.0*             41.3               85.4
                                TAG, VisGel, TVL
       UniTouch†                                                     47.25              75.29
                             SSVTP, OF Real , TacQuad
       AnyTouch         TAG, Feel, YCB-Slide, OF 2.0*                46.50              85.87
                       TAG, VisGel, Cloth, TVL, SSVTP,
       AnyTouch                                                      49.62              76.02
                      YCB-Slide, OF Real , Octopi, TacQuad

Table 4: Evaluation on the real-world pouring task
using GelSight Mini.

                    Dynamic       Mean Error (g) ↓
      Method
                   Perception     Fine-tune Freeze
      CLIP             ✘            5.22       49.1
       T3              ✘            2.33       9.74
    AnyTouch           ✘            2.45       9.60
    AnyTouch           ✔            1.56       8.22
                                                             Figure 5: Setup of real-world pouring task.

are much simpler, and the tactile text descriptions in other datasets also include these two binary
attributes, which have less impact on the data distribution.
5.5    S TATIC P ERCEPTION ON U NSEEN S ENSORS (Q3)
To verify the generalization of our method on unseen sensors, we compare it with the multi-sensor
models UniTouch and UniTouch† on two datasets from unseen sensors, OF 1.0 and OF 2.0. As
shown in Table 3, the AnyTouch trained on the same data as Unitouch outperforms it on both
datasets, demonstrating the static perception capability of our method across different sensors. Both
UniTouch and AnyTouch, perform better on the unseen OF 1.0 dataset, confirming that integrating
multi-sensor data aids generalization to unseen sensors. In addition, the AnyTouch trained on the
full dataset achieves the highest performance on the unseen OF 1.0, demonstrating that learning
sensor-agnostic semantic-level tactile features and constructing unified multi-sensor representation
space is an effective approach for cross-sensor transfer.
5.6    R EAL W ORLD DYNAMIC P ERCEPTION (Q3)
To test the dynamic perception capability of our method in real-world object manipulation tasks, we
conduct experiments on a real-world task: fine-grained pouring, as shown in Figure 5. The detailed
task setup is located at A.8. We compare AnyTouch with a recent multi-sensor model T3 and use a
static-only AnyTouch model trained solely on tactile images as a baseline. Neither model includes
modules specifically designed for dynamic perception. We conduct 10 real-world test runs and
record the error between the poured mass and the target mass for each test. We then average the error
across the test runs to get the ”mean error” and use it as the metric, as shown in Table 4. When the
tactile encoder is frozen and only the policy network is fine-tuned, CLIP, which has not seen tactile
images, struggles with the task, highlighting the challenges of fine-grained dynamic perception. In
contrast, the static-only AnyTouch performed comparably to T3 which was trained on more data.
After integrating dynamic perception capabilities, AnyTouch achieved the best performance. This
demonstrates the importance of learning unified multi-sensor representations from both static and
dynamic perspectives for completing various tasks including real-world tasks.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we collect TacQuad, an aligned multi-modal multi-sensor tactile dataset that enables
the explicit integration of various sensors. Based on this, we present AnyTouch, a unified multi-
sensor tactile representation learning framework from the perspectives of both static and dynamic
perception. We also explore the multi-sensor representation space and sensor transferability.


                                                        10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project is sponsored by CCF-Zhipu.AI Large Model Innovation Fund and also supported by the
Zhipu Company. We want to thank Xinjie Tang for providing design and drafting support.

R EFERENCES
Roberto Calandra, Andrew Owens, Manu Upadhyaya, Wenzhen Yuan, Justin Lin, Edward H Adel-
  son, and Sergey Levine. The feeling of success: Does touch sensing help predict grasp outcomes?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05512, 2017.
Guanqun Cao, Jiaqi Jiang, Danushka Bollegala, and Shan Luo. Learn from incomplete tactile data:
  Tactile representation learning with masked autoencoders. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
  ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 10800–10805. IEEE, 2023.
Ning Cheng, Changhao Guan, Jing Gao, Weihao Wang, You Li, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, Bin
  Fang, Jinan Xu, and Wenjuan Han. Touch100k: A large-scale touch-language-vision dataset for
  touch-centric multimodal representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03813, 2024.
Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gor-
 don, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for
 contrastive language-image learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2818–2829, 2023.
Jacob Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Elliott Donlon, Siyuan Dong, Melody Liu, Jianhua Li, Edward Adelson, and Alberto Rodriguez.
  Gelslim: A high-resolution, compact, robust, and calibrated tactile-sensing finger. In 2018
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1927–1934.
  IEEE, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
  age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020.
Ruoxuan Feng, Di Hu, Wenke Ma, and Xuelong Li. Play to the score: Stage-guided dynamic multi-
  sensory fusion for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01366, 2024.
Letian Fu, Gaurav Datta, Huang Huang, William Chung-Ho Panitch, Jaimyn Drake, Joseph Ortiz,
  Mustafa Mukadam, Mike Lambeta, Roberto Calandra, and Ken Goldberg. A touch, vision, and
  language dataset for multimodal alignment. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tFEOOH9eH0.
Ruohan Gao, Yen-Yu Chang, Shivani Mall, Li Fei-Fei, and Jiajun Wu. Objectfolder: A dataset
  of objects with implicit visual, auditory, and tactile representations. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 466–476. PMLR, 2022a.
Ruohan Gao, Zilin Si, Yen-Yu Chang, Samuel Clarke, Jeannette Bohg, Li Fei-Fei, Wenzhen Yuan,
  and Jiajun Wu. Objectfolder 2.0: A multisensory object dataset for sim2real transfer. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10598–10608,
  2022b.
Ruohan Gao, Yiming Dou, Hao Li, Tanmay Agarwal, Jeannette Bohg, Yunzhu Li, Li Fei-Fei, and
  Jiajun Wu. The objectfolder benchmark: Multisensory learning with neural and real objects.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  17276–17286, 2023.
Rohit Girdhar, Mannat Singh, Nikhila Ravi, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Armand Joulin, and Ishan
  Misra. Omnivore: A single model for many visual modalities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16102–16112, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Rohit Girdhar, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Zhuang Liu, Mannat Singh, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Armand
  Joulin, and Ishan Misra. Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15180–15190, 2023.
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment
  classification: A deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on
  machine learning (ICML-11), pp. 513–520, 2011.
Harsh Gupta, Yuchen Mo, Shengmiao Jin, and Wenzhen Yuan. Sensor-invariant tactile representa-
  tion, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19638.
Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Audioclip: Extending clip to
  image, text and audio. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 976–980. IEEE, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Carolina Higuera, Akash Sharma, Chaithanya Krishna Bodduluri, Taosha Fan, Patrick Lancaster,
  Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Michael Kaess, Byron Boots, Mike Lambeta, Tingfan Wu, et al. Sparsh:
  Self-supervised touch representations for vision-based tactile sensing. In 8th Annual Conference
  on Robot Learning, 2024.
GelSight. Inc.   GelSight Mini.    URL https://www.gelsight.com/gelsightmini/.
  (2022).
Justin Kerr, Huang Huang, Albert Wilcox, Ryan Hoque, Jeffrey Ichnowski, Roberto Calandra, and
  Ken Goldberg. Self-supervised visuo-tactile pretraining to locate and follow garment features.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13042, 2022.
Kunhee Kim, Sanghun Park, Eunyeong Jeon, Taehun Kim, and Daijin Kim. A style-aware discrimi-
  nator for controllable image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 18239–18248, 2022.
Mike Lambeta, Po-Wei Chou, Stephen Tian, Brian Yang, Benjamin Maloon, Victoria Rose Most,
 Dave Stroud, Raymond Santos, Ahmad Byagowi, Gregg Kammerer, et al. Digit: A novel design
 for a low-cost compact high-resolution tactile sensor with application to in-hand manipulation.
 IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(3):3838–3845, 2020.
Kwonjoon Lee, Huiwen Chang, Lu Jiang, Han Zhang, Zhuowen Tu, and Ce Liu. Vitgan: Training
 gans with vision transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Weixian Lei, Yixiao Ge, Kun Yi, Jianfeng Zhang, Difei Gao, Dylan Sun, Yuying Ge, Ying Shan,
 and Mike Zheng Shou. Vit-lens: Towards omni-modal representations. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 26647–26657, 2024.
Hao Li, Yizhi Zhang, Junzhe Zhu, Shaoxiong Wang, Michelle A Lee, Huazhe Xu, Edward Adelson,
  Li Fei-Fei, Ruohan Gao, and Jiajun Wu. See, hear, and feel: Smart sensory fusion for robotic
  manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03858, 2022.
Rui Li, Robert Platt, Wenzhen Yuan, Andreas Ten Pas, Nathan Roscup, Mandayam A Srinivasan,
  and Edward Adelson. Localization and manipulation of small parts using gelsight tactile sensing.
  In 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3988–3993.
  IEEE, 2014.
Yunzhu Li, Jun-Yan Zhu, Russ Tedrake, and Antonio Torralba. Connecting touch and vision via
  cross-modal prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 10609–10618, 2019.
Junyang Lin, An Yang, Yichang Zhang, Jie Liu, Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. Interbert: Vision-
  and-language interaction for multi-modal pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13198, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fengyuan Liu, Sweety Deswal, Adamos Christou, Yulia Sandamirskaya, Mohsen Kaboli, and
  Ravinder Dahiya. Neuro-inspired electronic skin for robots. Science robotics, 7(67):eabl7344,
  2022.

I Loshchilov. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Yuanhuiyi Lyu, Xu Zheng, Dahun Kim, and Lin Wang. Omnibind: Teach to build unequal-scale
  modality interaction for omni-bind of all. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16108, 2024.

Perla Maiolino, Marco Maggiali, Giorgio Cannata, Giorgio Metta, and Lorenzo Natale. A flexible
  and robust large scale capacitive tactile system for robots. IEEE Sensors Journal, 13(10):3910–
  3917, 2013.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Samanta Rodriguez, Yiming Dou, Miquel Oller, Andrew Owens, and Nima Fazeli. Touch2touch:
  Cross-modal tactile generation for object manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08269, 2024.

Zilin Si and Wenzhen Yuan. Taxim: An example-based simulation model for gelsight tactile sensors.
  IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):2361–2368, 2022.

Sudharshan Suresh, Zilin Si, Stuart Anderson, Michael Kaess, and Mustafa Mukadam. Midastouch:
  Monte-carlo inference over distributions across sliding touch. In Conference on Robot Learning,
  pp. 319–331. PMLR, 2023.

Zhan Tong, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Limin Wang. Videomae: Masked autoencoders are data-
  efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 35:10078–10093, 2022.

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.

Shaoxiong Wang, Mike Lambeta, Po-Wei Chou, and Roberto Calandra. Tacto: A fast, flexible,
  and open-source simulator for high-resolution vision-based tactile sensors. IEEE Robotics and
  Automation Letters, 7(2):3930–3937, 2022a.

Yau-Shian Wang, Ashley Wu, and Graham Neubig. English contrastive learning can learn universal
  cross-lingual sentence embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06127, 2022b.

Zhengtong Xu, Raghava Uppuluri, Xinwei Zhang, Cael Fitch, Philip Glen Crandall, Wan Shou,
  Dongyi Wang, and Yu She. Unit: Unified tactile representation for robot learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.06481, 2024.

Le Xue, Mingfei Gao, Chen Xing, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Jiajun Wu, Caiming Xiong, Ran Xu,
  Juan Carlos Niebles, and Silvio Savarese. Ulip: Learning a unified representation of language,
  images, and point clouds for 3d understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1179–1189, 2023.

Fengyu Yang, Chenyang Ma, Jiacheng Zhang, Jing Zhu, Wenzhen Yuan, and Andrew Owens. Touch
  and go: Learning from human-collected vision and touch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12498,
  2022.

Fengyu Yang, Chao Feng, Ziyang Chen, Hyoungseob Park, Daniel Wang, Yiming Dou, Ziyao Zeng,
  Xien Chen, Rit Gangopadhyay, Andrew Owens, et al. Binding touch to everything: Learning
  unified multimodal tactile representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 26340–26353, 2024.

Samson Yu, Kelvin Lin, Anxing Xiao, Jiafei Duan, and Harold Soh. Octopi: Object property rea-
  soning with large tactile-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02794, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Wenzhen Yuan, Siyuan Dong, and Edward H Adelson. Gelsight: High-resolution robot tactile
 sensors for estimating geometry and force. Sensors, 17(12):2762, 2017.
Wenzhen Yuan, Yuchen Mo, Shaoxiong Wang, and Edward H Adelson. Active clothing material
 perception using tactile sensing and deep learning. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
 Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4842–4849. IEEE, 2018.
Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023.
Lunwei Zhang, Yue Wang, and Yao Jiang. Tac3d: A novel vision-based tactile sensor for
  measuring forces distribution and estimating friction coefficient distribution. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.06211, 2022.
Shixin Zhang, Yiyong Yang, Fuchun Sun, Lei Bao, Jianhua Shan, Yuan Gao, and Bin Fang. A
  compact visuo-tactile robotic skin for micron-level tactile perception. IEEE Sensors Journal,
  2024.
Shixin Zhang, Yiyong Yang, Yuhao Sun, Nailong Liu, Fuchun Sun, and Bin Fang. Artificial skin
  based on visuo-tactile sensing for 3d shape reconstruction: Material, method, and evaluation.
  Advanced Functional Materials, 35(1):2411686, 2025.
Han Zhao, Remi Tachet Des Combes, Kun Zhang, and Geoffrey Gordon. On learning invariant
  representations for domain adaptation. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  7523–7532. PMLR, 2019.
Jialiang Zhao, Yuxiang Ma, Lirui Wang, and Edward H Adelson. Transferable tactile transformers
   for representation learning across diverse sensors and tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13640,
   2024.
Kaiyan Zhao, Qiyu Wu, Xin-Qiang Cai, and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka. Leveraging multi-lingual
  positive instances in contrastive learning to improve sentence embedding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.08929, 2023.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 5: Training dataset statistics. The text modality in Touch and Go and ObjectFolder Real is
generated by GPT-4o. *Note that Cloth and YCB-Slide contain vision modality, but we intentionally
do not use it to demonstrate our method’s compatibility with modality absence. We only count the
number of contact frames used for training in each dataset.

                Dataset                      Vision      Text     Video               Sensor         Size
   Touch and Go (Yang et al., 2022)           ✔           ✔        ✔              GelSight           250k
        VisGel (Li et al., 2019)              ✔           ✘        ✔              GelSight           587k
       Cloth (Yuan et al., 2018)              ✘*          ✘        ✔              GelSight           587k
         TVL (Fu et al., 2024)                ✔           ✔        ✔                DIGIT              39k
      SSVTP (Kerr et al., 2022)               ✔           ✔        ✘                DIGIT             4.5k
    YCB-Slide (Suresh et al., 2023)           ✘*          ✘        ✔                DIGIT             183k
  ObjectFolder Real (Gao et al., 2023)        ✔           ✔        ✔               GelSlim           1165k
        Octopi (Yu et al., 2024)              ✘           ✔        ✔           GelSight Mini          39k
                                                                          GelSight, DIGIT, DuraGel
               TacQuad                         ✔          ✔        ✔                                  55k
                                                                               GelSight Mini


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    T RAINING DATASET STATISTICS

In this section, we provide a detailed presentation of the sensor type, modality pairing and data
scale of the datasets used during the training phase. We use a total of 9 datasets from 5 different
sensors for training, including: Touch and Go (TAG) (Yang et al., 2022), VisGel (Li et al., 2019) and
Cloth (Yuan et al., 2018) from GelSight (Yuan et al., 2017); ObjectFolder Real (OF Real) (Gao et al.,
2023) from GelSlim (Donlon et al., 2018); TVL (Fu et al., 2024), YCB-Slide (Suresh et al., 2023)
and SSVTP (Kerr et al., 2022) from DIGIT (Lambeta et al., 2020); Octopi (Yu et al., 2024) from
GelSight Mini (Inc.); and the coarse-grained subset of our TacQuad from DIGIT, GelSight Mini and
DuraGel (Zhang et al., 2024). We filter the contact frames with tactile deformations by calculating
the difference between each tactile image and the corresponding background frame in these datasets.
Eventually, we extract a total of 2,481,703 tactile contact frames from these datasets for model
training. We also leverage the continual frames available in these datasets to train the model’s
dynamic perception capabilities. The detailed training dataset statistics are shown in Table 5. We
generate text descriptions for Touch and Go and ObjectFolder Real using GPT-4o. We also expand
the text descriptions in TVL, SSVTP and Octopi. We remove the text modality of the training samples
included in the test set of downstream tasks for fairness. It is worth saying that Cloth and YCB-Slide
contain vision modality originally, but we intentionally do not use it to demonstrate our method’s
compatibility with missing modalities.

A.2    M ULTI - MODAL A LIGNING LOSS

When training AnyTouch, we maximize the use of paired data by selecting the largest subset for
each modality combination within the batch for multi-modal aligning. Considering a pair of uni-
modal representations (xT , xV , xL ) derived from uni-modal encoders, where xT ∈ Rd is the touch
representation, xV ∈ Rd ∪ ∅ is the vision representation and xL ∈ Rd ∪ ∅ is the text representation.
We then perform multi-modal alignment (Radford et al., 2021) within the batch as:
                               1 X            exp(x⊤
                                                   T,i · xV,i /τ )
                LT →V = −              log P            ⊤
                                                                      ,
                             |ΩV |          j∈ΩV exp(xT,i · xV,j /τ )
                                   i∈Ω   V

                               1     X                 exp(x⊤
                                                            T,i · xL,i /τ )
                LT →L = −                    log P              ⊤
                                                                                  ,                     (10)
                             |ΩL |                    j∈ΩL exp(xT,i · xL,j /τ )
                                     i∈ΩL

                                 1              X                    exp(x⊤
                                                                          V,i · xL,i /τ )
                LV →L = −                                 log P               ⊤
                                                                                                ,
                             |ΩV ∩ ΩL |                         j∈Ωv ∩ΩL exp(xV,i · xL,j /τ )
                                             i∈ΩV ∩ΩL

where B is the batchsize, ΩV , ΩL are sets of indices for the samples containing vision and text, and
τ is the scalar temperature.


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A.3   D OWNSTREAM DATASETS

In this section, we provide a more detailed introduction to the downstream datasets. Specifically,
we compare the static perception capabilities of AnyTouch and the baselines on four downstream
datasets: TAG, Feel (Calandra et al., 2017), ObjectFolder 1.0 (OF 1.0) (Gao et al., 2022a) and
OjectFolder 2.0 (OF 2.0) (Gao et al., 2022b). TAG includes three tactile properties understanding
tasks: material, hardness, and roughness classification. Feel is a robotic dataset from GelSight
containing a grasp success prediction task. We follow the data split in (Yang et al., 2024; Cheng
et al., 2024) for Feel. ObjectFolder 1.0 and OjectFolder 2.0 are two simulated object datasets using
TACTO (Wang et al., 2022a) and Taxim (Si & Yuan, 2022). We use them as unseen datasets from
unseen sensors, and follow the data split in Yang et al. (2024).


A.4   BASELINES

In the static perception task, we compared AnyTouch with several recent single-sensor and multi-
sensor baselines. VIT-LENS-2 (Lei et al., 2024), TLV-Link (Cheng et al., 2024), and Omnibind (Lyu
et al., 2024) are three single-sensor models included, all of which conduct multi-modal alignment us-
ing data from GelSight. As for multi-sensor models, we compare our method with UniTouch (Yang
et al., 2024), which currently demonstrates the SOTA cross-sensor performance. We also intend
to train UniTouch and TLV-Link using all available multi-sensor data for comparison. However,
since UniTouch requires touch-vision paired data and TLV-Link can only be trained on three-modal
paired data, we extract the largest subset of data that meets the requirements to train them, remarked
as UniTouch† and TLV-Link†.
In the real-world dynamic perception task, we compare with a recent multi-sensor model T3 (Zhao
et al., 2024). This model has been validated to have strong capabilities in completing manipulation
tasks. It is important to note that the amount of training data used by this model is approximately
3M, which is more than our AnyTouch. Additionally, since this model utilizes labels from various
downstream tasks during pre-training, comparing its static perception capabilities with other models
would be unfair. Therefore, we only use it in the dynamic perception task.


A.5   DETAILS FOR FINE - GRAINED DATA COLLECTION

In this section, we provide a more detailed introduction of the data collection process for the fine-
grained spatio-temporal aligned data. The calibration platform we built consists of three main parts:
a platform, a movable end effector, and a 3D-printed container that holds the sensor. The four
sensors are fixed side by side in the container. The movable end on our calibration platform can
be programmed to move at a specified speed to a designated position within the coordinate system
defined by the base. Therefore, as long as we pre-measure the relative positions of the centers of the
four sensor surfaces within the container and compensate for the relative positions during each set
of data collection, we can ensure that all four sensors make contact with the object from the same
initial position and at the same speed, thereby achieving both temporal and spatial alignment.


A.6   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We base our encoders on OpenCLIP-Large (Cherti et al., 2023). For the tactile decoder, we use
a Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) with 8 layers and a dimension of 512. We
use the AdamW (Loshchilov, 2017) optimizer with a learning rate of 2e-4. After a warm-up period
of 1 epoch, we implement linear learning rate decay. For each tactile video clip, we use T = 3
frames. We train the first stage for 20 epochs and the second stage for 12 epochs on 4 NVIDIA
A800 GPUs. We alternate between training with tactile images and video clips throughout the entire
training process. We use a mask ratio ρ = 0.75. During the alignment, we use the text modality as
the anchor, freezing the text encoder while performing LoRA fine-tuning on the vision encoder. We
set the alignment strength αT V = αT L = 1.0 and αV L = 0.2, and set the weight of cross-sensor
matching λ = 0.1. Following (Yang et al., 2024), we use L = 5 sensor tokens for each type of
sensor. In both stages, we set the probability of using universal sensor tokens pu to increase linearly
from 0 to 0.75.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        Focus on the object being touched by the handheld tactile sensor. Please provide a description of the
        tactile properties (exact location of the touch, materials at the contact point, texture, roughness level,
        hardness level, and more than these properties), using a series of adjectives. Please do not use
        ambiguous adjectives like ‘moderate’ or ‘medium’. Ensuring your response does not exceed 60
        words, counting punctuation as separate words.


          Output: The sensor touches a rough, splintered wooden bench with peeling paint. Textured surface,
          visibly cracked, and fragmented. Hardness level high, unevenness significant, and the material at the
          contact point is weathered, aged wood coated in deteriorating paint chips.


                      Figure 6: Prompt and raw output for TAG and TacQuad.



A.7   GPT-4 O A NNOTATION

In this work, we generate paired text descriptions of tactile properties for Touch and Go, Object-
Folder Real and our TacQuad. We input paired visual images and predefined text prompts into
GPT-4o to obtain text descriptions. We borrow the prompt from (Cheng et al., 2024) and make
appropriate adjustments. The prompt for Touch and Go and TacQuad is shown in Figure 6.
Specifically, because the ObjectFolder Real dataset has two camera views and some touch locations
or details may not be visible, we input two visual images and one tactile image simultaneously, with
clear indications in the prompt, as shown in Figure 7.
Since the TVL and SSVTP datasets only contain simple phrase-level tactile descriptions, we also use
GPT-4o to extend the text modality in both datasets. We input both visual images and the existing
text descriptions simultaneously, as shown in Figure 8.
After generating the annotations using GPT-4o, we conduct a simple and rough sampling check to
ensure the correctness. We find that as long as the model can correctly recognize the object, the
knowledge of object-related physical properties stored in the large model can effectively provide
accurate tactile annotations. Errors in the generated annotations may occur when an object’s cate-
gory is difficult to determine or when occlusions are present. However, such instances are relatively
uncommon.


A.8   R EAL -W ORLD POURING TASK

To test the dynamic perception capability of our method in real-world object manipulation tasks,
we conduct experiments on a real-world task: fine-grained pouring, as shown in Figure 5. In the
experiments, we use a 6-DoF UFACTORY xArm 6 robotic arm equipped with a Robotiq 2F-140
gripper. Cartesian space displacement commands are generated at a policy frequency of 5 Hz. The
robot arm must rely entirely on tactile feedback to pour out 60g of small beads from a cylinder that
initially contains 100g of beads. The robot arm can select one of the three actions to perform based
on the real-time tactile feedback: pouring, waiting, or retracting. The action step size is δϕ = 0.25◦ .
We train the model through imitation learning and collect the training data using a keyboard. As both
rotating the cylinder and pouring out the small beads lead to continuous variations in pressure on
the sensors, the model must analyze the fine-grained changes between tactile images to determine
the appropriate pouring speed and the right moment to retract the cylinder. This task is typically
performed using multi-modal data (Li et al., 2022), making it particularly challenging for models
that rely solely on tactile perception.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          Focus on the object being touched by the tactile sensor in the first two images. The two images are
          shot from two distinct viewpoints. The third image comes from the tactile sensor, reflecting the
          detailed deformations when touching the object. Please provide a description of the tactile properties
          (exact location of the touch, materials at the contact point, texture, roughness level, hardness level,
          and more than these properties), using a series of adjectives. Please do not use ambiguous adjectives
          like 'moderate' or 'medium'. Ensuring your response does not exceed 60 words, counting punctuation
          as separate words.


         Output without tactile image: The tactile sensor contacts the upper center of a clear polycarbonate
         box lid. The material is smooth, glossy, and transparent, featuring a hard, durable surface.The
         texture is sleek, with no visible roughness or irregularities, providing a nearly frictionless feel. The
         hardness level is high, indicative of robust plastic material.
         Output with tactile image: The tactile properties indicate contact at the smooth, transparent
         polycarbonate lid, characterized by its high hardness and rigidity. The surface is designed with a
         bubble-like texture that feels slightly raised and evenly distributed.The texture appears consistent,
         lacking significant roughness, while retaining a firm yet slightly flexible quality at the touchpoint.


Figure 7: Prompt and raw output for OF Real. Given that OF Real includes two camera views
and some touch locations or details may be obscured, we input two visual images along with one
tactile image simultaneously. If the tactile image is not provided as input, there is a possibility of
producing incorrect annotations (marked in red).


        Focus on the object being touched by the tactile sensor. Please provide a description of the tactile
        properties (exact location of the touch, materials at the contact point, texture, roughness level,
        hardness level, and more than these properties), using a series of adjectives. It is already known that
        the object is {phrase-level descriptions}. Please do not use ambiguous adjectives like ‘moderate’ or
        ‘medium’. Ensuring your response does not exceed 60 words, counting punctuation as separate words.


          Output: The touch is at the upper edge, the tactile sensor contacts leather. The texture is smooth,
          with a slight grain. The roughness is low, and the hardness is low. The material feels soft, yielding
          minimally to pressure, with a consistent, uninterrupted surface.


Figure 8: Prompt and raw output for TVL and SSVTP. Given that these datasets only contain
phrase-level tactile descriptions, we input the visual image and the phrase-level descriptions to gen-
erate more detailed tactile descriptions.


A.9   A BLATION STUDY

To investigate the impact of each module in AnyTouch, as well as the individual contributions of
the vision and text modalities in multi-modal alignment, we conduct ablation studies on the four
downstream datasets. The experimental results are shown in Table 6. We observe performance
decline when the paired vision and text modalities are excluded, highlighting the importance of
aligning with these paired modalities to narrow the sensor gaps and achieve a comprehensive tactile
perception capability. We also find that the performance decline caused by removing the visual
modality is greater than removing text. However, this does not necessarily indicate that the visual
modality is more important, as removing the visual modality results in a more significant reduction


                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Table 6: The impact of modalities and modules in AnyTouch on static perception capabilities.

                                          TAG            Feel        OF 1.0       OF 2.0
                     Model
                                         Material        Grasp       Material     Material
                  AnyTouch                80.82        80.53        49.62        76.02
               w/o Text Modality      75.91(↓4.91) 78.93(↓1.60) 48.87(↓0.75) 75.52(↓0.50)
              w/o Vision Modality      74.55(↓6.27) 77.30(↓3.23) 48.12(↓1.50) 75.22(↓0.80)
              w/o Text in TacQuad     80.70(↓0.12) 80.19(↓0.34) 49.21(↓0.41) 75.91(↓0.11)
                  w/o Stage 1          78.34(↓2.48) 78.62(↓1.91) 48.75(↓0.87) 76.08(↑0.06)
                  w/o Stage 2         68.64(↓12.18) 72.39(↓8.14) 46.50(↓3.12) 73.09(↓2.93)
          w/o Cross-Sensor Matching 80.54(↓0.28) 79.43(↓1.10) 49.25(↓0.37) 75.80(↓0.22)
            w/o Dynamic Perception    77.93(↓2.89) 79.28(↓1.25) 48.62(↓1.00) 75.70(↓0.32)
          w/o Universal Sensor Tokens 80.79(↓0.03) 79.03(↓1.53) 48.40(↓1.22) 75.40(↓0.62)



in data during the aligning. We also remove the text from the TacQuad dataset we proposed to
validate the effectiveness of the text in the dataset. Although the TacQuad data is relatively small
compared to the total dataset, making it unlikely to significantly impact performance when modified,
we observe a consistent decline in the model’s performance on downstream tasks after removing the
text modality. This demonstrates the important role of the text modality in our dataset as a bridge
that helps reduce the gap between sensors.
When we remove cross-sensor matching and universal sensor tokens from AnyTouch, we observe
a performance decline primarily on the datasets from unseen sensors. It is important to note that
the sensors in these datasets are not included in the positive sample pairs for cross-sensor matching,
indicating that this task has even greater potential. This demonstrates that both strategies can en-
hance the model’s generalization to unseen sensors. After removing the entire stage 2, we observe
a significant performance decline. On OF 2.0, it performs even worse than CLIP, which has never
encountered tactile data. This result is consistent with the improvement on OF 2.0 when removing
stage 1 and the analysis in Section 5.3, indicating that learning semantic-level features is crucial for
achieving comprehensive tactile perception and cross-sensor generalization. Nevertheless, learning
pixel-level features in stage 1 is still meaningful for the seen sensors. In addition, we also observe a
consistent decline in performance after removing the joint training for dynamic perception, indicat-
ing that integrating dynamic perception can indeed enhance static perception capabilities.



A.10    C ROSS - SENSOR GENERATION

To more comprehensively demonstrate the value and impact of the dataset we proposed, we conduct
cross-sensor generation experiments on the fine-grained spatio-temporal aligned data. Specifically,
we trained models to generate aligned DuraGel images from GelSight Mini images, and to recon-
struct the 20x20 force fields captured by the Tac3D sensor from DIGIT and GelSight Mini data. We
compared the performance of our model with the T3 model, which used more training data than
ours (3.08M compared to our 2.48M) for pretraining. Specifically, for generating Duragel images,
we constructed a GAN network based on ViT, using T3 or AnyTouch as the encoders for the dis-
criminator and generator, similar to ViTGAN (Lee et al., 2022). A ViT-based decoder is then used
to generate images across sensors. For the force field generation of Tac3D, due to its low resolution,
we treat it as a regression task and use an MLP to reconstruct the force field based on the features
extracted by the encoder. Both networks can effectively evaluate the quality of the encoder’s tactile
representations. To further ensure fairness, we also removed the overlapping portions of the coarse-
grained aligned data from the training data that overlapped with this dataset. Note that Tac3D is an
unseen sensor for both of the models. We use mean square error (MSE) (↓) between the generated
data and the ground truth as the metric. The results shown in Table 7 indicate that our method outper-
forms T3 in terms of generation quality, both for cross-sensor generation of vision-tactile images and
for force fields captured by the unseen Tac3D. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our method
and the value of the dataset, and supports our motivation to obtain a unified tactile multi-sensor
representation that is applicable to a variety of tasks and sensors.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 7: Performance comparison with T3 on the cross-sensor generation task using the fine-grained
spatio-temporal aligned data.

                                                      Mean Square Error (↓)
                Model       Training Data    GelSight Mini GelSight Mini     DIGIT
                                              → DuraGel      → Tac3D        → Tac3D
                 T3             3.08M           0.2261           0.0167        0.0155
              AnyTouch          2.48M           0.2159           0.0151        0.0144


A.11    D ISCUSSION ON FRAME NUMBER

In the real world, the complete process of touching an object can take several seconds or even tens of
seconds. Ensuring the model can comprehend an entire tactile video presents a significant challenge.
Current large-scale video understanding models, such as Video-LLaMA (Zhang et al., 2023), often
process tens or even hundreds of frames as input, encoding them into tokens. However, this comes
at the cost of generating very long token sequences, which significantly increase computational
overhead and inference time. The tactile modality is frequently used in fine-grained manipulation
tasks that demand high real-time performance, which imposes strict requirements on the model’s
inference speed. As a result, models that rely on long frame sequences are challenging to apply in
real-time dynamic perception tasks. Moreover, since touch actions are typically performed at high
speeds, even a sequence of three continual frames (equivalent to 0.1 seconds for a DIGIT sensor
with a frequency of approximately 30Hz) can exhibit noticeable changes. We anticipated these
challenges and, as a result, chose to use a sequence of three continual frames as the input format for
tactile videos. This approach also enables the understanding of longer videos by selecting multiple
3-frame segments and either concatenating or summing their features, similar to ImageBind (Girdhar
et al., 2023). Using more frames may lead to better perception performance, but this is essentially a
trade-off between performance and both computational cost and reference speed.

A.12    D ISCUSSION ON OTHER TACTILE SENSORS

Tactile perception is not limited to images. Some tactile properties, such as temperature and torque,
are difficult to obtain from tactile images alone, requiring the use of other types of tactile sensors.
This issue presents challenges from both hardware and algorithmic perspectives.
From a hardware perspective, an ideal tactile sensor should be capable of gathering various types of
tactile information, effectively integrating multiple existing tactile sensors into a single unit. This
may be very challenging, and a more practical solution might involve equipping different fingers of
a robotic hand with different types of sensors. This would allow for the simultaneous collection of
diverse tactile data, maximizing the range of information captured.
From an algorithmic perspective, when vision-based tactile sensors are replaced with other types of
tactile sensors (e.g., tactile sensor arrays), the multi-sensor data alignment method proposed in this
paper can still be applied. Aligned data can then be used to perform alignment or to distill knowledge
from the visuo-tactile model to models for other types of tactile sensors. For lower-resolution tactile
sensors, the aligned data can facilitate tactile super-resolution learning, enabling knowledge transfer
from vision-based tactile sensor models to enhance their performance.
If both vision-based tactile sensors and other tactile sensors (e.g., those capturing temperature or
other non-visual properties) are used simultaneously, a possible approach is to fuse their outputs
into a unified, comprehensive tactile feature. This enriched representation can then be aligned with
other modalities in a unified manner.

A.13    LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this section, we discuss some potential limitations of our work and propose corresponding solu-
tions for future work:

       • Compared to all the training data, the scale of the TacQuad dataset we have currently
         collected is still somewhat limited. Capturing the immense variety of object types within


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        a single dataset is challenging in a limited amount of time. Fortunately, the coarse-grained
        spatial alignment data collection method we propose has the potential to scale up, as data
        collection can be performed manually without the need for precise alignment. Fine-grained
        data collection can also be expanded by replicating the calibration platform and increasing
        manpower. We plan to grow our team to scale up the dataset and enhance object diversity
        in future work.
      • The types of sensors considered are relatively limited. We have made every effort to col-
        lect all available vision-based tactile sensors around us, yet we were only able to include
        four different types. Moreover, we did not explore the differences between individual sen-
        sors of the same type or address issues such as gel damage. Moving forward, we aim to
        expand our dataset and increase the diversity of sensors through collaborative data collec-
        tion across multiple laboratories.
      • The scope of tasks for dynamic tactile perception is currently limited. In this work, we
        validated the dynamic perception capabilities of our model on a single real-world manip-
        ulation task: pouring. We hope to explore more challenging and interesting dynamic per-
        ception tasks in future work. Additionally, beyond real-world manipulation tasks, studying
        tactile video understanding—particularly fine-grained dynamic tactile understanding that
        includes direction and action descriptions—is also an interesting direction to explore.


                                                21
