Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L ANGUAGE AGENTS M EET C AUSALITY – B RIDGING
LLM S AND C AUSAL W ORLD M ODELS

 John Gkountouras1 , Matthias Lindemann2 , Phillip Lippe3 , Efstratios Gavves3,4 , and Ivan Titov2,1
           1
             Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), University of Amsterdam
       2
           Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation (ILCC), University of Edinburgh
                                   3
                                     QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
                                      4
                                        Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
                  i.gkountouras@uva.nl, m.m.lindemann@sms.ed.ac.uk,
               p.lippe@uva.nl, egavves@uva.nl, ititov@inf.ed.ac.uk



                                               A BSTRACT

            Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently shown great promise in planning and
            reasoning applications. These tasks demand robust systems, which arguably require
            a causal understanding of the environment. While LLMs can acquire and reflect
            common sense causal knowledge from their pretraining data, this information is
            often incomplete, incorrect, or inapplicable to a specific environment. In contrast,
            causal representation learning (CRL) focuses on identifying the underlying causal
            structure within a given environment. We propose a framework that integrates CRLs
            with LLMs to enable causally-aware reasoning and planning. This framework
            learns a causal world model, with causal variables linked to natural language
            expressions. This mapping provides LLMs with a flexible interface to process and
            generate descriptions of actions and states in text form. Effectively, the causal world
            model acts as a simulator that the LLM can query and interact with. We evaluate
            the framework on causal inference and planning tasks across temporal scales and
            environmental complexities. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
            approach, with the causally-aware method outperforming LLM-based reasoners,
            especially for longer planning horizons.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for a wide range of tasks, from
natural language understanding to complex problem-solving (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2023b). Recent work has explored the use of LLMs as action agents for planning and
reasoning tasks, showing promising results in improving task-specific, downstream performance (Ahn
et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). These approaches primarily rely on the model’s
ability to extract common-sense causal information stated in its training data (Zečević et al., 2023).
While LLMs can reflect general beliefs and correlations, this information may be incomplete, incorrect,
or inapplicable in specific environments. This poses challenges for LLMs in novel or complex
situations, particularly in dynamic environments where accurate modeling of action consequences is
crucial (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Kambhampati et al., 2024).
Causal representation learning (CRL) aims to identify the underlying causal structure of
data (Schölkopf et al., 2021). By separating and identifying latent causal factors, CRL enables
models to reason about the effects of interventions and counterfactuals. Recent theoretical work
provides justification for causal representation learning, showing it is necessary for achieving strong
robustness guarantees in AI systems (Richens & Everitt, 2024). While CRL can model complex
causal mechanisms, applying it to real-world environments with visual complexity remains challeng-
ing. Recent advancements in CRL (Lippe et al., 2022; 2023) have begun to tackle this problem in
simulated environments. These developments open up new possibilities for enhancing AI systems,
    Project page: https://j0hngou.github.io/LLMCWM/.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                         Causal                                           Causal
                                        Transition                                       Transition
                                          Model                                            Model
                        Causal
                                                                                                                            Stop
                        Encoder

                                                            Text                                             Text
                                                           Decoder
                                                                        Text
                                                                                                            Decoder   ...
                                                                       Encoder
           Toggle the


                                  ...


                                                                                   ...


                                                                                                      ...
                          Text


                                                     ...
   LLM
              third                                         LLM                                               LLM           LLM
           stoveknob
                        Encoder                                        Place the
                                                                      plate down


Figure 1: Overview of a single rollout in the proposed planning pipeline. The causal encoder,
implemented using a CRL model, maps the high-dimensional state representation (image) to its
fundamental constituents—the causal variables. During planning, the LLM agent samples a proposed
action, which is then encoded by the text encoder. The causal transition model uses both the
disentangled latent representation of the image and the encoded action to simulate the next state
based on its learned causal mechanisms. The process iterates until the planning algorithm terminates,
with the causal model autoregressively operating in the latent space.

including LLMs. Although CRL does not directly address all LLM limitations, it can significantly
enhance their capabilities in specific domains. Our work builds upon these advancements, integrating
CRL with language models to improve their performance on causal inference and planning tasks.
We introduce a framework that combines CRL with language models to enable causally-aware
reasoning and planning in interactive environments. CRL provides LLMs with a structured, causal
understanding of the environment, reasoning about interventions and their consequences during
planning. The causal world model – akin to a simulator but learned rather than predefined – allows
the LLM to evaluate multiple possible futures before taking action and thereby guides its decisions.
Conversely, LLMs offer a flexible interface for interacting with the causal world model, allowing for
more intuitive planning and reasoning that can leverage the LLM’s commonsense knowledge.
Furthermore, this work investigates using text to represent actions in the context of CRL-based world
modeling. Text-based action representations provide a flexible and intuitive way to describe actions,
making them more suitable for generalist agents operating in diverse environments. Moreover,
annotating frame sequences with natural language descriptions is often easier than exhaustively
enumerating every possible action in an environment, which can be intractable for complex domains.
We consider a setting with interleaved sequential observations in image format and corresponding
action descriptions at each timestep. This setup takes inspiration from real-world scenarios where
an agent might receive visual input (e.g., from a camera) along with descriptions of actions taken
(e.g., from system logs or human annotations). For example, in a robotic manipulation task, the
dataset might consist of a series of images showing the robot’s workspace, paired with descriptions
like “The gripper shifted slightly to the right.” or “The object was grasped and placed on the
worktop.” We assume no prior knowledge of the causal factors or the causal mechanisms between
them. The agent can only observe the effects of its actions from the images and does not require
explicit information about which specific variables or factors in the causal model it is affecting. Our
method builds on BISCUIT (Lippe et al., 2023), a CRL framework, to create a flexible causally-aware
world model from the sequence of observations and action descriptions, which is then used for
planning in environments.
The key contributions of our work are as follows:
         • The first framework integrating CRL with LLMs to enable causally-aware reasoning and
           planning in interactive environments.
         • An exploration of text-based action representations for CRL and demonstration of their
           effectiveness in data-scarce regimes, showing improved data efficiency in learning causal
           representations.
         • Demonstration of the framework’s effectiveness on a set of reasoning and planning tasks
           across both static and dynamic environments.
Our experiments focus on simple environments, using existing CRL methods that are sufficiently
advanced for our use case. While these environments are still relatively simple, they represent the
current frontier of causal representation learning. As more powerful CRL methods become available,
they can be integrated into our framework, scaling it to more complex, realistic scenarios.


                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2       R ELATED W ORK
Causal Representation Learning Causal representation learning aims to identify the underlying
causal variables and their relations from high-dimensional observations (Schölkopf et al., 2021).
In the most general setting, the latent causal variables may not be uniquely identifiable (Locatello
et al., 2019a; Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999). Many approaches rely on assumptions or additional
knowledge about the causal structure, such as constraining the observation function (Buchholz et al.,
2023; Squires et al., 2023; Ahuja et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Kivva et al., 2022; Lachapelle et al.,
2023), sparse graphical structures (Khemakhem et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; 2024; Lachapelle &
Lacoste-Julien, 2022; Lachapelle et al., 2024), having multiple views (Xu et al., 2024; Yao et al.,
2024a; von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Brehmer et al., 2022; Locatello et al., 2020), or supplementary
supervision labels (Yang et al., 2020; Komanduri et al., 2022; Locatello et al., 2019b). Recent
advancements have explored CRL for temporal environments, in which agent-level actions like in
reinforcement learning are used to learn the causal structure of the environment (Lippe et al., 2022;
2023; Nalmpantis et al., 2023). In particular, our work leverages BISCUIT (Lippe et al., 2023), a
CRL framework that learns causal representations with realistic agent-focused assumptions, requiring
only a small set of labeled causal variables for the final mapping after causal representation learning,
without their interactions or causal graphs.

World Models and Causal Integration World models predict the consequences of actions and
have been extensively used in reinforcement learning (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). Recent work has
focused on object-centric world models (Greff et al., 2017; Steenkiste et al., 2018; Watters et al.,
2019) and the integration of graph neural networks for modeling transitions (Battaglia et al., 2016;
2018; Kipf et al., 2018). However, attempts to integrate causality into world models have been limited.
Some approaches, such as CoPhyNet (Baradel et al., 2020), consider counterfactual scenarios but
rely on direct supervision of object positions or place constraints on unobserved variables (Li et al.,
2020). Our work aims to learn a causal world model relying only on images and textual annotations 1
but capable of reasoning about actions across state transitions, while also being able to be interacted
with by a language model.

Large Language Models, Causality, Planning and Reasoning There has been much work
exploring the use of LLMs as action agents for planning and reasoning tasks, showing promising
results (Ahn et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). Various methodologies have been
developed to make use of LLMs for agent planning. These include task decomposition for breaking
complex tasks into subtasks (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024), multi-plan selection
for generating and choosing optimal plans (Yao et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2022), external module-
aided planning (Liu et al., 2023a; Guan et al., 2023), reflection and refinement via self-evaluation and
improvement (Shinn et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024; Madaan et al., 2024), and memory-augmented
planning for decision making (Zhang et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). While LLMs have shown
impressive performance in reasoning, tool usage, planning, and instruction-following, challenges
remain in addressing hallucinations, plan feasibility, and tractability in complex, multi-step planning
scenarios (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Kambhampati et al., 2024; Kambhampati, 2024). Theoretical
work on robustness under distribution shifts in unmediated decision tasks (where the decision does not
influence the utility) establishes a connection between causal understanding and robustness (Richens
& Everitt, 2024). A better approximation of the underlying causal model generally translates to more
robust agents, implying that world models should be causality-aware (Gupta et al., 2024).

3       BACKGROUND AND S ETUP
To enable LLMs to perform causally-aware reasoning and planning in interactive environments, we
leverage CRL methods to build a causal world model (CWM). The CWM provides LLMs with a
structured understanding of the environment, allowing them to reason about interventions and their
consequences during planning.
In this section, we provide an overview of CRL in temporal causal graphs, which is foundational
to our framework. We discuss how CRL can learn latent causal representations from sequences of
observations and actions, setting the stage for integrating these representations with LLMs.
    1
        Except for a few labels needed to map from the latent representation to human-interpretable language.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


3.1       C AUSAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING IN T EMPORAL C AUSAL G RAPHS

CRL aims to uncover the latent causal variables and the underlying causal structure. In temporal
settings, we consider sequences of high-dimensional observations {Xt }Tt=0 , where Xt ∈ RD , and
actions {Rt }Tt=1 , where Rt ∈ RE . Actions Rt can represent, for example, the coordinates of the
locations where the interactions occurred (Lippe et al., 2023). The true causal variables {Ct }Tt=0 ,
where Ct ∈ RK , are unobserved. Furthermore, a deterministic observation model is assumed, often
represented as Xt = g(Ct ), where g : RK → RD is an injective function mapping causal variables
to observations.
Instead of directly modeling causal variables, CRL relies on latent state representations. It estimates
a function f : RD → RM 2 that maps observations Xt to latent representations zt = f (Xt ). The
goal is to ensure that each dimension zit of zt corresponds to a causal variable Cit in Ct up to a
transformation decided by the identifiability class of the causal model. Specifically, it aims to achieve
this disentanglement using only {Xt }Tt=0 and {Rt }Tt=1 .

3.2       G ENERATIVE M ODEL

The temporal CRL framework is often modeled as a generative process that describes how observa-
tions are produced from underlying latent state representations and actions. At each time step t, the
state zt evolve according to a transition model influenced by actions Rt , and generate observations
Xt . Assuming a first-order Markov process, the conditional likelihood of the observed data {Xt }Tt=0
given actions {Rt }Tt=1 is expressed as
                                          Z            T
                                                       Y
                     p {Xt } | {Rt } =        p(z0 )         pω (zt | zt−1 , Rt ) pg (Xt | zt ) dz,

                                                                                                          (1)
                                                       t=1

where p(z0 ) is the prior distribution over the state. The transition model term pω (zt | zt−1 , Rt )
models the state dynamics, capturing how the states evolve over time and how intervening actions
influence them. The observation model pg (Xt | zt ) describes how the states generate the observations,
which in our case will be done with the deterministic function g.
The marginalization in Eq. (1) renders the objective intractable. A standard approach to address this is
to optimize the corresponding Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) by assuming a Gaussian distribution
for the transition dynamics and the standard Gaussian for the prior, using the reparameterization trick
to enable efficient optimization (Kingma & Welling, 2013).

3.3       I DENTIFIABILITY G UARANTEES IN BISCUIT

There is nothing in the objective of Eq. (1) itself that guarantees the model will identify the causal
variables from the observations. In BISCUIT (Lippe et al., 2023), the CRL framework we adopt,
identifiability arises from two key assumptions: (1) each causal variable has a distinct ‘interaction
pattern,’ meaning that the effect of Rt on zt is mediated by a latent binary mask, and (2) these
interaction patterns vary over time. The first assumption is enforced by using a structured model
family to model the transition pω (zt | zt−1 , Rt ). We incorporate this component from BISCUIT in
our approach. These assumptions together ensure that causal variables are uniquely identifiable from
the observed data. For a more detailed discussion on the assumptions, theoretical guarantees, and the
structure of the transition model, we refer the reader to the original paper (Lippe et al., 2023).

4       B UILDING A C AUSAL W ORLD M ODEL FROM C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS
To integrate the CRL model with LLMs, we construct a Causal World Model (CWM) that takes
actions in text format and states in image format and produces state representations in natural language.
The CWM builds on BISCUIT to model the environment’s dynamics, with the CWM’s encoder and
decoder components (see Figure 2) responsible for translating states and actions to and from natural
language. BISCUIT ensures identifiability and causal structure recovery, which enables reliable
predictions of the effects of actions/interventions, as demonstrated by our experiments in Section 6.
    2
        Since we do not normally have a priori information of the number of causal variables, we set M ≫ K.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         Input                     Causal Encoder             Causal Transition                                     Decoder
                                 BISCUIT                          Model
                       ❄
                                                                                                         Causal Mapper
                        Auto                                                                                                                      The cyan traffic light
                       encoder              NF                                                                MLP              1
                                                                                                                                                       is showing a
                                                                                                              MLP             0.15                green signal. The red
                                                                                                                                       State       car is positioned at
                                              CRL Model                                                                              Descriptor
                                                                                                              ...              ...                 (0.15, 0.75). ... The
                       ❄                                                              ...                                                           heavy boulder is
   You changed the      CLIP                                                                                                                       positioned at (0.10,


                                                                ...


                                                                           ...
                                           MLP      0 1 0 1                                                   MLP             0.78
   state of the cyan    Text                                                                                                                               0.77).
                       Encoder                                                                Target
      traffic light.
                                                                                            Assignment


Figure 2: Illustration of the first roll-out step with the Causal World Model. The image X0 and action
description L0 are encoded into initial latent representations. The CRL module then disentangles
these representations and the transition model predicts the next state. The causal mapper transforms
the disentangled causal representation of the next state into the estimated causal variables Ĉ1 . Finally,
the state descriptor s generates a natural language description ℓ1 of the next state. For subsequent
steps, the model can autoregress in the latent space using the previously predicted z, bypassing the
autoencoder and normalizing flow, enabling efficient multi-step inference and planning.

Although we utilize BISCUIT, our approach should be compatible with any CRL frameworks that can
provide disentangled causal representations (i.e., (Nalmpantis et al., 2023; Lachapelle et al., 2024;
Yao et al., 2022)).

4.1      L ANGUAGE G ROUNDING M ODULES

To integrate the CRL model with LLMs, we introduce architectural components that transform the
CRL model into a world model with a language interface. This section outlines the new components
we introduce, enabling the model to process image states and text inputs, and produce text outputs.

Language-Based Action Representations We replace the action encoding Rt in the CRL frame-
work with a language-based representation Le (Lt ), where Le embeds a natural language description
Lt . This is implemented using an encoder-only language model (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) with
a trainable head, replacing the original action encodings in the CRL framework’s transition model
Rt = Le (Lt ) (see also Section 4.2).

Decoder The decoder G comprises two parts: the causal mapper and the state description generator.
The causal mapper mθ extracts causal variables C from the learned disentangled representations
z. It first identifies which latent dimensions zi are most predictive for each causal variable Cj , then
learns to perform the actual mapping. The state description generator s maps the estimated causal
variables Ĉ to ℓ, a natural language description of the state. Detailed implementations of these
components are provided in Appendix G and H respectively.

4.2      PARAMETER E STIMATION AND I NFERENCE

In this section, we explain the estimation process for all model components and detail how the
resulting model is applied during inference. We use the GridWorld environment as a running example
to illustrate the process, though the same methodology applies to any environment.

Estimation: Causal Encoder and Transition Model To estimate the model, we use image pairs
{Xt } and corresponding action descriptions {Lt } in natural language, for example, “you toggled
the cyan traffic light” or “you moved the blue car”. We first train an autoencoder to compress high-
dimensional observations Xt into lower-dimensional latent representations Et = eψ (Xt ), in which,
however, the causal variables will still be entangled. Then, analogously to Eq. 1, the conditional
likelihood of the encoded observations {Et }Tt=0 given action descriptions {Lt }Tt=1 is given by
                                  Z         YT
                p {E } | {L } = p(z0 )
                      t      t
                                               pω (zt | zt−1 , Le (Lt )) pϕ (Et | zt ) dz,

                                                                                                 (2)
                                                                       t=1

where pω is the transition model, structured as in BISCUIT in order to satisfy the identifiability
guarantees, pϕ (Et | zt ), is the observation model, and p(z0 ) is the prior distribution over the
initial latents, assumed to be the standard Gaussian. The invertible mapping fϕ : RM → RM is a


                                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


normalizing flow (NF) that transforms the autoencoder’s states {Et } into a new, structured latent
space {zt }, while identifying and separating the causal variables. As the NF is invertible, fϕ and its
Jacobian also yield the term pϕ (Et | zt ) in the generative model. Similar to BISCUIT, the ELBO is
formulated and optimized using the reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2013).
The full causal encoder that maps an observation Xt to the causal state zt is expressed as E := fϕ ◦eψ ,
where eψ is the encoder part of the autoencoder, and fϕ is the NF. While we assume perfect
reconstruction capability for the autoencoder, a common assumption in CRL (Kivva et al., 2022;
Lachapelle et al., 2023; Brehmer et al., 2022; Lachapelle et al., 2024, inter alia), this component can
be replaced with stronger visual encoders as they become available, without affecting the framework’s
core functionality.
This framework builds upon the BISCUIT architecture, maintaining the same structure for the
autoencoder, normalizing flow (RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2016)), and transition model. However, we
introduce an important modification in the action representation. While BISCUIT used coordinate-
based action encodings (as described in Section 5.1), our work incorporates language-based action
representations through Le (Lt ) in the transition model to enable our model to process natural
language action descriptions.

Estimation: Decoder We train the causal mapper mθ using a small set of annotated but not
necessarily ordered images where the true causal variables C and their values are known. The
training pairs consist of (z, C), where z is the output of our causal encoding pipeline and C are
the corresponding ground truth causal variables. In GridWorld, these variables include positions of
vehicles and obstacles, and states of traffic lights. For instance, the causal mapper might learn that
dimensions z1 , z3 , and z7 are most predictive for the “blue car x-position” (C0 ), and then train a
specific predictor for C0 using only these relevant dimensions.
The state description generator s, typically a rule-based system, maps the estimated causal variables
to human-interpretable outputs. For example, it might transform position and state variables into a
description like “The blue car is at (2,3), the cyan traffic light is green”. The full decoder is expressed
as G := s ◦ mθ .

Inference Process During inference, the model sequentially processes new GridWorld images
through these components:
                                       zt = E(Xt ) = (fϕ ◦ eψ )(Xt ),
                                       zt+1 ∼ pω zt+1 | zt , Le (Lt ) ,


                                  ℓt+1 = G(zt+1 ) = (s ◦ mθ )(zt+1 ).
This process transforms raw input into interpretable state descriptions of the next state, facilitating
interaction with language models for reasoning and planning tasks. Notably, the transition model
operates solely in the disentangled latent space, without dependency on the high-dimensional observa-
tions Xt . This enables efficient multi-step inference through autoregression, allowing for long-term
planning and reasoning without the need to decode back to the observation space at each step.
This entire process relies solely on the sequence of observations and action descriptions, without
requiring explicit information about which specific variables or factors are being affected. By
introducing the language-based action encoder and decoding into natural language, we create a
framework that is inherently suited for language-based causal reasoning in complex environments.
The algorithm to perform inference is provided in Appendix M.

5    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We evaluate our framework using two distinct environments: a dynamic 8 × 8 GridWorld and a static
3D-rendered kitchen (AI2-THOR) (Kolve et al., 2017). The GridWorld is dynamic, meaning the
environment state can change even without agent actions, while the iTHOR kitchen is static, changing
only in response to agent interventions. Our experiments focus on three key aspects: the effectiveness
of text-based action representations, causal inference, and planning. Both environments feature
various objects with causal variables representing their states and positions. Detailed descriptions of
the environments are provided in Appendices A and B.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For each environment, we generated multiple datasets for training, evaluation, and in-context learning.
The data generation process involves initializing the environment state and performing random,
valid actions. Specific details about dataset sizes, in-context learning example generation, and
self-evaluation reward generation for planning tasks are described in Appendix D.

5.1   ACTION R EPRESENTATIONS

We investigate three action representation modalities:

      1. Coordinate-based (CB): Encoding of 2D pixel coordinates indicating the position where
         the interaction was performed. For example, a click at position (2, 3) is transformed into a
         higher-dimensional representation using high-frequency sinusoidal functions.
      2. Text-based (TB): Natural language descriptions expanded using a PCFG (e.g., “you toggled
         the bright cyan traffic light”), then encoded through an encoder-only text embedder.
      3. Hybrid (HB): Concatenation of coordinate-based and text-based representations.

We hypothesize that the text-based action encoding is a) semantically richer, providing more infor-
mation for the same or less effort to annotate the data, b) more flexible, enabling a language-based
interface suitable for a generalist agent, and c) more robust, meaning that paraphrases or equivalent
descriptions of the same action can still work with our model even if it was not specifically trained on
them. This last point is crucial, as the LLM used at inference may deviate in its action description
style from what was seen during training.

5.2   BASELINE

Our baseline uses the world model component from the Reasoning via Planning (RAP) methodology
(Hao et al., 2023). This language model-based world model predicts the next state given the current
state st , chosen action at , and context c:
                                    st+1 ∼ pLM (st+1 | st , at , c).
The baseline constructs a prompt at runtime that includes the environment description and dynamics,
current state representation, chosen action, two relevant in-context learning (ICL) examples, and
instructions for predicting the next state. This approach leverages the language model’s pretrained
knowledge while adapting to the specific task and environment dynamics. We ensure the relevance of
the ICL examples by providing examples that match the current action and the object it is applied to.
We use LLaMA 3 (8B) (Dubey et al., 2024) as the planning agent quantized to 6 bits in the exl2
format. We chose RAP+LLaMA3 as the baseline for its simplicity and effectiveness, providing a fair
point of comparison to assess the benefits of integrating causal representation learning. This allows
us to isolate the impact of causal understanding in an otherwise comparable framework, though our
approach could integrate with alternative search algorithms such as LLM-MCTS (Zhao et al., 2024).

6     E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSION

6.1   E VALUATION OF T EXT- BASED ACTION R EPRESENTATIONS

In this experiment, we demonstrate the effectiveness of representing actions in natural language
for learning causal representations. We assess the induced state variables z by comparing them to
ground-truth causal variables. Note that the model’s decoder is not evaluated in these experiments.
We train our causal world model using each action modality (CB, TB, HB) across different sub-
sample percentages of the training dataset, focusing on the low-data regime. Given sufficient data,
models yield practically identical results across all 3 modalities but obtaining data in non-simulated
environments is typically expensive. Performance is assessed using a standard CRL metric: R2
scores for the permutation π that maximizes the diagonal of the R2 matrix between learned latent
variables and true causal variables. This approach accounts for the fact that we learn causal variables
up to permutation. Each experiment uses 3 seeds with distinct subsamples. A more comprehensive
explanation of the training of the components of the CRL models used is presented in Appendix E.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: R2 scores for action representations. CB: Coordinate-based, TB: Text-based, HB: Hybrid.
100% stands for 106 image states.

                                         Subsample Percentage
  Action                                                                                       100%
   Type       0.3%          0.5%           0.7%         1.0%          1.2%           1.5%
      CB   0.392 ±0.000 0.366±0.000 0.424±0.001 0.457±0.004 0.472±0.004 0.548±0.022 0.987
      TB   0.374±0.000 0.362±0.000 0.399±0.000 0.470±0.012 0.495±0.014 0.603±0.003 0.990
      HB   0.392±0.000 0.433±0.001 0.460±0.000 0.461±0.007 0.490±0.010 0.539±0.011 0.991

Table 2: N -step causal inference accuracies for the causal world model and the RAP (Hao et al.,
2023) world model across different environments and step lengths.

                                         iTHOR                    GridWorld
             Steps                   1       2      4      1      2    4         6       8
             Causal Model    0.824 0.680 0.630 0.954 0.922 0.829 0.797 0.758
             RAP World Model 0.482 0.285 0.110 0.391 0.220 0.085 0.045 0.005


Table 1 presents the results of our action representation experiments for the GridWorld environment in
the low-data regime. Our results demonstrate that incorporating text into action representations (TB
and HB) is Pareto-optimal in GridWorld; TB and HB perform at least as well as the coordinate-based
representation, especially in low-data regimes. In extremely low-data scenarios (0.3% - 0.7%), the
hybrid approach consistently outperforms both CB and TB. As data increases (1.0% - 1.5%), TB
shows competitive performance while providing natural alignment with LLM interfaces.
These findings support our hypothesis: action encodings including text are as effective as or superior
in uncovering causal variables to coordinate-based representations, particularly when data is scarce.
We use the TB model trained using the entire dataset (106 examples) in the subsequent experiments.


6.2    C AUSAL I NFERENCE P ERFORMANCE

Our causal inference experiments evaluate both world models’ ability to perform 1-step and N -step
causal inference, i.e., predict the effects of actions (interventions) on the environment. In the 1-step
case, given the current state and an action, the model predicts the new state. For N -step causal
inference, we provide a sequence of actions and only the starting state and the world model applies
each action to its previous prediction in a sequence. This differs from planning in that it focuses on
the effect of a given sequence of actions rather than finding actions to reach a goal. The evaluation
methodology is presented in Appendix K.
Table 2 presents accuracies of causal inference for both models across different environments and
step lengths. The causal world model consistently outperforms the baseline across all scenarios.
In GridWorld, it maintains high accuracy (75.8%) even for 8-step inference, while the baseline’s
performance drops nearly to 0. The performance in iTHOR, while lower than in GridWorld, still
shows a substantial improvement over the baseline.
The higher overall performance on GridWorld can be attributed to its simpler action space, object
space, and causal graph, despite its dynamic nature. The baseline’s lower performance in GridWorld
compared to iTHOR may be due to the lack of visual input, which is less natural for language models
in an artificial environment.
Table 3 provides a detailed breakdown of the causal inference performance for specific actions and
objects, based on the extended 1-step dataset of 3000 samples. In iTHOR, the causal world model
excels at ToggleObject and OpenObject actions (95.7% and 92.6% accuracy), while struggling more
with PutObject and PickupObject actions (50.6% and 43.1% accuracy). This discrepancy likely
stems from the following; first, we model the three-dimensional coordinates as independent random
variables while, in reality, they are dependent. Second, we model interventions using binary variables
to estimate whether we performed an intervention or not. Performance could be improved by injecting
inductive bias towards the continuous, three-dimensional nature of the underlying variable. However,
this requires task specialization within the model and we chose to keep the proposed framework task-


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



Table 3: Causal inference accuracies for action categories in iTHOR and GridWorld environments.
CWM: Causal World Model, RAP (Hao et al., 2023): RAP World Model Baseline.

                       iTHOR Environment                GridWorld Environment
                 Action Category CWM RAP            Action Category     CWM RAP
                 ToggleObject       0.957   0.466 Change Light State     0.986   0.300
                 OpenObject         0.926   0.339 No Action              0.985   0.456
                 NoOp               0.962   0.710 Move                   0.928   0.408
                 PutObject          0.506   0.100
                 PickupObject       0.431   0.692

agnostic. The baseline model shows a different pattern, performing better on NoOp and PickupObject
actions but struggling with PutObject actions.
In GridWorld, the causal world model demonstrates high accuracy across all action types, with
particularly strong performance in changes to the state of the lights and no-action scenarios. The
baseline model shows lower performance across the board, with its best performance on the No
Action category.
These results highlight the causal world model’s superior ability to reason about causal relationships,
maintaining strong performance across different temporal scales, environments, and action types.

6.3     P LANNING

Methodology The planning experiments assess the model’s ability to generate a sequence of
actions to transform an initial state into a goal state. This involves exploring multiple possible action
sequences and evaluating their effectiveness in reaching the goal. Unlike causal inference, planning
requires considering long-term consequences and optimizing for a specific objective.
Our framework adapts the Reasoning via Planning (RAP) methodology, with a key distinction: we
employ a separate causal world model alongside a language model agent, rather than using a single
language model for both roles. We use the same LLM as for the baseline planning agent (LLaMA 3).
The planning works as follows: The LLaMA 3 agent proposes possible actions based on the current
state. The world model then simulates the actions’ outcomes, predicting subsequent states. The agent
then evaluates each state-action pair’s quality and picks an action resulting in a new state. This cycle
repeats, exploring multiple reasoning paths before converging on a final solution. For all N -step
experiments, we use a search tree depth of N + 2. We use a modified version of the RAP-MCTS
algorithm, presented in Appendix N.

Actions In Gridworld, there are three actions to toggle traffic lights (one per light) and one to
perform no action. In iTHOR, we dynamically generate 10-15 possible actions, depending on the
initial state. During planning, the models use their internal representations to determine possible
actions. During evaluation, we use the external simulator (the same one used to generate the data) to
execute the plan proposed by the agent. If an invalid action is proposed, during evaluation we default
to performing no action.

Reward Design In line with the RAP methodology, we rely on the LLM’s ability to judge the
current state in relation to the goal. The Intuition reward is the unnormalized log probability of
actions generated by the language model, given the current state and few-shot demonstrations. The
Self-evaluation reward is the log probability of the token “good” when asking the model to evaluate
whether the proposed action is correct, given the current state and few-shot demonstrations.
We avoid using percentage-of-goals-reached rewards to maintain generality and applicability to
problems that are not easily divisible into subgoals or subtasks. This choice ensures that our method
remains applicable to a wide range of problems, including those where intermediate progress toward
the goal is difficult to quantify and/or may not correlate directly with overall success.

6.3.1    P LANNING R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Table 4 presents the planning results for both models across different environments and step lengths.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 4: Planning results for the causal world model and RAP (Hao et al., 2023) across different
environments and step lengths. The best performing method for each metric is highlighted in green.

                                 Causal World Model                                RAP Baseline
 Environment    Steps
                                          Avg. Steps    Avg. Steps                      Avg. Steps   Avg. Steps
                        Success Rate ↑   (Success) ↓    (Failure) ↓   Success Rate ↑   (Success) ↓   (Failure) ↓
                2                 0.58         1.78           3.36              0.25         4.00          4.00
 iTHOR
                4                 0.44         2.14           5.43              0.11         6.00          6.00
                2                 0.95         1.92           3.20              0.20         2.00          3.19
                4                 0.73         2.71           5.27              0.11         3.27          5.48
 GridWorld
                6                 0.46         3.65           7.72              0.08         5.50          7.72
                8                 0.42         4.62           9.76              0.06         7.00          9.93


The causal world model consistently outperforms the baseline in both environments:

       • Success Rates: The causal model achieves significantly higher success rates, particularly in
         longer planning horizons. In iTHOR, it more than doubles the baseline’s success rate for
         2-step planning (0.58 vs 0.25) and quadruples it for 4-step planning (0.44 vs 0.11).
       • Efficiency: For successful trajectories, the causal model takes fewer steps on average to
         reach the goal state, indicating more efficient planning.
       • Scalability: While both models show decreased performance as the number of steps in
         the ground truth increase, the causal model degrades more gracefully. In GridWorld, it
         maintains a 0.42 success rate for 8-step planning, compared to the baseline’s 0.06.
       • Consistency: Both models perform better in GridWorld compared to iTHOR, likely due to
         the lower complexity and more constrained action space. However, the causal model shows
         more consistent performance across both environments.

An interesting observation is the sub-N performance in N -step planning scenarios. This phenomenon
arises from two key factors in our experimental design which renders the parameter N an upper
bound of the steps needed to achieve the goal state. In the static iTHOR environment, some actions
can negate others (e.g., toggling the toaster twice is equivalent to performing no action), allowing for
shorter paths to the goal state. In addition to this phenomenon, in the dynamic GridWorld environment,
the inherent movement of entities (e.g., cars moving when facing a green light) can sometimes lead
to the goal state in fewer steps than the upper bound. This sub-N performance highlights our models’
ability to find efficient paths to the goal state, often outperforming the original trajectories used to
generate the planning problems.
The performance improvements observed in our experiments can be attributed to the CRL world
model’s higher accuracy in predicting future states. Both our method and the baseline use identical
state representations, with consistent text formatting maintained across the in-context learning
examples. This uniformity ensures that the language model’s reasoning and planning processes are
influenced primarily by the accuracy of the underlying world model. Therefore, the superior planning
performance of our method highlights the effectiveness of integrating CRL for more accurate state
predictions, which directly benefits the downstream reasoning tasks.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced a framework that integrates causal representation learning with language
models, enabling causally-aware reasoning and planning in interactive environments. Our approach
combines the structured causal understanding of CRL with the flexible interface of language models,
demonstrating superior performance in causal inference and planning tasks across two environments.
The causal world model consistently outperforms baselines, showing improved accuracy, efficiency,
and scalability as task complexity increases. Our exploration of text-based action representations
reveals potential advantages in low-data regimes, suggesting implications for more flexible and
generalizable AI systems. While our current experiments focus on relatively simple environments,
the framework is designed to extend to more complex scenarios as CRL and search methods advance.
Future work could explore applications to real-world environments, improve the interpretability of
learned causal world models and develop techniques independent of labeled causal variables.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
For reproducibility, we publish the code and models to integrate Causal Representation Learning
(CRL) with Language Models (LLMs), as well as the scripts to generate data sets used in our
experiments, on our code repository: https://github.com/j0hngou/LLMCWM/. All models were
implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and PyTorch Lightning (Falcon & The PyTorch
Lightning team, 2019). Detailed hyperparameters and dataset descriptions are provided in Section 5
and Section 6, with further details in Appendices C, F, D, E, K, M, and N.
In terms of computational resources, all experiments were performed on NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
Training the autoencoders takes approximately 1 to 2 days. Jointly training the normalizing flows and
the language heads takes around 0.5 to 1 hour.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) for their support
(VICI grant VI.C.212.053).

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey,
 Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Kartik Ahuja, Divyat Mahajan, Yixin Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. Interventional Causal Representation
  Learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, PMLR, 2023.
Fabien Baradel, Natalia Neverova, Julien Mille, Greg Mori, and Christian Wolf. Cophy: Counterfac-
  tual learning of physical dynamics. In ICLR, 2020.
Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, et al. Interaction networks
  for learning about objects, relations and physics. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
  Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
  2018.
Johann Brehmer, Pim de Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco Cohen. Weakly Supervised Causal Represen-
  tation Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Simon Buchholz, Goutham Rajendran, Elan Rosenfeld, Bryon Aragam, Bernhard Schölkopf, and
  Pradeep Kumar Ravikumar. Learning Linear Causal Representations From Interventions Under
  General Nonlinear Mixing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In International
  conference on computers and games, pp. 72–83. Springer, 2006.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.

Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
  Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

William Falcon and The PyTorch Lightning team. PyTorch Lightning, March 2019. URL https:
 //github.com/Lightning-AI/lightning.

Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  CRITIC: large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. In The Twelfth In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024.
  OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sx038qxjek.

Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation maximization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Lin Guan, Karthik Valmeekam, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Leveraging pre-
  trained large language models to construct and utilize world models for model-based task planning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:79081–79094, 2023.

Tarun Gupta, Wenbo Gong, Chao Ma, Nick Pawlowski, Agrin Hilmkil, Meyer Scetbon, Ade Famoti,
  Ashley Juan Llorens, Jianfeng Gao, Stefan Bauer, et al. The essential role of causality in foundation
  world models for embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06665, 2024.

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023.

Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.

Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear Independent Component Analysis: Existence and
  Uniqueness Results. Neural Networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999.

Subbarao Kambhampati. Can large language models reason and plan? Annals of the New York
  Academy of Sciences, 1534(1):15–18, 2024.

Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Kaya Stechly, Siddhant
  Bhambri, Lucas Paul Saldyt, and Anil B Murthy. Position: LLMs can’t plan, but can help planning
  in LLM-modulo frameworks. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Th8JPEmH4z.

Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational Autoencoders
   and Nonlinear ICA: A Unifying Framework. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
   PMLR, 2020.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.             Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard Zemel. Neural relational
  inference for interacting systems. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2688–2697.
  PMLR, 2018.

Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Identifiability of Deep
  Generative Models Without Auxiliary Information. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In Johannes Fürnkranz,
  Tobias Scheffer, and Myra Spiliopoulou (eds.), Machine Learning: ECML 2006, pp. 282–293,
  Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-46056-5.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D Environment
  for Visual AI. arXiv, 2017.
Aneesh Komanduri, Yongkai Wu, Wen Huang, Feng Chen, and Xintao Wu. Scm-vae: Learning
  identifiable causal representations via structural knowledge. In 2022 IEEE International Conference
  on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1014–1023. IEEE, 2022.
Sébastien Lachapelle and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Partial Disentanglement via Mechanism Sparsity.
  In UAI 2022 Workshop on Causal Representation Learning, 2022.
Sebastien Lachapelle, Divyat Mahajan, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Additive
  Decoders for Latent Variables Identification and Cartesian-Product Extrapolation. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodríguez López, Yash Sharma, Katie Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
  Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Nonparametric Partial Disentanglement via Mechanism
  Sparsity: Sparse Actions, Interventions and Sparse Temporal Dependencies. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2401.04890, 2024.
Minne Li, Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Xu Chen, Zhitang Chen, and Jun Wang. Causal world models
 by unsupervised deconfounding of physical dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14228, 2020.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Stratis Gavves. Citris:
  Causal identifiability from temporal intervened sequences. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 13557–13603. PMLR, 2022.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves.
  Biscuit: Causal representation learning from binary interactions. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1263–1273. PMLR, 2023.
Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
  Llm+p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.11477, 2023a.
Rosanne Liu, Joel Lehman, Piero Molino, Felipe Petroski Such, Eric Frank, Alex Sergeev, and
  Jason Yosinski. An intriguing failing of convolutional neural networks and the coordconv solution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Yuhang Liu, Zhen Zhang, Dong Gong, Mingming Gong, Biwei Huang, Anton van den Hengel, Kun
  Zhang, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Identifying Weight-Variant Latent Causal Models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.14153, 2022.
Yuhang Liu, Zhen Zhang, Dong Gong, Mingming Gong, Biwei Huang, Anton van den Hengel, Kun
  Zhang, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Identifiable Latent Polynomial Causal Models Through the Lens of
  Change. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2024.
Zhihan Liu, Hao Hu, Shenao Zhang, Hongyi Guo, Shuqi Ke, Boyi Liu, and Zhaoran Wang. Reason
  for future, act for now: A principled framework for autonomous llm agents with provable sample
  efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17382, 2023b.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Dis-
  entangled Representations. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2019a.
Francesco Locatello, Michael Tschannen, Stefan Bauer, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Disentangling factors of variation using few labels. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1905.01258, 2019b.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and Michael
  Tschannen. Weakly-Supervised Disentanglement Without Compromises. In Proceedings of the
  37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research. PMLR, 2020.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Angelos Nalmpantis, Phillip Lippe, and Sara Magliacane. Hierarchical Causal Representation
  Learning. In Causal Representation Learning Workshop at NeurIPS 2023, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
Jonathan Richens and Tom Everitt. Robust agents learn causal world models. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=pOoKI3ouv1.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the
  IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt:
  Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 36, 2024.
Chandler Squires, Anna Seigal, Salil S. Bhate, and Caroline Uhler. Linear Causal Disentanglement
  via Interventions. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, PMLR, 2023.
Sjoerd Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural expecta-
  tion maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. 02 2018.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the
  planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36:75993–76005, 2023.
Julius von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-Supervised Learning With Data Augmentations Provably
  Isolates Content From Style. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  volume 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Matko Bosnjak, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner.
  Cobra: Data-efficient model-based rl through unsupervised object discovery and curiosity-driven
  exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09275, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Danru Xu, Dingling Yao, Sebastien Lachapelle, Perouz Taslakian, Julius von Kügelgen, Francesco
  Locatello, and Sara Magliacane. A Sparsity Principle for Partially Observable Causal Representa-
  tion Learning. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2024.
Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Xinwei Shen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Causalvae:
 Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08697,
 2020.
Dingling Yao, Danru Xu, Sebastien Lachapelle, Sara Magliacane, Perouz Taslakian, Georg Martius,
  Julius von Kügelgen, and Francesco Locatello. Multi-View Causal Representation Learning
  With Partial Observability. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2024a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
  Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024b.
Weiran Yao, Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. Temporally Disentangled Representation Learning. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35. Curran Associates,
 Inc., 2022.
Matej Zečević, Moritz Willig, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Causal parrots: Large
 language models may talk causality but are not causal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13067, 2023.
Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language
  image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 11975–11986, 2023.
Danyang Zhang, Lu Chen, Situo Zhang, Hongshen Xu, Zihan Zhao, and Kai Yu. Large language
  models are semi-parametric reinforcement learning agents. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jiaqi Zhang, Kristjan Greenewald, Chandler Squires, Akash Srivastava, Karthikeyan Shanmugam,
   and Caroline Uhler. Identifiability Guarantees for Causal Disentanglement From Soft Interventions.
   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36. Curran Associates,
   Inc., 2023.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge for
  large-scale task planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing large
 language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 19724–19731, 2024.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     G RIDWORLD E NVIRONMENT

The gridworld environment is a dynamic environment of size H × H, where H ∈ N denotes both the
height and width of the grid. The top left corner of the grid is defined to be (0, 0). The environment
consists of C underlying causal variables that interact based on the actions taken by the agent
and the dynamics of the environment. The environment contains three types of entities: vehicles
v ∈ V , obstacles o ∈ O, and traffic lights tl ∈ T L. Each entity has a fixed corresponding attribute,
implemented as a color, which differentiates it from other objects within the same entity class.
The traffic lights are positioned in the grid, and each vehicle is facing a specific traffic light. The
positions of the traffic lights are fixed and immutable, with coordinates (xtl , ytl ), where xtl , ytl ∈
{0, 1, . . . , H − 1}. Each traffic light has a state stl ∈ {red, green}. The obstacles have positions
(xo , yo ) in the grid, where xo , yo ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1}, and these positions can only change through
interventions performed on them. The vehicles have positions (xv , yv ) in the grid, where xv , yv ∈
{0, 1, . . . , H − 1}, and an orientation θv ∈ {up, down, left, right}. The vehicle positions change
according to the following dynamics:
Let v be a vehicle at position (xv , yv ) with orientation θv , associated with a traffic light tl at position
(xtl , ytl ). We say that the vehicle v is facing the traffic light tl if and only if one of the following
conditions is satisfied:

      1. θv = up and xv = xtl and yv > ytl
      2. θv = down and xv = xtl and yv < ytl
      3. θv = left and yv = ytl and xv > xtl
      4. θv = right and yv = ytl and xv < xtl

If the vehicle v is facing the traffic light tl, it will move forward to the cell (x′v , yv′ ) at the next
timestep if and only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:

      1. The traffic light tl has a state of green, i.e., stl = green.
      2. There are no obstacles in the cell (x′v , yv′ ), i.e., ∄ o ∈ O : (xo , yo ) = (x′v , yv′ ).
      3. There are no traffic lights in the cell (x′v , yv′ ), i.e., ∄ tl ∈ T L : (xtl , ytl ) = (x′v , yv′ ).
      4. The cell (x′v , yv′ ) is within the grid boundaries, i.e., 0 ≤ x′v < H and 0 ≤ yv′ < H.

The new position (x′v , yv′ ) is determined by the vehicle’s current position (xv , yv ) and orientation θv
as follows:

                                                  (xv , yv − 1)
                                                
                                                                  if θv = up
                                                
                                                  (xv , yv + 1)    if θv = down
                                                
                                 (x′v , yv′ ) =                                                                  (3)
                                                (xv − 1, yv )
                                                                  if θv = left
                                                
                                                  (xv + 1, yv )    if θv = right

Interventions The intervention process follows a specific sequence: first, a step in the environment
dynamics is executed; then, an intervention is applied; finally, a snapshot of the resulting state is
captured. Interventions can modify traffic light states, alter obstacle positions, or move a vehicle
forward. Spatial interventions on obstacles and vehicles are constrained to single-cell displacements;
for obstacles, the direction is stochastic, while for vehicles, it is deterministically forward. Vehicle
intervention is further constrained by the absence of obstacles or traffic lights in the target cell,
adherence to environment boundaries, and the corresponding traffic light displaying a red signal.
A no-operation (NOOP) intervention is also permissible. This tripartite sequence—environmental
progression, intervention, and state documentation—constitutes a complete intervention cycle. These
interventions correspond to regime variables Rt , which are then represented using natural language.

Causal Variables The causal variables in the gridworld environment are the positions of the
vehicles (xv , yv ), the positions of the obstacles (xo , yo ), and the states of the traffic lights stl .


                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     I THOR K ITCHEN E NVIRONMENT - E MBODIED AI

The iTHOR (Kolve et al., 2017) kitchen environment is based on the FloorPlan10 dataset, featuring
a static 3D-rendered kitchen. The robot’s position remains fixed in front of the kitchen counter.
The environment consists of C underlying causal variables that interact based on the actions taken
by the agent. The environment contains three types of entities: movable objects m ∈ M , fixed
interactive objects f ∈ F , and receptacles r ∈ R. Movable objects include a plate with a potato and
an egg. Fixed interactive objects comprise a microwave, stoves, cabinet, and toaster. Receptacles
include the counter, microwave (when open), and pan (for the egg). Each object has a state so ∈ So ,
where So is the set of possible states for object o. For binary state objects (e.g., microwave, cabinet),
So = open, closed or active, inactive. For movable objects, So includes their position (xm , ym , zm )
in the 3D space and a binary pickup state. The set of possible actions A includes:

       • ToggleObject(o): For o ∈ {microwave, stoves, toaster}
       • OpenObject(o): For o ∈ {microwave, cabinet}
       • PickupObject(m): For m ∈ M
       • PutObject(m, r): For m ∈ M, r ∈ R
       • MoveObject(m): For m ∈ M
       • NoOp: No action performed

The availability of actions depends on the current state of objects. For example:
                       ToggleObject(microwave) is valid iff smicrowave = closed                       (4)
                         OpenObject(microwave) is valid iff smicrowave = inactive                      (5)
The regime variable Rt ∈ [0, 1]2 represents the normalized click-location on the image to select the
object for interaction. Let Io be the set of pixels belonging to object o in the current frame. Then:
                                   1
                          Rt =           · (x, y), where (x, y) ∼ Uniform(Io )                         (6)
                                H ×W
where H and W are the height and width of the frame respectively. The causal variables C =
C1 , ..., CC in this environment correspond to the states and positions of objects. Binary state variables
(e.g., Cabinet-Open, Microwave-Active) take values in 0, 1, while position variables (e.g., Egg-Pos-x)
take continuous values in [0, 1], normalized to the environment’s dimensions. Observations are
generated as high-resolution images X t ∈ R512×512×3 , then downsampled to X ′t ∈ R256×256×3
using bilinear interpolation.

C     T EXT-BASED ACTION R EPRESENTATION G ENERATION
C.1   G RIDW ORLD E NVIRONMENT

For the GridWorld environment, we implement a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG). The
PCFG includes:

       • A set of adjectives Ao for each object type o ∈ O = {traffic light, vehicle, obstacle}
       • A set of action modifiers M
       • A set of action verbs Va for each action type a ∈ A = {move, turn, change state}

Let C : R3 → Σc be a function mapping RGB values to a finite set of color names Σc . For each
object o with RGB value ro , we compute its color name as co = C(ro ). The generation process for
an action a on object o can be formalized as:
                                 D(a, o) = m · va · the · adjo · co · o                               (7)
where m ∼ P (M ), va ∈ Va , adjo ∼ P (Ao ), and P (·) denotes the probability distribution defined
by the PCFG. Example: Consider an action to move a blue car to the right. Let ro = (0, 0, 255),
C(ro ) = “blue”, m = “skillfully”, va = “moved”, and adjo = “sleek”. The generated description
would be:
            D(move right, car) = “You skillfully moved the sleek, blue car to the right.”             (8)


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   I THOR E NVIRONMENT

For the iTHOR environment, we define a mapping function f : A × O → Σ, where A is the set
of possible actions, O is the set of objects, and Σ is the set of all possible strings over the alphabet.
Let Ta : A → V be a function that maps actions to verb phrases, and To : O → Σ∗ be a function
that maps objects to descriptive phrases. The generation process for an action a on object o can be
expressed as:
                                     f (a, o) = You · Ta (a) · To (o)                                (9)
Example: For the action of opening a microwave, let a = OpenObject and o = Microwave. As-
sume Ta (OpenObject) = “adjusted” and To (Microwave) = “the microwave’s door”. The generated
description would be:
                 f (OpenObject, Microwave) = “You adjusted the microwave’s door.”                   (10)

C.3   T OKENIZATION AND I NTEGRATION

Let τ : Σ∗ → Nk be a tokenization function that maps a string to a sequence of k token indices. For
a generated description d, we compute its tokenized representation as:
                                                t = τ (d)                                           (11)
The tokenized representations are then padded or truncated to a fixed length l, resulting in the final
representation t′ ∈ Nl . For a trajectory of actions a1 , ..., an on objects o1 , ..., on , we generate a
sequence of tokenized descriptions t′1 , ..., t′n , where:
                               t′i = pad(τ (D(ai , oi )), l) for GridWorld                          (12)
                                 t′i = pad(τ (f (ai , oi )), l) for iTHOR                           (13)

D     DATA G ENERATION AND P REPARATION

For each environment, we generated multiple datasets as shown in Table 5.

                        Table 5: Dataset specifications for each environment

       Dataset               Size                                  Description
       Training              10000 trajectories of 100 steps       Used for model training
       Validation            1000 episodes of 100 steps            Used for model validation
       Test                  1000 episodes of 100 steps            Used for final evaluation
       ICL                   100 episodes of 100 steps             Used for in-context learning
       N -step evaluation    100 episodes of 100 steps each,       Used for N -step experiments
                             for each N value


D.1    DATA G ENERATION P ROCESS

The data generation process for both environments follows these steps:

      1. Initialize the environment state randomly, ensuring a valid starting configuration.
      2. For each step in the trajectory:
          (a) In the Gridworld environment, apply the dynamic update rules (e.g., moving vehicles
              if facing a green light).
          (b) Select a random valid action from the set of possible actions for the current state.
          (c) Apply the selected action to the environment.
          (d) Record the current state, action taken, and resulting next state.
      3. Repeat step 2 for the desired number of steps (100 in our case).


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


For the Gridworld environment, valid actions include toggling traffic lights and performing no action.
The dynamic nature of this environment means that even when no action is taken, the state may
change due to vehicle movements.
For the iTHOR environment, valid actions depend on the current state and may include toggling
objects (e.g., microwave, stoves), opening objects (e.g., cabinet), picking up or putting down movable
objects, and performing no action.
For N -step experiments, we generate multiple datasets, each corresponding to a different value of N :

       • Gridworld: We create separate datasets for N ∈ {2, 4, 6, 8}.
       • iTHOR: We create separate datasets for N ∈ {2, 4}.

Each N -step dataset consists of 100 episodes, where each episode is created by splicing together N
consecutive steps from the evaluation datasets. This approach provides sequences of varying temporal
lengths for our experiments.


D.2    I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING E XAMPLES

For Gridworld, we maintain a pool of 10 ICL examples, each consisting of a 3-tuple (ini-
tial_state_causal_variables, actions, end_state_causal_variables). For each iteration during training
or evaluation, we randomly sample two examples from this pool to provide context for the model.
This process is similar to the one employed in RAP (Hao et al., 2023).
For iTHOR, we craft fixed few-shot examples to ensure comprehensive coverage of state-action pairs.
The examples are designed to demonstrate various object interactions and their outcomes. For 2-step
experiments, we use 7 examples covering every state-action pair at least once. For 4-step experiments,
we use 9 examples covering at least 2 of each state-action pair. This approach ensures that the model
has exposure to a wide range of possible interactions within the environment.


D.3    S ELF -E VALUATION R EWARDS

Following RAP (Hao et al., 2023), for the self-evaluation rewards in planning tasks, we generate
samples by splicing 1-step trajectories. We select the actual action taken in the environment for
“good” evaluations, providing a positive example of a correct action. For “bad” evaluations, we select
a random action different from the one actually taken, providing a negative example.


E     CRL M ODEL T RAINING

This section details the training process for the Causal Representation Learning (CRL) models
used in our experiments. The CRL models are trained using triplets of (state_image, text action,
next_state_image) following the process described in Section 4.


E.1   AUTOENCODER

The autoencoder is trained from scratch using 10 times more samples than the main dataset to ensure
a robust representation. This approach is justified by the relative ease of obtaining unlabeled, random
samples from an environment. In scenarios where this is not feasible, transfer learning from a
pretrained image representation model can be employed by adding a learnable linear projection to the
required dimensions and training with the original dataset size.
For the Gridworld environment, we implement an autoencoder with 40 latent dimensions and 64
hidden channels. Both the encoder and decoder consist of 2 residual blocks with SiLU activation
functions. We incorporate the CoordConv operator (Liu et al., 2018) to better capture coordinate
information from images. For the iTHOR environment, we employ the autoencoder architecture from
BISCUIT (Lippe et al., 2023).


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2      N ORMALIZING F LOW AND T RANSITION M ODEL

For both the normalizing flow and transition model, we use the same architectures and hyperparam-
eters as in BISCUIT (Lippe et al., 2023) as it has demonstrated strong performance in identifying
causal variables from high-dimensional observations.

E.3      T EXT E NCODER

The text encoder for the Gridworld environment is based on a pretrained Sentence Transformer
(Reimers & Gurevych, 2019), specifically the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model3 , augmented with a 2-layer
MLP head with 64 hidden dimensions. For iTHOR, we use a pretrained SigLIP model (Zhai et al.,
2023)4 with a similar 2-layer MLP head. In both cases, the pretrained encoders remain frozen during
training, with only the MLP head being updated.

E.4      T RAINING PARAMETERS

Key training parameters for each environment are as follows: For Gridworld, we use a learning rate
of 3 × 10−3 for the main model and 3 × 10−3 for the text MLP, batch size of 384, and train for 300
epochs. For iTHOR, we use a learning rate of 1 × 10−3 for the main model and 3 × 10−3 for the text
MLP, batch size of 64, and train for 100 epochs. Both environments employ a warmup period of 100
steps and a sequence length of 2 for training.

F       M ODEL S ELECTION
This section details our model selection procedure for the different components of our framework.

F.1      M ODEL C OMPONENTS

For the text encoder, we performed 5-fold cross-validation to select the optimal hyperparameters for
the MLP head architecture and training parameters. The search parameters for the planning algorithm
were optimized using Bayesian optimization with 15 trials.

F.2      S ENSITIVITY

Our experiments indicated that the framework’s performance is relatively robust to variations in
the model training hyperparameters. The causal encoder and text encoder components showed
stable performance across different configurations. However, we observed higher sensitivity to the
exploration weight parameter w in the search algorithm due to the interaction between exploration-
exploitation trade-off and reward scaling.

G       C AUSAL M APPER
The causal mapper mθ extracts interpretable causal variables from the learned disentangled represen-
tations.
This process allows for a non-injective mapping from latent dimensions to causal variables. For
instance, if we have a causal variable “cabinet_state”, the first stage might learn that latents 1, 5, and
7 are the most predictive for this variable. In the second stage, a specific predictor would learn to
map from these dimensions to either 0 (closed) or 1 (open).
The causal mapper mθ is implemented in two stages:

G.1      TARGET A SSIGNMENT

This stage uses a single MLP fassign to predict all causal variables from each latent dimension
independently:
    3
        https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2
    4
        https://huggingface.co/timm/ViT-B-16-SigLIP


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Ĉ = fassign (z ⊙ M, M )                                     (14)

where M ∈ {0, 1}L is a mask and ⊙ is element-wise multiplication. M is set to the identity.
For each latent dimension i, we create a mask Mi where only the i-th element is 1 and the rest are 0.
We then batch these masks along with the corresponding masked latent vectors:

                                           z ⊙ M1     M1
                                                      
                                          z ⊙ M2   M2 
                                             ..  , .                                            (15)
                                              .    .. 
                                           z ⊙ ML         ML

This batched input is fed into fassign , which outputs predictions for all causal variables for each
masked input. The output shape is [L, C], where L is the number of latent dimensions and C is the
number of causal variables.
We then compute the correlation between these predictions and the ground truth causal variables.
This allows us to identify which latent dimensions are most predictive of each causal variable. We
apply a correlation threshold (in our experiments we use 0.1) to determine which latent dimensions
are relevant for each causal variable to determine each Mj′ .

G.2   C AUSAL P REDICTION

Individual MLPs fcausal,j are trained for each causal variable j, using only the relevant latent dimen-
sions identified in stage 1:


                                        Ĉj = fcausal,j (z ⊙ Mj′ )                                  (16)

where Mj′ is the mask for causal variable j.
The output layer of each fcausal,j is adjusted based on the a priori known type of the causal variable
(categorical, numerical, angle).


H     S TATE D ESCRIPTION G ENERATOR

The state description generator s is responsible for converting the causal variables into a human-
readable natural language description of the current state. This process can be implemented in various
ways:

H.1   S TOCHASTIC AND D ETERMINISTIC I MPLEMENTATIONS

The generator can operate either stochastically or deterministically, depending on the application’s
needs:

      1. Stochastic: This approach uses a language model with a temperature greater than 0, which
         allows for a variety of possible descriptions for the same state. This variability can be useful
         in scenarios where diverse language outputs are desired.
      2. Deterministic: This method involves either setting the temperature of a language model
         to 0, ensuring consistent outputs, or using a rule-based system that directly maps causal
         variables to fixed phrases or sentences.

H.2   E XAMPLE OF S TATE D ESCRIPTION G ENERATION

For instance, given a dictionary of causal variables as follows:


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


{
       "cabinet_state": 1,
       "light_color": 0,
       "door_angle": 45
}

The state description generator might produce a sentence like: "The cabinet is open. The traffic light
is showing a red signal. The door is partially open at a 45-degree angle."

H.3    C HOICE OF A PPROACH

The choice between a stochastic and deterministic approach depends on the specific requirements
of the task and the desired level of variability in the generated descriptions. For simplicity and
consistency, in our experiments, we have opted for a rule-based deterministic state descriptor.
While rule-based generation is suitable for environments with reasonably sized state spaces, more
complex environments may benefit from learned approaches. A fine-tuned sequence-to-sequence
model or instruction-tuned LLM could generate natural descriptions from causal variables while
maintaining consistency. The key requirement is that the mapping from causal variables to descrip-
tions remains reliable and interpretable, allowing the planning agent to reason effectively about state
transitions.
The modular nature of our framework allows for easy substitution of the state description generator.
This flexibility ensures that as environments become more complex, the description generation can
be adapted accordingly while maintaining the benefits of our causally-aware planning approach.


I     E NABLING THE BASELINE TO PROCESS IMAGE STATES

To enable LLaMA to process the environment states, we implement a conversion of visual states
to natural language descriptions using the ground truth causal variables. This process ensures fair
comparison with our causal world model while maintaining the LLM’s ability to reason about the
environment.
For each initial state, we extract the ground truth causal variables and use the same rule-based
state description generator employed in our causal world model to convert these variables into
natural language. For example, in GridWorld, a state with causal variables blue_car_x: 2,
blue_car_y: 3, cyan_light_state: green would be converted to “The blue car is
at position (2,3). The cyan traffic light is showing green.”.
The baseline LLM then uses this initial state description to reason about subsequent states and actions,
relying on its world model capabilities to predict state transitions. This approach ensures that the
baseline has access to the initial information as our causal world model, with the key difference being
that our model learns the causal structure while the baseline relies on its pretrained knowledge for
state transition predictions.


J     C AUSAL M APPER A NALYSIS

We present a statistical analysis framework to evaluate the performance of our causal mapper in the
GridWorld environment.

J.1    A NALYSIS M ETHODOLOGY

Our evaluation framework consists of two core components:

       1. Overall Performance Analysis: We track mean absolute error (MAE) across all dimensions
          against training set size. Standard deviation bands are computed from three independent
          training runs to illustrate the variance in performance across different training instances.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                             2. Dimension-wise Evolution Analysis: We analyze how prediction accuracy for each causal
                                variable evolves with training size using heatmaps, with darker colors indicating better
                                performance.

Statistical significance is assessed using the criterion that standard deviation should be less than half
the mean value, indicating reliable performance measurements.


                                           Overall Performance                                                                                             Causal Mapper Dimension Evolution
                                                                   Causal Mapper                                                                                                               0.30
                                                                   100% Training Data (n=16000.0)                     obstacle (255, 165, 0) position x
                      0.16

                                                                                                                      obstacle (255, 165, 0) position y
                      0.14                                                                                                                                                                     0.25

                                                                                                                        trafficlight (0, 255, 255) state


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean Absolute Error
                      0.12                                                                                                                                                                     0.20
Mean Absolute Error


                                                                                                                        trafficlight (100, 100, 0) state


                                                                                                         Dimension
                      0.10                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                      trafficlight (192, 192, 192) state
                      0.08
                                                                                                                          vehicle (0, 0, 255) position y                                       0.10

                      0.06                                                                                           vehicle (192, 192, 192) position y
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.05
                      0.04                                                                                                vehicle (255, 0, 0) position y
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.00
                      0.02


                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                        1916
                                                                                                                                                        122
                                                                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                                        1464
                                                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                                                        320
                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                        4080
                                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                                        640
                                                                                                                                                        720
                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                        8080
                                                                                                                                                      190600
                                                                                                                                                      1140
                                                                                                                                                      1120
                                                                                                                                                      122040
                                                                                                                                                      1380
                                                                                                                                                      1460
                                                                                                                                                      156200
                                                                                                                                                      1900
                                                                                                                                                      2320
                                                                                                                                                      342040
                                                                                                                                                     1562080
                                                                                                                                                        000
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                      18

                                                                                                                                                      14

                                                                                                                                                      28
                               102                           103                                                                                                      Training Size
                                             Training Set Size

(a) Model performance (MAE) vs training size for the (b) Dimension-wise performance analysis showing the
causal mapper in GridWorld. Error bands represent one evolution of prediction accuracy across dimensions at
standard deviation across three independent runs.     different training sizes. Darker green colors indicate
                                                      better performance.

Figure 3: Performance analysis of the causal mapper showing both overall error metrics and
dimension-wise evolution.


J.2                          R ESULTS

Our analysis reveals strong performance of the causal mapper approach in terms of data efficiency and
prediction accuracy. The causal mapper achieves adequate accuracy (MAE < 0.05) with approximately
1200 labeled examples, demonstrating effective learning from disentangled representations.
The dimension-wise evolution analysis reveals distinct learning patterns across different types of
causal variables. The causal mapper exhibits rapid early learning for traffic light states, achieving
high accuracy with minimal data. For positional variables, we observe more gradual but consistent
improvement as training data increases. This pattern suggests that binary state variables (like traffic
light states) are easier to learn than continuous positional variables, which require understanding
more complex spatial relationships.
The performance analysis shows consistent improvement across all dimensions as training size
increases, with particularly strong performance in predicting traffic light states even in low-data
regimes. The small standard deviation bands indicate stable learning across different training runs,
suggesting robust performance regardless of initialization conditions.


K                            E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY

Given the stochastic nature of both the Gridworld and iTHOR environments, we have implemented
specific adjustments to our evaluation methodology. These adjustments ensure that our perfor-
mance metrics accurately reflect the models’ understanding of the underlying causal structure while
accounting for inherent randomness in the environments.

K.1                          G RIDWORLD E NVIRONMENT

In the Gridworld environment, we make the following adjustment:


                                                                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Boulder Position Exclusion: We exclude the boulder’s position from the final state evalua-
         tion. This is because the boulder’s movement is stochastic and not determined by the causal
         structure we aim to learn and evaluate other than the fact that it was moved or not.

Rationale: The boulder’s position can vary due to random factors not captured in our causal model.
By excluding it from our evaluation, we focus on the aspects of the environment that are causally
determined by the actions and states we’re modeling.

K.2   I THOR E NVIRONMENT

For the iTHOR environment, we implement a more nuanced approach:

       • Coordinate Categorization: We categorize the x, y, and z coordinates for objects with
         stochastic movements into discrete position categories.
       • Category-based Evaluation: Instead of comparing exact coordinates, we check whether
         objects end up in the correct category of positions after an action.

Rationale: In iTHOR, object movements can have slight variations due to a) inherent stochasticity
in movements, and b) physics simulations, even when the same action is applied. By categorizing
positions, we can evaluate whether the model correctly predicts the general outcome of an action
(e.g., “on the counter” vs. “in the microwave”) without being overly sensitive to minor coordinate
differences.

K.3   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For both environments, we implement these adjustments as follows:

      1. State Representation and Prediction: We maintain the full state representation, including
         all object positions and attributes, for both the actual and predicted states.
      2. Dynamic Evaluation: During the comparison of predicted states to ground truth states, we
         dynamically apply our adjustment rules:
             • For Gridworld, we dynamically ignore the boulder’s position when comparing states.
             • For iTHOR, we dynamically categorize the exact x, y, z coordinates into position
               categories (e.g., “on the counter”, “in the microwave”) and compare these categories
               instead of the exact coordinates.
      3. Accuracy Calculation: We calculate accuracy based on the match between predicted and
         actual states after applying these dynamic adjustments during the comparison process.

L     C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD A NALYSIS
We performed detailed benchmarks comparing single-step predictions between the LLM-based world
model and our CRL world model. The analysis was conducted on 5 GridWorld samples, with 10 runs
per sample after warmup, using a single NVIDIA A100-40GB GPU.
Our CRL world model consists of three main components: an autoencoder (4.5M parameters), a
normalizing flow (2.9M parameters), and a transition prior (28.7M parameters), totaling 36.1M
parameters. For comparison, we used LLaMA 3 8B quantized to 6 bits via ExLlamaV2 as our
baseline LLM world model.
The benchmarks revealed that the CRL world model achieves an average inference time of 27ms,
compared to 2.2s for the LLM world model—representing an approximately 82x speedup. This
computational difference has significant implications for planning tasks. For example, a 10-branch
tree search would take approximately 22 seconds with LLM calls versus just 0.27 seconds with the
CRL world model.
This substantial performance difference becomes particularly important in scenarios requiring multiple
forward simulations or when real-time planning is necessary. The efficiency of our CRL world model
enables more extensive tree searches and faster iteration during planning, while maintaining high
prediction accuracy as demonstrated in our main experimental results.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M     C AUSAL W ORLD M ODEL A LGORITHM
This section presents the formal algorithm for sampling from/performing inference with the Causal
World Model. The algorithm takes as input the trained model components and an initial state, and
produces a sequence of latent states and their corresponding natural language descriptions.

Algorithm 1 Inference with the Causal World Model
Require: Observation space X , latent space Z, action description space L, action encoding space
    A; observation encoder eψ , normalizing flow fϕ , action encoder Le , transition model pω , causal
    mapper mθ , state description generator s; initial observation X0 ∈ X ; action descriptions
           −1
    {Lt }Tt=0  ∈ LT
 1: function E(X ∈ X )
 2:    E ← fϕ (eψ (X))                                               ▷ Causal encoding of observation
 3:    return E
 4: end function
 5: function E NCODE ACTION(L ∈ L)
 6:    a ← Le (L)                                 ▷ Encode action description into action latent space
 7:    return a
 8: end function
 9: function G(z ∈ Z)
10:    C ← mθ (z)                                                 ▷ Map latent state to causal variables
11:    ℓ ← s(C)                                         ▷ Generate natural language state description
12:    return ℓ
13: end function
14: function S AMPLE N EXT S TATE(zt ∈ Z, at ∈ A)
15:    zt+1 ∼ pω (zt+1 | zt , at )                                           ▷ Predict next latent state
16:    ℓt ← G(zt )                                                 ▷ Generate current state description
17:    ℓt+1 ← G(zt+1 )                                                ▷ Generate next state description
18:    return (zt+1 , ℓt , ℓt+1 )
19: end function
                                                            −1
20: function I NFERENCE T RAJECTORY(X0 ∈ X , {Lt }T       t=0 )
21:    z0 ← E(X0 )                                                               ▷ Initialize latent state
22:    ℓ0 ← G(z0 )                                                  ▷ Generate initial state description
23:    yield (z0 , ℓ0 )
24:    for t = 0 to T − 1 do
25:         at ← EncodeAction(Lt )                                        ▷ Encode action description
26:         (zt+1 , ℓt , ℓt+1 ) ← S AMPLE N EXT S TATE(zt , at )
27:         yield (zt+1 , ℓt+1 )
28:         zt ← zt+1                                            ▷ Update latent state for next iteration
29:    end for
30: end function


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N     M ODIFIED MCTS P LANNING A LGORITHM
We adapt the Reasoning via Planning (RAP)(Hao et al., 2023) Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
algorithm (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006; Coulom, 2006) for our causally-aware planning framework.
Our modifications primarily focus on integrating the causal world model and leveraging its capabilities.
Algorithm 2 presents our modified version of the MCTS algorithm.

Algorithm 2 Causally-Aware MCTS
Require: Initial image X0 , causal world model (Algorithm 1), LLM agent, depth limit L, number
                                                                   int
    of roll-outs N , exploration weight w, intuition ICL samples DICL  , self-evaluation ICL samples
      self
    DICL
 1: Initialize memory of actions A : Z 7→ L, children c : Z × L 7→ Z and rewards r : Z × L 7→ R
 2: Initialize the state-action value function Q : Z × L 7→ R and visit counter N : Z 7→ N
 3: z0 ← E(X0 ), ℓ0 ← G(z0 )                                                     ▷ Initialize root node
 4: for n ← 0, . . . , N − 1 do
 5:      t ← 0, zt ← z0 , ℓt ← ℓ0
 6:      while N (zt ) > 0 do                                                               ▷ Selection
 7:          N (zt ) ← N (zt ) + 1 h               q         i
                                                          ln N (zt )
 8:         at ← arg maxa∈A(zt ) Q(zt , a) + w           N (c(zt ,a))
 9:        rt ← r(zt , at ), zt+1 ← c(zt , at )
10:        t ← t + 1, zt ← zt+1 , ℓt ← G(zt )
11:    end while
12:    while zt is not a terminal state ∧ t ≤ L do
13:        At ← GetValidActions(ℓt )
14:        for a ∈ At do                                                                   ▷ Expansion
15:            zt+1 , _, ℓt+1 ← S AMPLE N EXT S TATE(zt , Le (a))         ▷ Use the Causal World Model
16:            rintuition ← − log pLLM (a | ℓt , DICL
                                                   int
                                                        )
17:            rself-eval ← − log pLLM (“good” | ℓt , a, DICL    self
                                                                      )
18:            r(zt , a) ← rintuition + rself-eval
19:            Update A(zt ) ← A(zt ) ∪ {a}, c(zt , a) ← zt+1
20:        end for
21:        at+1 ← arg maxa∈A(zt ) r(zt , a)                                               ▷ Simulation
22:        rt ← r(zt , at+1 ), zt+1 ← c(zt , at+1 )
23:        t ← t + 1, zt ← zt+1 , ℓt ← G(zt )
24:    end while
25:    for t′ ← t, . . . , 0 do                                                     ▷ Back propagation
                            ′
26:        Update Q(zt , at′ ) with {rt′ , rt′ +1 , . . . , rt }
27:    end for
28: end for

The key modifications in our algorithm compared to the original RAP MCTS are:

      1. State Representation: We use disentangled causal latent representations z for states, starting
         from an encoded initial image X0 (line 3).
      2. Causal World Model Integration: We employ our trained causal world model (Algorithm
         1) to predict the next state and generate state descriptions (line 15).

These modifications allow our MCTS algorithm to leverage the causal understanding provided by
the causal world model, while also incorporating the strengths of the LLM agent for action selection
and evaluation. The use of disentangled latent representations z allows for efficient and robust state
transitions, while the natural language descriptions ℓ enable interaction with the LLM agent.
While our current implementation uses a predefined set of valid actions, the framework could
potentially be extended to sample actions directly from the LLM for open-ended domains where the
action space is not easily enumerable.



                                                    26
