Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G RAMMAR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING : PATH AND
CYCLE COUNTING IN GRAPHS WITH A C ONTEXT-F REE
G RAMMAR AND T RANSFORMER APPROACH
    Jason Piquenot1          Maxime Bérar1             Pierre Héroux1          Jean-Yves Ramel2

 Romain Raveaux2                    Sébastien Adam1
                                    1
                                        LITIS Lab, University of Rouen Normandy, France
                                    2
                                        LIFAT Lab, University of Tours, France



                                               A BSTRACT
         This paper presents Grammar Reinforcement Learning (GRL), a reinforcement
         learning algorithm that uses Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and a transformer
         architecture that models a Pushdown Automaton (PDA) within a context-free
         grammar (CFG) framework. Taking as use case the problem of efficiently count-
         ing paths and cycles in graphs, a key challenge in network analysis, computer
         science, biology, and social sciences, GRL discovers new matrix-based formulas
         for path/cycle counting that improve computational efficiency by factors of two
         to six w.r.t state-of-the-art approaches. Our contributions include: (i) a frame-
         work for generating gramformers that operate within a CFG, (ii) the development
         of GRL for optimizing formulas within grammatical structures, and (iii) the dis-
         covery of novel formulas for graph substructure counting, leading to significant
         computational improvements.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Paths and cycles are fundamental structures in graph theory, playing a crucial role in various fields
such as network analysis (Wang et al., 2023), chemistry (Ishida et al., 2021), computer science
(AbuSalim et al., 2020), biology (Bortner and Meshkat, 2022), and social sciences (Boccaletti et al.,
2023). Efficiently counting paths and cycles of varying lengths is essential for understanding graph
connectivity and network redundancies, and is the foundation of many graph processing algorithms,
including graph learning algorithms such as some recent Graph Neural Networks (GNN) (Bouritsas
et al., 2022; Michel et al., 2023). In particular, Bouritsas et al. (2022) demonstrated that incorporat-
ing precomputed counts of paths or cycles, either at the node level or the graph level, into the feature
representation can significantly enhance the expressive power of GNNs.
This problem of counting paths and cycles has been extensively studied in the literature (Harary
and Manvel, 1971; Alon et al., 1997; Jokić and Van Mieghem, 2022). Among existing approaches,
matrix-based formulae such as those proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012) (see equation (1)
for an example) are known to be the most efficient methods for paths and cycles of lengths up to six
and seven, respectively (Giscard et al., 2019). This raises a significant open question: Can a deep
learning algorithm discover more efficient formulae for counting paths?
In Fürer (2017) and Arvind et al. (2019), the length limits mentioned above are theoretically
explained by examining the relationship between the subgraph counting problem and the kth-
order Weisfeiler-Leman test (k-WL). These papers conclude that 3-WL cannot count cycles
longer than seven. Concurrently, Geerts (2020) explored the connection between 3-WL and a
fragment of the matrix language MATLANG (Brijder et al., 2019), defined by the operations
L3 := {·, T , diag, 1, ⊙}. This paper demonstrates that this fragment, when applied to adjacency
matrices, distinguishes the same graph pairs as 3-WL. In order to build a 3-WL GNN, Piquenot et al.
(2024) introduced a 3-WL Context-Free Grammar (CFG). We observed that, with minor modifica-
tions, this generative framework is capable of producing all the formulae previously identified by


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Voropaev and Perepechko (2012). Taken together, these recent works enable to transform the search
for a path/cycle counting algorithm into a CFG-constrained language generation problem where the
aim is to build efficient path counting formulae.
The use of context-free grammars (CFGs) for search has gained considerable attention in the litera-
ture. In robotics, Zhao et al. (2020) demonstrated that CFGs can effectively describe robotic struc-
tures, enabling the design and adaptation of robots for diverse tasks to be formulated as a search
problem within a CFG. Similarly, in the field of AutoML, the application of CFG-based search has
been explored (Klinghoffer et al., 2023; Vázquez et al., 2023). In particular, Vazquez et al. (2022)
proposed a grammar specifically designed for an AutoML task, where searching within this grammar
enables the discovery of the optimal model for a given task.
Searching for formulae within a CFG corresponds to solving a combinatorial optimization problem
of possibly infinite size. In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) approaches have
been proposed to address such problems (Vinyals et al., 2015; Khalil et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2018;
Hubert et al., 2021; Darvariu et al., 2024). A recent success of DRL has been the discovery of
more efficient matrix multiplication algorithms through a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)-based
approach (Fawzi et al., 2022). MCTS-based RL algorithms typically consist of two phases: an
acting phase and a learning phase. During the acting phase, the agent selects actions based on a
heuristic that combines MCTS exploration with a deep neural network that predicts both policy and
value function to guide the tree search. The network is then updated during the learning phase to
reflect search trees from multiple iterations. As the objective is to discover efficient formulae and
considering that MCTS aligns with CFG sentence generation process due to its tree-based structure,
such a Deep MCTS approach is particularly well-suited to searching formulae within CFGs.
In this paper, we propose Grammar Reinforcement Learning (GRL), a deep MCTS model capable
of discovering new efficient formulae for path/cycle counting within a CFG. This particular context
raises a new research question: How to approximate a policy and a value function through a deep
neural network within a CFG?
To address this question, we propose the Gramformer model, a transformer architecture that models
Pushdown Automata (PDA), which are equivalent to CFGs. Gramformer is used to learn the policy
and value functions within GRL.
When applied to the path/cycle counting problem, GRL not only recovers the formulae from
Voropaev and Perepechko (2012) but also discovers new ones, whose computational efficiency is
improved by a factor of two to six.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We propose GRL, a generic DRL algorithm
designed to explore and search within a given grammar. (ii) We introduce Gramformer a new trans-
former training pipeline compliant with the CFG/PDA framework. (iii) We propose novel state of
the art explicit formulae for path/cycle counting in graphs, leading to substantial improvements in
computational efficiency.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 provides the background about path/cycle count-
ing, CFGs and PDAs, defining essential concepts. Section 3 describes the design of GRL, taking as
root a given CFG. Section 4 presents Gramformer, connecting transformers and CFGs. Section 5
discusses the results of GRL on path/cycle counting tasks. Finally, we conclude with a summary of
our contributions and suggest avenues for future research.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   PATH AND CYCLE COUNTING

Path and cycle counting in graphs can be performed at multiple levels: graph, node, and edge. At
the graph level, all possible paths or cycles of a given length within the graph are counted. At the
node level, the focus is on counting paths starting at a specific node, as well as cycles that include
the node. At the edge level, for any non-negative integer l, let Pl represent the l-path matrix where
(Pl )i,j is the number of l-length paths connecting vertex i to vertex j. Additionally, for l > 2, let Cl
represent the l-cycle matrix where (Cl )i,j indicates the number of l-cycles that include vertex i and
its adjacent vertex j.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


As mentioned in Section 1, path/cycle counting has been extensively tackled in the literature. In the
early 1970s, Harary and Manvel (1971) introduced algorithms for counting cycles up to length five
at the graph level. Two decades later, Alon et al. (1997) refined these algorithms, extending cycle
counting to lengths of up to seven, and conjectured that these methods can also be adapted to count
cycles at the node level. Later Voropaev and Perepechko (2012) established a relationship between
the counting of l-cycles at the edge level and the counting of (l − 1)-paths at the edge level using a
simple formula. By deriving explicit formulae for the counting of paths of length up to six at the edge
level, they were able to compute the number of cycles of length up to seven. More recently, Jokić
and Van Mieghem (2022) rediscovered the formulae for paths of length up to four from Voropaev
and Perepechko (2012). In contrast, Giscard et al. (2019) proposed an algorithm capable of counting
cycles and paths of arbitrary lengths. However, they acknowledged that their method is slower than
those presented by Alon et al. (1997) and Voropaev and Perepechko (2012). Specifically, since the
latter algorithms
                  are based on matrix multiplication, they exhibit a computational complexity of
O n3 , where n is the number of nodes. As noted by Giscard et al. (2019), these matrix-based
approaches remain the most efficient known methods for counting paths and cycles of lengths up to
six and seven, respectively.

2.2   C ONTEXT-F REE G RAMMAR .

Throughout this paper, we employ standard formal language notation: Γ∗ denotes the set of all
finite-length strings over the alphabet Γ, and ε represents the empty string. The relevant definitions
used in this context are as follows:
Definition 2.1 (Context-Free Grammar)
A Context-Free Grammar (CFG) G is defined as a 4-tuple (V, Σ, R, S), where V is a finite set of
variables, Σ is a finite set of terminal symbols, R is a finite set of production rules of the form
               ∗
V → (V ∪ Σ) , and S is the start variable. Note that R fully characterizes the CFG, following the
convention that the start variable is placed on the top left and that the symbol | represents ”or”.
Definition 2.2 (Derivation)
                                      ∗
Let G be a CFG. For u, v ∈ (V ∪ Σ) , we define u =⇒ v if u can be transformed into v by
                                          ∗
applying a single production rule, and u =⇒ v if u can be transformed into v by applying a
sequence of production rules from G.
Definition 2.3 (Context-Free Language)
A set B is called a Context-Free Language (CFL) if there exists a CFG G such that B = L(G) :=
                      ∗
{w | w ∈ Σ∗ and S =⇒ w}.

The generation process in a CFG involves iteratively replacing variables with one of their corre-
sponding production rules, starting from the start variable, until only terminal symbols remain.
As mentioned in Section 1, it is well known that CFGs are equivalent to PDAs (Schneider, 1968;
Caucal, 1995; Baeten et al., 2023; DuSell and Chiang, 2024). Usually, PDA are language acceptor,
but by relabelling the input as output of the PDA, the same PDA can be used as language generator.
Thus the following subsection is dedicated to defining PDA.

2.3   P USH D OWN AUTOMATON

Definition 2.4 (PushDown Automaton)
A PushDown Automaton (PDA) is defined as a 7-tuple P = (Q, Σ, Γ, δ, q0 , Z, F ) where Q is a
finite set of states, Σ is a finite set of symbols called the input alphabet, Γ is a finite set of symbol
called the stack alphabet, δ is a finite subset of Q × (Σ ∪ {ε}) × Γ → Q × Γ∗ , the transition function,
q0 ∈ Q is the start state, Z ∈ Γ is the initial stack symbol, F ⊆ Q is the set of accepting states.

In the case of PDA corresponding to CFG, the input alphabet Σ corresponds to the terminal symbol
alphabet. The stack alphabet Γ consits of V ∪ Σ, which is the union of the set of variables (non-
terminal symbols) and the terminal symbols. For such a PDA, there are only two states: q0 , the
initial state and, q1 ∈ F , the accepting state. The initial stack symbol is Z = S, where S is the start
variable of the CFG. The transition function δ consists of two types of transitions:


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       • Transcription transitions: If the top of the stack is a terminal symbol a ∈ Σ, the transition
         is of the form δ(q0 , a, a) = {(q0 , ε)}. This indicates that the system remains in state q0 ,
         outputs the symbol a, and removes a from the stack.
       • Transposition transitions: If the top of the stack is a variable ν ∈ V , the transition is of
         the form δ(q0 , ε, ν) = {(q0 , r), r ∈ Vν }, where Vν ⊂ R is the subset of rules for ν. This
         means that the system stays in state q0 , produces no output, and replaces ν with the rule r
         on the stack.

In the same way that production rules fully defines a CFG, the transition function δ completely
specifies a PDA. For a PDA constructed from a CFG, the transposition transitions alone are sufficient
to define the automaton.
A PDA generates a string by starting in the initial state q0 , with the stack initialized to Z and the
generated string s initialized to ε. The PDA then processes the top symbol t of the stack according
to the transition function δ. If t ∈ Σ, a transcription occurs: t is popped from the stack and appended
to the output string s. If t ∈ V = Γ \ Σ, a transposition occurs: t is popped from the stack, and some
v ∈ {v, (q0 , v) ∈ δ(q0 , ε, t)} is pushed onto the stack. Since v ∈ Γ∗ , it may consist of multiple
symbols, which are pushed onto the stack in reverse order. The process continues until the stack is
empty, at which point the PDA transitions to the accepting state q1 , and the generated string s is a
member of the language of the corresponding CFG.

3     G ENERATING PATH / CYCLE COUNTING FORMULA THROUGH GRL
The following subsection presents a specific CFG (see Section 2) designed to address the open
problem of path counting.

3.1   F ROM PATH MATRIX FORMULAE TO THE CFG G3

Let G = (V, E) denote an undirected graph, where V = [[1 , n]] represents the set of n nodes, and
                                                                                    n×n
E ⊆ V × V represents the set of edges. We define the adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}        , that encodes
                                                     n×n                            n×n
the connectivity of G, the identity matrix I ∈ {0, 1}    , and the matrix J ∈ {0, 1}     , that is filled
with ones except along the diagonal.
In the work of Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), all of the proposed formulae are linear combina-
tions of terms composed of matrix multiplications and Hadamard products (denoted by ⊙) applied
exclusively on the arguments A, I, J. For example, the matrix formula in equation (1) is used to
count the number of 3-paths between two nodes in the graph. The formulae for path of length four
to six can be found in Appendix D of the supplementary material.


                            P3 = J ⊙ A3 − (I ⊙ A2 )A − A(I ⊙ A2 ) + A                                (1)

To generate the terms of Voropaev’s formulae, we define the CFG G3 in equation (2).


                                 M → (M ⊙ M ) | (M M ) | A | I | J.                                  (2)

Voropaev’s formulae are linear combinations of sentences of L(G3 ). This ensures that the problem
of counting paths of length up to 6 can be addressed through finding linear combinations of sentences
of L(G3 ).
Additionally, we prove in Appendix A that G3 is 3-WL equivalent, resulting in Theorem 3.1.
Theorem 3.1 (3-WL CFG)
G3 is as expressive as 3-WL

While CFGs are theoretical objects, PDAs are the practical tools for processing and applying the
production rules of a CFG to ensure the correct generation of valid sentences according to the gram-
matical structure. The following subsection derives a PDA (see Section 2) from G3 .


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: The left diagram illustrates a path in the derivation tree of the PDA D3 which generates
the sentence J ⊙ A2 ∈ L(G3 ). The right diagram details the process of generating this sentence,
emphasizing the transcription and transposition loops. As depicted, the stack fills during transposi-
tion steps and empties during transcription steps, eventually leading to the derivation of a sentence
from the language.


3.2   F ROM G3 TO THE PDA D3

We denote as D3 the PDA described by the following transition δ:

               δ(q0 , ε, M ) = {(q0 , (M ⊙ M )), (q0 , (M M )), (q0 , A), (q0 , I), (q0 , J)},

which corresponds directly to the production rules of G3 .
Figure 1 illustrates how the sentence (J ⊙ (AA)) = J ⊙ A2 ∈ L(G3 ) is generated by the PDA D3 .


3.3   S EARCH IN D3 THROUGH G RAMMAR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

To find efficient formulae for path and cycle counting, we propose a two step strategy as illustrated
by Figure 2. The first step is to generate a set of sentences belonging to G3 by the D3 generation
process. The second step compares a linear combination of this set with a ground truth matrix in
order to evaluate the corresponding formula. In the following of this subsection, we detail each of
these steps.
As stated before, the tree structure of a sentence generation within PDA (see Figure 2) aligns with
MCTS algorithm. Such algorithms have been proposed and refined over the last decade to guide the
search within trees with a general heuristic (Świechowski et al., 2023). In this work, we propose an
MCTS-based DRL algorithm, termed Grammar Reinforcement Learning (GRL) adapted to the path
counting open problem, generating sets of different sentences.
In GRL, MCTS performs a series of walks through the PDA, which are stored in a search tree. The
nodes of the tree represent states I, which are a concatenation of the written terminal symbols and
the stack. The edges correspond to actions defined by the CFG rules r that can be applied at those
states.
Each walk begins at the start state I0 = {Z, · · · , Z}, whose cardinality is the number of desired
sentences, and terminates when a state contains only terminal symbols. Such terminal states are sets
of sentences located in leaf nodes. For each state-action pair (I, r), the algorithm tracks the visit
count N (I, r), the empirical rule value Q(I, r), and two scalars predicted by a neural network: a
                                                                                                Q(I,r)
policy probability π(I, r) and a value v(I, r). From a reinforcement learning perspective, N      (I,r)
represents the expected return over all possible trajectories that originate from state I and follow
action r. At each intermediate state, a rule action r is selected according to the following equation:


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: From left to right: The agent selects a set of N sentences based on an MCTS heuristic.
These sentences are computed for a given set of graphs. The computation is then evaluated against
a ground truth, yielding a linear combination of the sentences and a value representing their perti-
nence. This value is subsequently backpropagated through the MCTS search tree.


                                                                      pP
                                                                           a N (I, a)
                argmax     αQ(I, r) + (1 − α)v(I, r) + c(I)π(I, r)                      ,          (3)
                    r                                                  1 + N (I, r)


where the exploration factor c(I) regulates the influence of the policy π(I, r) relative to the Q-
values, adjusting this balance based on the frequency of node traversal. The parameter α ∈ [0 , 1]
controls the reliance on neural network predictions. After a walk reaches a leaf node, the visit counts
and the values are updated via a backward pass.
To update the values, it is necessary to evaluate a leaf node. Its associated set of sentences is
computed for a collection of graphs, and a linear combination of these computed sentences is derived
by comparing them against a ground truth for each graph. The resulting value, which reflects the
relevance of the sentences to a specific path counting problem, is used to empirically update the tree
that is constructed during sentence generation. The derivation of this linear combination is detailed
in Appendix B, with a specific focus on Figure 8. A concrete example of this approach, applied to
the problem of counting 3-paths within G3 , is shown in Figure 2. To encourage the generation of
efficient sentences, each CFG rule r is penalized by a value Pr in the reward definition, reflecting
its computational cost. Additionally, to prevent the generation of overly long sentences, the number
of characters is constrained by a maximum limit, Cmax .
After a sufficient number of MCTS, the sequences of nodes and edges from each walk are used to
train the neural network. The ratio N (I, r)/N (I) provides a policy derived from MCTS exploration,
while Q(I, r) represents the empirical expected return for the current state. The policy is learned
using a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence loss, and the value function is trained using a mean
squared error (MSE) loss. The pseudo-code for each algorithm of GRL is provided in Appendix F.
Figure 3 depicts both the acting and the learning parts.
The neural network—serving as a memory of the search trees that the agent has previously ex-
plored—must be capable of learning the policy and value distributions of the sentence generation
within the CFG/PDA. As discussed in Section 1, designing an architecture that can effectively learn
within a CFG/PDA remains an open research question. In the next section, we present the neural
network used for estimating the policy and value functions in the GRL algorithm.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: In the acting phase, rules are selected based on both the MCTS algorithm and the neural
network outputs. Each time MCTS selects a node, the decision, empirical policy, and value of the
node are stored in a replay buffer. During the learning phase, the neural network is updated by
predicting the policy and value functions based on the decisions stored in the replay buffer.



4   G RAMFORMER

Since our problem is related to the generation of sentences within a language, a transformer archi-
tecture fits with this CFG framework. Central to this architecture is the concept of tokens, which
represent individual units of input data.
We propose Gramformer, a transformer architecture that follows the production rules of a given
CFG, through a PDA. It relies on the assignment of the elements of the transition function δ into
three distinct sets of tokens. Recall that δ can be partitioned into two subsets: the transcription
set δw (for writing) and the transposition set δr (for replacing). Specifically, δr = {δ(q0 , ε, ν) =
{(q0 , v), v ∈ Rν )}, ν ∈ V }, where each ν ∈ V represents a variable in the CFG.
For each variable ν ∈ V , we define a variable token corresponding to ν. For each element in
δ(q0 , ε, ν) ∈ δr , we define a rule token representing the specific production rule. This rule token
is divided in two subsets. If the rule contains a variable, the token is classified as a non-terminal
rule token. If the rule consists only of terminal symbols (i.e., v ∈ Σ), the token is classified as a
terminal rule token. Any symbol in δw is assigned as part of the terminal token set along with the
terminal rule token.
For each variable token, a corresponding mask is provided. This mask indicates the rule tokens
associated with that variable. Figure 4 illustrates this framework applied to the CFG G3 that contains
only one variable. An example of a CFG with more variables is provided in Figure 9 of Appendix C.
Once all tokens have been defined, the Gramformer is tasked with predicting two ouputs for a given
input state. The first output is the probability of selecting the production rule for a given variable.
The second one is a scalar that corresponds to the value of the given state.
Gramformer follows a classical encoder-decoder architecture with self-attention and cross-attention
mechanisms. At any time, the model’s input I consists of the concatenation of the stack and the set
of terminal symbols generated so far, representing a state.
The input I is read until a variable token associated to a variable symbol is encountered. This token,
denoted as ν is passed to the encoder. The decoder receives the encoder output and the input I.
The first output of the decoder is combined with the mask corresponding to ν, so that tokens not
associated with ν are set to −∞. This masking ensures that, when the softmax function is applied
to the first decoder’s output, it yields a valid probability distribution over the rules of ν.
The pseudo-code for each algorithm in this framework is provided in Appendix F. Figure 5 depicts
the Gramformer process for a given input.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: From PDA to grammar tokens: D3 is turned into three sets of tokens. The corresponding
variables of each element of δr are turned into variable tokens. For each variable token, a set of rule
tokens is defined. Eventually, for every corresponding terminal symbols of δw a terminal token is
defined. In the end, for each variable token, a variable mask is defined.


Figure 5: The input is read until the first variable token (Rd). This token is passed to the encoder
(Enc). The decoder (Dec) receives the encoder output and the input. The first output of the decoder
is combined with the mask corresponding to variable token to generate a policy. The second output
is the value.


Note that Gramformer, in an autoregressive mode of operation, can generate sentences within a
CFG, simulating a PDA. Figure 6 and Figure 10 of the Appendix C illustrate this generation of the
sentence (J⊙(AA)) ∈ L(G3 ) using the Gramformer architecture coupled with a replace block. The
path in the derivation tree of D3 resulting in the generation of this sentence is provided in Figure 1.
We now have the necessary components to use GRL on the path counting problem, which is de-
scribed in the following section.


5   F INDING MORE EFFICIENT FORMULAE FOR COUNTING WITH RL.

To address the problem of path counting at the edge level, we apply GRL using a slightly modified
version of the grammar G3 , denoted G̃3 . This grammar generates matrices of L(G3 ) with a null
diagonal, reducing the search space. For more details on this modified grammar, please refer to
Appendix C.


Figure 6: A sequence of tokens is fed into the transformer architecture, beginning with the start vari-
able token. The transformer ouputs the rule token corresponding to the current variable token. The
predicted rule’s corresponding variables and terminal symbols replace the current variable token,
producing a new sequence of tokens. The process is repeated, until no variables remains. At this
last step, a sentence from the grammar is generated.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 7: Comparison of the time consumption of Pl and Pl∗ in function of the number of nodes
for l ∈ {3, 4, 5, 6}. Each time, the yellow correspond to the time computation of Pl divided by the
theoretical gain of time consumption.



The primary objective of this experiment was to demonstrate that GRL can successfully derive the
path counting formulae Pl proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012). Specifically, for l = 2,
GRL successfully identified the formula P2 . For path lengths l ∈ 3, 4, 5, 6, GRL not only derived
the Pl formulae but also discovered more efficient alternatives, denoted as Pl∗ . These new formulae
significantly reduce the time complexity of l-path counting by factors of 2, 2.25, 4, and 6.25, re-
spectively. The formulae for P2∗ through P4∗ are provided below, while those for P5∗ and P6∗ can be
found in Appendix D.



                   P2∗ = J ⊙ A2 ,
                   P3∗ = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )) − A ⊙ (AJ),
                   P4∗ = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ)))
                         − J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) + 2A ⊙ A2 .


For each formula, we prove in Appendix D that Pl = Pl∗ , leading to the following theorem.

Theorem 5.1 (Efficient path counting)
For l ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, (Pl∗ )i,j computes the number of l-paths starting at node i and ending at node
j.

It is visually obvious that P3∗ is more compact than P3 . To quantify this, we compare the number of
matrix multiplications required, which allows us to derive the ratio of time complexity between the
formulae. The theoretical time savings between Pl and Pl∗ are detailed in Appendix D.
We also assessed the empirical time savings across various random graphs. For each graph, the time
required to compute each formula was recorded, and the average computation time was calculated
for graphs of the same size. To compare these results with the theoretical time savings, we divided
the mean computation time of Pl by the corresponding theoretical time reduction factor. The results
of these experiments are presented in Figure 7, demonstrating a strong alignment between empirical
and theoretical gains. This confirms the significant time savings provided by the new formulae
discovered by GRL and supports our theoretical analysis.
In Appendix D, we derive the cycle-counting formulae based on the work of Voropaev and
Perepechko (2012), using the relation Cl+1 = A ⊙ Pl . Additionally, we provide a detailed ex-
planation of how Pl∗ counts l-path establishing a new methodology for deriving formulae.
Since 3-WL cannot count the 7-paths (Fürer, 2017), theorem 3.1 leads to the incapability for G3 to
count it either. To go beyond the 6-paths counting, a more expressive grammar is needed.
In Appendix E, we evaluate GRL on directed graphs and compare its performance to baseline al-
gorithms. GRL stands out as the only approach capable of discovering novel matrix formulae for
counting paths of lengths 4 to 5 in directed graphs.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


6   C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces Gramformer, a deep learning architecture that learns a policy and a value
function within a CFG/PDA framework, by assigning tokens to elements of the transition function
of a PDA. Used within the GRL algorithm, it effectively addresses the question ”Can a deep learning
algorithm discover efficient set of sentences for a given task”.
Instantiated over the grammar G3 to solve the path counting problem, GRL provides efficient for-
mulae that are linear combinations of sets of sentences in L(G3 ). These formulae of enhanced
computational efficiency by factors ranging from 2 to 6.25 demonstrate the ability of GRL to not
only discover explicit formulae for counting paths, but also to provide new ways of designing such
formulae.
For paths longer than 6, future research should aim to characterize k-WL CFGs to bypass the theo-
retical limit on path counting of G3 . Such a characterization will enable the application of GRL to
uncover more explicit formulae for substructure counting across graph structures.
Moreover, applying GRL to real-world datasets to derive formulae for various tasks represents a
promising direction for future exploration as the grammar provides a link to substructures and thus
interpretability.
This approach could potentially improve the applicability and effectiveness of GRL in practical
scenarios, thereby broadening its impact.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge the support of the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) un-
der grant ANR-21-CE23-0025 (CoDeGNN project) and grant ANR-20-LCV1-0009 (Labcom Lisa).
This work was supported by computational resources provided by CRIANN (Centre Régional In-
formatique et d’Applications Numériques de Normandie).

R EFERENCES
S. W. AbuSalim, R. Ibrahim, M. Z. Saringat, S. Jamel, and J. A. Wahab. Comparative analysis
   between dijkstra and bellman-ford algorithms in shortest path optimization. In IOP Conference
   Series: Materials Science and Engineering, volume 917, page 012077. IOP Publishing, 2020.

N. Alon, R. Yuster, and U. Zwick. Finding and counting given length cycles. Algorithmica, 17(3):
  209–223, 1997.

V. Arvind, F. Fuhlbrück, J. Köbler, and O. Verbitsky. On weisfeiler-leman invariance: Sub-
  graph counts and related graph properties. In L. A. Gasieniec, J. Jansson, and C. Levcopou-
  los, editors, Fundamentals of Computation Theory - 22nd International Symposium, FCT 2019,
  Copenhagen, Denmark, August 12-14, 2019, Proceedings, volume 11651 of Lecture Notes in
  Computer Science, pages 111–125. Springer, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-25027-0 8. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-25027-0 8.

J. C. Baeten, C. Carissimo, and B. Luttik. Pushdown automata and context-free grammars in bisim-
   ulation semantics. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 19, 2023.

S. Boccaletti, P. De Lellis, C. Del Genio, K. Alfaro-Bittner, R. Criado, S. Jalan, and M. Romance.
   The structure and dynamics of networks with higher order interactions. Physics Reports, 1018:
   1–64, 2023.

C. Bortner and N. Meshkat. Identifiable paths and cycles in linear compartmental models. Bulletin
  of mathematical biology, 84(5):53, 2022.

G. Bouritsas, F. Frasca, S. Zafeiriou, and M. M. Bronstein. Improving graph neural network expres-
  sivity via subgraph isomorphism counting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 45(1):657–668, 2022.

R. Brijder, F. Geerts, J. V. den Bussche, and T. Weerwag. On the expressive power of query lan-
  guages for matrices. ACM Trans. Database Syst., 44(4):15:1–15:31, 2019.

D. Caucal. Bisimulation of context-free grammars and of pushdown automata. Modal Logic and
  process algebra, 53:85–106, 1995.

V.-A. Darvariu, S. Hailes, and M. Musolesi. Graph reinforcement learning for combinatorial opti-
  mization: A survey and unifying perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06492, 2024.

B. DuSell and D. Chiang. Stack attention: Improving the ability of transformers to model hierarchi-
  cal patterns. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

A. Fawzi, M. Balog, A. Huang, T. Hubert, B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, F. J.
  R Ruiz, J. Schrittwieser, G. Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms
  with reinforcement learning. Nature, 610(7930):47–53, 2022.

M. Fürer. On the combinatorial power of the weisfeiler-lehman algorithm. In International Confer-
 ence on Algorithms and Complexity, pages 260–271. Springer, 2017.

F. Geerts. On the expressive power of linear algebra on graphs. Theory of Computing Systems, Oct
   2020.

P.-L. Giscard, N. Kriege, and R. C. Wilson. A general purpose algorithm for counting simple cycles
   and simple paths of any length. Algorithmica, 81:2716–2737, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F. Harary and B. Manvel. On the number of cycles in a graph. Matematickỳ časopis, 21(1):55–63,
   1971.
T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Barekatain, S. Schmitt, and D. Silver. Learning and
   planning in complex action spaces. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
   4476–4486. PMLR, 2021.
S. Ishida, T. Miyazaki, Y. Sugaya, and S. Omachi. Graph neural networks with multiple feature
   extraction paths for chemical property estimation. Molecules, 26(11):3125, 2021.
I. Jokić and P. Van Mieghem. Number of paths in a graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.08840, 2022.
E. Khalil, H. Dai, Y. Zhang, B. Dilkina, and L. Song. Learning combinatorial optimization algo-
  rithms over graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
T. Klinghoffer, K. Tiwary, N. Behari, B. Agrawalla, and R. Raskar. Diser: Designing imaging
   systems with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
   on Computer Vision, pages 23632–23642, 2023.
G. Michel, G. Nikolentzos, J. F. Lutzeyer, and M. Vazirgiannis. Path neural networks: Expressive
  and accurate graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  24737–24755. PMLR, 2023.
J. Piquenot, A. Moscatelli, M. Berar, P. Héroux, R. Raveaux, J.-Y. Ramel, and S. Adam. G2 n2 :
   Weisfeiler and lehman go grammatical. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2024.
V. B. Schneider. On the parsing of context-free languages by pushdown automata. In Ann. meeting
   of the assoc. for computational linguistics, number TR-68-76, 1968.
D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Ku-
  maran, T. Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi,
  and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018.

M. Świechowski, K. Godlewski, B. Sawicki, and J. Mańdziuk. Monte carlo tree search: A review
 of recent modifications and applications. Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(3):2497–2562, 2023.
H. C. Vazquez, J. Sánchez, and R. Carrascosa. Gramml: Exploring context-free grammars with
  model-free reinforcement learning. In Sixth Workshop on Meta-Learning at the Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
H. C. Vázquez, J. Sanchez, and R. Carrascosa. Integrating hyperparameter search into model-free
  automl with context-free grammars. In International Conference on Learning and Intelligent
  Optimization, pages 523–536. Springer, 2023.
O. Vinyals, M. Fortunato, and N. Jaitly. Pointer networks. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 28, 2015.
A. Voropaev and S. Perepechko. The number of fixed length cycles in undirected graph explicit
  formula in case of small lengths. Discrete and Continuous Models and Applied Computational
  Science, (2):6–12, 2012.
J. Wang, W. Liu, L. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Wen. Analysis of china’s non-ferrous metals industry’s
   path to peak carbon: A whole life cycle industry chain based on copper. Science of The Total
   Environment, 892:164454, 2023.
A. Zhao, J. Xu, M. Konaković-Luković, J. Hughes, A. Spielberg, D. Rus, and W. Matusik. Robo-
  grammar: graph grammar for terrain-optimized robot design. ACM Transactions on Graphics
  (TOG), 39(6):1–16, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This document provides additional content to the main paper.

A    CFG S AND PDA S
This section provides the proof of theorem 3.1 of Section 2 and more details about PDA.
Even if G3 is different from the 3-WL CFG proposed in Piquenot et al. (2024), they share the same
expressive power. Indeed, in the context of this paper, we are not limited by the depth of the CFG
while the goal of the grammar reduction in Piquenot et al. (2024) was to keep the expressiveness of
the CFG at a given depth.
It is important to note that in a separative point of view, we separate graphs with scalar, a CFG G
separates two graphs G1 and G2 if there exists a sentence s ∈ L(G) such that s(AG1 ) ̸= s(AG2 ).
Knowing that, we have the following proposition and theorem relative to the expressive power of
G3 .
Proposition A.1
Assume we have a sentence s that is the sum of two sentences s1 and s2 . If s separates G1 and G2 ,
then it is necessary that s1 or s2 separate G1 and G2 .

Proof. Assume for the sake of contradiction that neither s1 nor s2 can separate G1 and G2 . Then
                              s(AG1 ) = s1 (AG1 ) + s2 (AG1 )
                                      = s1 (AG2 ) + s2 (AG2 ) = s(AG2 ).
That is absurd.
Theorem A.1 (3-WL CFG)
G3 is as expressive as 3-WL

Proof.
                              Vc → M V c | 1                                                       (4)
                              M → (M ⊙ M ) | (M M ) | diag (Vc ) | A.
We will start from the CFG (4) that was proven to be 3-WL equivalent. We show that Vc variable
and diag (Vc ) can be removed.
First of all, we have that for any matrix N and vector w, N w = (N ⊙ I)w + (N ⊙ J)w, since
a sentence in the CFG (4) consists on a sum other the resulting vector, we have with the help of
proposition A.1 that vectors (N ⊙ I)w and (N ⊙ J)w have a better separability than N w. To
remove Vc variable, we first have I = diag (1). Then for any matrix N and vector w, we have that
(N diag (w) J) ⊙ I = diag ((N ⊙ J)w) and (N diag (w)) ⊙ I = diag ((N ⊙ I)w).
                                           X
                       (N diag (w) J)i,i =    Ni,l diag (w)l,m Jm,i
                                               l,m
                                               X
                                          =          Ni,l wl Jli
                                                l
                                               X
                                          =          Ni,l Jil wl
                                                l
                                               X
                                          =     (N ⊙ J)i,l wl = ((N ⊙ J)w)i ,
                                                l

                                               X
                         (N diag (w))i,i =           Ni,l diag (w)l,i
                                                l
                                          = Ni,i wi
                                            X
                                          =    (N ⊙ I)i,l wl = ((N ⊙ I)w)i
                                                l

The conclusion can be made by induction. We obtain G3 as expressive as 3-WL.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To give more insight in the construction of PDA from CFG, consider the PDA D3 , which corre-
sponds to the CFG G3 :


                D3 = ({q0 , q1 }, {A, I, J, (, ), ⊙}, {M, A, I, J, (, ), ⊙}, δ, q0 , M, q1 ).
where the transition relation δ is defined as follows:
    δ(q0 , ε, M ) = {(q0 , (M ⊙ M )), (q0 , (M M )), (q0 , A), (q0 , I), (q0 , J)}
    δ(q0 , A, A) = δ(q0 , I, I) = δ(q0 , J, J) = δ(q0 , (, () = δ(q0 , ), )) = δ(q0 , ⊙, ⊙) = {(q0 , ε)}
     δ(q0 , ε, ε) = {(q1 , ε)}.
In the same way that production rules fully defines a CFG, the transition relation δ completely
specifies a PDA. For a PDA constructed from a CFG, the transposition transitions alone are sufficient
to define the automaton. For instance, D3 can be fully described by the transition:
               δ(q0 , ε, M ) = {(q0 , (M ⊙ M )), (q0 , (M M )), (q0 , A), (q0 , I), (q0 , J)},
which corresponds directly to the production rules of G3 .

B    O N THE EVALUATION OF GRL IN THE CONTEXT OF PATH COUNTING
We remind the acting phase of GRL described in section 4. In GRL, an agent generates a set of
sentences, S, using a pushdown automaton corresponding to a given CFG. For a given set of graphs,
the agent computes the results of each sentence in s. A linear combination of these computed results
is then derived and compared to the ground truth path counts, which yields a reward Rs . This section
aims to detailed this evaluation process in the case of GRL applied to G3 .
In the case of G3 , the set of computed sentences for a given set of graphs results into a set of matrices
for each sentence. We have then s sets of g matrices, where s is the number of sentences and g the
number of graphs. Along with this, we have a set of g matrices of ground truth. For the sake of
explanation, we assume that each graphs have the same size n. Then we chose s indices ι1 , · · · , ιs
and a graph G such that, the matrix E of size s × s, where Ei,j = sj (AG )ιi , is invertible. If such
a matrix does not exist, we penalise the set of sentences by attributing a negative value. Along with
the construction of E, we define the vector v with the ground truth matrix of G, TG by vi = (TG )ιi .

         Pcombination is then obtained by resolving the equation Ex = v. Then, the linear com-
The linear
bination i xi si (AG ) is compared to the ground truth TG for all graphs G resulting in the value
rS . This value encompasses the pertinence of the set of sentence S over a specific path counting
problem. Figure 8 depicts this evaluation procedure.
The existence of Voropaev and Perepechko (2012) formulas, ensure that there exist a linear combi-
nation of sentences that addresses the path counting of length up to 6.

C    A CFG TO COUNT AT EDGE LEVEL
In our investigation of substructure counting at the edge level for the grammar G3 , we focus on
the non-diagonal elements of the involved matrices. To streamline this process, we introduce an
alternative context-free grammar, denoted as G̃3 , which is equally expressive as G3 but specifically
tailored for edge-related computations. The grammar is defined as follows:
                                E → (E ⊙ M ) | (N E) | (EN ) | A | J                                       (5)
                                N → (N ⊙ M ) | (N ⊙ N ) | I
                                M → (M M ) | (EE)

In G̃3 , the variable E represents matrices with zero on the diagonal, corresponding to edges in the
graph, while N represents diagonal matrices, corresponding to nodes, and M represents general
matrices. The start variable is E as we aim to focus on edge-level structures. The production
rules for each variable describe valid operations and combinations within G3 that yield matrices
corresponding to that variable.


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: The evaluation process of GRL for path counting involves deriving an invertible matrix
E from the computed sentences corresponding to a given graph, alongside a ground truth vector
v. The solution of the equation Ex = v provides a linear combination of the computed sentence
results. This linear combination is then compared to the ground truth across the entire graph dataset,
yielding a value that reflects the effectiveness and relevance of the set of sentences in solving the
path counting problem.


Figure 9: At the top, the tokens of the Graformer derived from G̃3 are separated into three sets.
Below, the variable masks of Gramformer are defined to correspond to the rule tokens of their
corresponding variable token.


In the case of N , matrix multiplication is omitted because, for diagonal matrices, the matrix prod-
uct behaves like the Hadamard product. This choice reduces computational complexity without
sacrificing expressiveness.


D    PATH AND CYCLE COUNTING

This section contains the proof of theorem 5.1 of Section 5 and provides a detailed explanation of
how Pl∗ counts l-path. In the following, all graphs are assumed to be simple, i.e., they contain no
self-loops. This assumption aligns with the search for paths, as self-loops cannot contribute to any


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: Generation of the sentence J ⊙ A2 ∈ L(G̃3 ), following a PDA procedure guide by a
Gramformer policy.


path due to the repetition of a node when traversing through a self-loop. Consequently, the adjacency
matrix A will always have a zero diagonal. Furthermore, this ensures that J ⊙ A = A.
As GRL found more efficient formulas to calculate paths and cycles at edge-level in a graph, we
tried to prove that such formulas are correct, and by doing so, we found the following lemma that
helps to reduce the computation cost.
Lemma D.1                                                               P
Let N ,M and P be square matrices of the same size, such that Ni,i = k Mi,k for all indices i.
Then we have
                                 P ⊙ (M J) = (I ⊙ N )P − P ⊙ M

Proof. We have
                                                     X
                              (P ⊙ (M J))i,j = Pi,j (  Mi,k − Mi,j )
                                                           k
                                                 = Pi,j Ni,i − Pi,j Mi,j ,                        (6)
and
                                                     X
                     ((I ⊙ N )P − P ⊙ M )i,j =            (I ⊙ N )i,k Pk,j − Pi,j Mi,j
                                                      k
                                                  = Ni,i Pi,j − Pi,j Mi,j .                       (7)
From equations (6) and (7), we can conclude.

2-paths and 3-cycles The most effective explicit formula discovered to date for calculating the
number of 2-paths connecting two nodes was proposed by Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), it is
                                               P2 = J ⊙ A 2 .                                     (8)

Following the formula for the l-cycle proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), we obtain for
the 3-cycle the following formula
                                      C 3 = A ⊙ P2 = A ⊙ A 2 .                                    (9)
Without any surprise, our architecture found the same formulas for both 2-path and 3-cycle.

3-paths and 4-cycles The most effective explicit formula discovered to date for calculating the
number of 3-paths connecting two nodes was proposed by Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), it is
                           P3 = J ⊙ A3 − (I ⊙ A2 )A − A(I ⊙ A2 ) + A.                           (10)

Following the formula for the l-cycle proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), we obtain for
the 3-cycle the following formula
                     C4 = A ⊙ P3 = A ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A.                        (11)
Obviously our architecture found P3 , but surprisingly, it found a more compact formula.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 11: computation of P3∗ for an example graph, the dashed lines indicate an entry in the column
corresponding to the white node in the matrix associated with the term specified above.


Theorem D.2
The following formula, denoted as P3∗ , computes the number of 3-paths linking two nodes

                                 P3∗ = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )) − A ⊙ (AJ).                              (12)

Proof. We will show that P3 = P3∗ . Firstly, we have

            J ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) = J ⊙ ((A(J + I) ⊙ A2 )) − A(I ⊙ A2 )
                                     = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )) −A(I ⊙ A2 )
                                                          |     {z       }
                                                               =A(I⊙A2 )

                                     = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )).                                         (13)

Secondly, we have that A2i,i =
                                 P
                                     k Ai,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies

                                      (I ⊙ A2 )A − A = A ⊙ (AJ).                                 (14)
From equality (13) and (14), we can conclude.

An alternative understanding of how P3∗ computes the number of 3-paths connecting two nodes is
illustrated in Figure 11. The process can be described as follows:
The expression A(J ⊙ A2 ) calculates, from a given node, a non-closed 2-path followed by a 1-path.
This computation inherently includes non-closed 3-paths as well as 3-cycles. The 3-cycles are sub-
sequently removed by the Hadamard multiplication with J, which zeroes out the diagonal elements.
However, this operation also allows the possibility of traversing a 2-path and then returning to the
intermediate node. To account for this and eliminate such paths, we subtract the term A ⊙ (AJ).
Thanks to formula (12), we can derive the 4-cycle formula.
Corollary D.2.1
The following formula, denoted as C4f computes the number of 4-cycles linking two nodes

                               C4f = A ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )) − A ⊙ (AJ).                                (15)

In terms of time complexity, P3∗ is more efficient than P3 . The ratio of time complexity of P3∗ over
P3 is 21 . It is directly derived from the number of matrix multiplications in both formulas. Figure 7
shows the gain of complexity of P3∗ and the ratio between the two formulas.
Surprisingly, even for l = 3, GRL allows to improve the computation of path and cycle at edge-level
in terms of time complexity.

4-paths and 5-cycles The most effective explicit formula discovered to date for calculating the
number of 4-paths connecting two nodes was proposed by Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), it is
                          P4 = J ⊙ A4 − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + 2(J ⊙ A2 )                           (16)
                                           2        2           2          2
                                 − (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )
                                 − A(I ⊙ A3 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )A + 3A ⊙ A2 .


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following the formula for the l-cycle proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), we obtain for
the 5-cycle the following formula
                    C5 = A ⊙ P4 = A ⊙ A4 − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)                                 (17)
                                                    2          2             2       2
                                      − (I ⊙ A )(A ⊙ A ) − (A ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )
                                      − A(I ⊙ A3 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )A + 5A ⊙ A2 .

Again, GRL found an improved formula for l = 4.
Theorem D.3
The following formula, denoted as P4∗ , computes the number of 4-paths linking two nodes
                   P4∗ = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ)))                       (18)
                                                                         2               2
                         − J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )J) + 2A ⊙ A .

Proof. We will show that P4∗ = P4 . Firstly, we have
         J ⊙ A4 = J ⊙ ((A((J + I) ⊙ A3 )))
                 = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 )) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 ))
                                      |     {z       }
                                                   =A(I⊙A3 )

                 = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A2 )))) + A(I ⊙ A3 )
                 = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )))) +A(I ⊙ A3 )
                                               |          {z           }
                                                               =(J⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )

                 = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A )))) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + A(I ⊙ A3 ).
                                               2
                                                                                             (19)
Secondly, we have from equality (14)
                        J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A) = J ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A − A)A)
                                                   = J ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) −J ⊙ A2
                                                     |       {z      }
                                                        (I⊙A2 )(J⊙A2 )

                                                   = (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ A2 .           (20)
Thirdly, we have from equality (14)
                        J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ))) = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A − A))
                                                   = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) − J ⊙ A2 .            (21)
And eventually, we have A3i,i =             2
                                  P
                                    k (A ⊙ A )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies

                             (I ⊙ A3 )A − A ⊙ A2 = A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J).                         (22)
From equality (19), (20),(21) and (22), we can conclude.

An alternative understanding of how P4∗ computes the number of 4-paths connecting two nodes is
illustrated in Figure 12. The process can be described as follows:
The expression A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))) − A(A ⊙ (AJ)) = AP3∗ calculates, from a given node, a
non-closed 3-path followed by a 1-path. This computation inherently includes non-closed 4-paths
as well as 4-cycles. The 4-cycles are subsequently removed by the Hadamard multiplication with
J, which zeroes out the diagonal elements. However, this operation also allows the possibility of
traversing a 3-path and then returning to an intermediate node. To account for this and eliminate
respectively paths returning to the third and second nodes of the 3-paths, we subtract the terms
J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A) − A ⊙ A2 and A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ A2 .
Thanks to formula (18), we can derive the 5-cycle formula.
Corollary D.3.1
The following formula, denoted as C5f computes the number of 5-cycles linking two nodes
                  C5f = A ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))) − A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ)))                        (23)
                                                                         2               2
                         − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )J) + 2A ⊙ A .


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 12: computation of P4∗ for two graphs, the dashed lines indicate an entry in the column
corresponding to the white node in the matrix associated with the term specified above.



In terms of time complexity, P4∗ is more efficient than P4 . The ratio of time complexity of P4∗ over
P4 is 94 . It is directly derived from the number of matrix multiplications in both formulas. Figure 7
shows the gain of complexity of P4∗ and the ratio between the two formulas.
GRL improves the computation of path and cycle at edge-level for l = 5.


5-paths and 6-cycles The most effective explicit formula discovered to date for calculating the
number of 5-paths connecting two nodes was proposed by Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), it is

 P5 = J ⊙ A5 − (I ⊙ A4 )A − A(I ⊙ A4 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 )                 (24)
       − (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A3 ) − (J ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A) + 3A ⊙ A3
       + 2A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + 2(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A + 3A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + (I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )
       − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A) + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) + 3J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))
       + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)) − 6(I ⊙ A2 )A − 6A(I ⊙ A2 )
       − 4A ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ A3 + 4A.


Following the formula for the l-cycle proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), we obtain for
the 6-cycle the following formula

C6 = A ⊙ A5 − (I ⊙ A4 )A − A(I ⊙ A4 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 )                  (25)
                2         3             3       2                   3                3
      − (I ⊙ A )(A ⊙ A ) − (A ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A) + 6A ⊙ A
      + 2A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + 2(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A + 3A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + (I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )
      − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − A ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A) + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) + 3A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))
      + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)) − 6(I ⊙ A2 )A − 6A(I ⊙ A2 )
      − 4A ⊙ A2 + 4A.


Again, GRL found an improved formula for l = 5.

Theorem D.4
The following formula, denoted as P5∗ , computes the number of 5-paths linking two nodes

            P5∗ = J ⊙ (AP4∗ ) − (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ (C4f J) − (AJ) ⊙ P3∗              (26)
                    + P3∗ + C4f + 2A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 4A ⊙ A2 .


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We will show that P5∗ = P5 . First, we have
   J ⊙ A5 = J ⊙ ((A((J + I) ⊙ A4 )))
           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A4 )) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A4 ))
                                |     {z       }
                                           =A(I⊙A4 )

           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A3 )))) + A(I ⊙ A4 )
           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 )))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )))) +A(I ⊙ A4 )
                                         |          {z           }
                                                             =(J⊙A2 )(I⊙A3 )

           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A )))))) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 ) + A(I ⊙ A4 )
                                                             2

           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 ))))))                    (27)
                             2       3                   4
                 + (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) + A(I ⊙ A ).
And
      J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )))))) = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ))
                                                  = J ⊙ (A3 (I ⊙ A2 )) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ))
                                                    |      {z        } |            {z           }
                                                         =(J⊙A3 )(I⊙A2 )           =A(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )

                                                  = (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ).
                                                                 3       2
                                                                                                        (28)
Thus equation (27) and (28) give
  J ⊙ A5 = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))))) + (J ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 ) (29)
               + A(I ⊙ A4 ) − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ).
Second, we have from equality (20)
J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A))) = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ A2 ))
                                 = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )) − J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))
                                                         |          {z           } |       {z       }
                                                                        =A(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )        =J⊙A3 −A(I⊙A2 )

                                 = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ A3                   (30)
                                                     2
                                         + A(I ⊙ A ).
Third, we have from equality (21)
J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ))))) = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) − J ⊙ A2 ))
                                 = J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) − J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))
                                                         |          {z          } |       {z       }
                                                                        =A(I⊙(A(I⊙A2 )A)         =J⊙A3 −A(I⊙A2 )

                                 = J ⊙ (A (I ⊙ A )A) − A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A) − J ⊙ A3
                                             2           2                         2
                                                                                                        (31)
                                                     2
                                         + A(I ⊙ A ).
Fourth, we have from equality (22)
              J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J))) = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ A3 )A) − A ⊙ A2 ))
                                                 = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )).                (32)
Fifth, we have A3i,i =            2
                         P
                          k (A ⊙ A )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies

                (I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 = (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J).                            (33)
Sixth, we have (AP3∗ )i,i = k (C4f )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies
                           P

                              (I ⊙ (AP3∗ ))A − C4f = A ⊙ (C4f J).                                       (34)
Eventually, we have (A2 )i,i = k Ai,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies
                               P

                                 (I ⊙ A2 )P3∗ − A ⊙ P3∗ = P3∗ ⊙ (AJ).                                   (35)
                                                                                           2
By removing equality (29), (30), (31), (32), (33),(34), (35) and 2J ⊙(A(A⊙A )) to P5 , we obtain
exactly P3∗ + C4f + 2A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 4A ⊙ A2 . It concludes the proof.


                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


An alternative understanding of how P5∗ computes the number of 5-paths connecting two nodes is
illustrated in Figure 13. The process can be described as follows:
The expression AP4∗ calculates, from a given node, a non-closed 4-path followed by a 1-path.
This computation inherently includes non-closed 5-paths as well as 5-cycles. The 5-cycles are
subsequently removed by the Hadamard multiplication with J, which zeroes out the diagonal el-
ements. However, this operation also allows the possibility of traversing a 4-path and then re-
turning to an intermediate node. To account for this and eliminate respectively paths returning to
the fourth, third and second nodes of the 4-paths, we subtract the terms A ⊙ ((C4f )J) − C4f ,
(J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) + 4A ⊙ A2 − 2A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 − 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) and (AJ) ⊙ P3∗ − P3∗ .
Thanks to formula (26), we can derive the 6-cycle formula.

Corollary D.4.1
The following formula, denoted as C6f computes the number of 6-cycles linking two nodes


          C6∗ = A ⊙ (AP4∗ ) − (A ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ ((C4f )J) − (AJ) ⊙ C4f              (36)
                                    2       2                2                2
                + 2C4f + 2A ⊙ A ⊙ A + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )A) − 4A ⊙ A .


In terms of time complexity, P5∗ is more efficient than P5 . The ratio of time complexity of P5∗ over
P5 is 41 . It is directly derived from the number of matrix multiplications in both formulas. The
significant decrease in time complexity can be attributed to the presence of both P4∗ , C4f and P3∗ in
the computational formula. The contributions of these terms to the time complexity are cumulative,
meaning that each occurrence of P4∗ , C4f and P3∗ adds to the total computational gain. As a result,
their individual time complexities are aggregated, leading to the observed diminution in the overall
time complexity of the formula. Figure 7 shows the gain of complexity of P5∗ and the ratio between
the two formulas.
GRL improves the computation of path and cycle at edge-level for l = 5 by a factor 4.


6-paths and 7-cycles The most effective explicit formula discovered to date for calculating the
number of 6-paths connecting two nodes was proposed by Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), it is


P6 = J ⊙ A6 − (I ⊙ A5 )A − A(I ⊙ A5 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A4 ) − (J ⊙ A4 )(I ⊙ A2 )                  (37)
               4         2              2       4                 4               4
      − (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A) + 3A ⊙ A
      − (J ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A3 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A3 ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A3 ) − J ⊙ (A3 (I ⊙ A2 )A)
      − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A2 ) − J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A3 )A) + 4A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 ) + 4(I ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 )A
      + 6A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A3 + (I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (I ⊙ A3 )A(I ⊙ A2 ) + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A3 )A)
      + 3J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 )) + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A)) − J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A2 )
      + 2A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + 2(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A + J ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
      + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A2 ) + 3J ⊙ (A2 (A ⊙ A2 )) + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))(J ⊙ A2 ) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))
      + J ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )) + 2J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A)
      + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 )) + (I ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))
      + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )A) + 3J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )) − 12(I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − 12(A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
      − 4J ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 − 8A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )) − 8A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 3A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)
      + 3J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )A) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))A) − 4J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )) − 4J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A)
      + 4J ⊙ A4 − 5A(I ⊙ A3 ) − 5(I ⊙ A3 )A − 4(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))A − 4A(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))
      − 4(I ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A))A − 4A(I ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A)) − 7(IA2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − 7(J ⊙ A2 )(IA2 )
      − 10J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + 44A ⊙ A2 + 12J ⊙ A2 .


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: computation of P5∗ for four graphs, the dashed lines indicate an entry in the column
corresponding to the white node in the matrix associated with the term specified above.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Following the formula for the l-cycle proposed in Voropaev and Perepechko (2012), we obtain for
the 7-cycle the following formula


C7 = A ⊙ A6 − (I ⊙ A5 )A − A(I ⊙ A5 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A4 ) − (A ⊙ A4 )(I ⊙ A2 )            (38)
                4         2             2      4                4              4
      − (I ⊙ A )(A ⊙ A ) − (A ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A) + 3A ⊙ A
      − (A ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A3 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(A ⊙ A3 ) − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A3 ) − A ⊙ (A3 (I ⊙ A2 )A)
      − A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A2 ) − A ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A3 )A) + 4A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 ) + 4(I ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 )A
      + 6A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A3 + (I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (I ⊙ A3 )A(I ⊙ A2 ) + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A3 )A)
      + 3A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 )) + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A)) − A ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A2 )
      + 2A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + 2(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A + A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
      + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A2 ) + 3A ⊙ (A2 (A ⊙ A2 )) + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))(A ⊙ A2 ) + (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))
      + A ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )) + 2A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A)
      + (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ))A + A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 )) + (I ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))A + A(I ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))
      + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )A) + 3A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )) − 12(I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − 12(A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
      − 4A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 − 8A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )) − 8A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 3A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)
      + 3A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )A) + A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))A) − 4A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )) − 4A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A)
      + 4A ⊙ A4 − 5A(I ⊙ A3 ) − 5(I ⊙ A3 )A − 4(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))A − 4A(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))
      − 4(I ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A))A − 4A(I ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A)) − 7(IA2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − 7(A ⊙ A2 )(IA2 )
      − 10A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + 56A ⊙ A2 .


Again, GRL found an improved formula for l = 6.


Theorem D.5
The following formula, denoted as P6∗ computes the number of 6-paths linking two nodes


P6∗ = J ⊙ (AP5∗ ) − P3∗ ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ (C5f J) − P4∗ ⊙ (AJ)                          (39)
      + P4∗ + C5f − (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ (C4f J) + 4A ⊙ A2 ⊙ P3∗ + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ))
      + J ⊙ A ⊙ A ⊙ A + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A ⊙ A )A) − 4J ⊙ A ⊙ A − 8A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))
              2    2    2                  2   2             2     2

      − 8A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 4J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A) − 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) + 17A ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ A2 .


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. We will show that P6∗ = P6 . First, we have

J ⊙ A6 = J ⊙ ((A((J + I) ⊙ A5 )))
        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A5 )) + J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A5 ))
                             |     {z       }
                                     =A(I⊙A5 )

        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A4 )))) + A(I ⊙ A5 )
        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A4 )))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A4 )))) +A(I ⊙ A5 )
                                      |          {z           }
                                                           =(J⊙A2 )(I⊙A4 )

        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A )))))) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A4 ) + A(I ⊙ A5 )
                                                       3

        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 )))))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 ))))))
                                               |              {z                }
                                                                  =(J⊙A3 )(I⊙A3 )−A(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A3 )

             + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A4 ) + A(I ⊙ A5 )
        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A((J + I) ⊙ A2 )))))))) + (J ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A3 )
             − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 ) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A4 ) + A(I ⊙ A5 )
        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))))))) + J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 ))))))))
                                                        |                  {z                     }
                                                                         =(J⊙A4 )(I⊙A2 )−A(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A3 )−(J⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )

             + (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − A(I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A4 ) + A(I ⊙ A5 )
                       3         3                 2             3

        = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))))))) + (J ⊙ A4 )(I ⊙ A2 )                                  (40)
                           2         3                 2             2       2          3           3
             − 2A(I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) + (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )
             + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A4 ) + A(I ⊙ A5 ).

Second, we have from equality (30)

 J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (AJ))A))))) = J ⊙ (A((J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
                                                                − J ⊙ A3 + A(I ⊙ A2 )))
                                               =           J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 )))       −(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
                                                           |           {z             }
                                                   =J⊙(A2 (I⊙A2 )A2 )−A(I⊙(A(I⊙A2 )A2 ))

                                                           J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 )) +(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
                                                           |     {z       }
                                                           =J⊙A4 −A(I⊙A3 )

                                               = J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A2 ) − A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A2 )) (41)
                                                           − (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ A4 + A(I ⊙ A3 )
                                                           + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ).

Third, we have from equalities (31)

J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (AJ))))))) = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A) − A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))
                                                              − J ⊙ A3 + A(I ⊙ A2 )))
                                           = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))) −(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))
                                             |           {z             }
                                               =J⊙(A3 (I⊙A2 )A)−A(I(A2 (I⊙A2 )A))

                                                   − J ⊙ A4 + A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
                                           = J ⊙ (A3 (I ⊙ A2 )A) − A(I(A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A))                      (42)
                                                   − (J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A)) − J ⊙ A + A(I ⊙ A3 )
                                                                     2              2                   4

                                                   + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ).


                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Fourth, we have from equality (32)
J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J))))) = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))))
                                         =       J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A)))          −     J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))))
                                                 |           {z           }                |          {z           }
                                             =J⊙(A2 (I⊙A2 )A)−A(I⊙(A(I⊙A3 )A))           =J⊙(A2 (A⊙A2 ))−A(I⊙(A(A⊙A2 )))

                                         = J ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )A) − A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A))                    (43)
                                                − J ⊙ (A2 (A ⊙ A2 )) + A(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))).
Fifth, we have from equality (33)
  J ⊙ (A((J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J))) = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 ))
                                         =      J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A2 )) −J ⊙ A(A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )
                                                |          {z           }
                                               J⊙(A(I⊙A3 )A2 )−A(I⊙A3 )(I⊙A2 )

                                         = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A3 )A2 ) − A(I ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 )                     (44)
                                                                   2       2
                                                 − J ⊙ A(A ⊙ A ⊙ A ).
Sixth, we have from equality (34)
      J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ (C4f J)) = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ (AP3 ))A − C4 ))
                              = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A)))A)
                                    − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A))
                              = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A4 )A) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )A)                           (45)
                                                               2                                 2
                                    − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A))A) + 2J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A)
                                    − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 )) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − (J ⊙ A2 ).
Seventh, we have from equality (35)
J ⊙ (A(P3∗ ⊙ (AJ))) = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ A2 )P3 − C4 ))
                       = J ⊙ (A((I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A)))
                            − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A))
                       = J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A3 ) − A(I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 )                                       (46)
                                                2          2                     2           2
                            − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A(I ⊙ A )) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )A)
                            + 2J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 )) + (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − (J ⊙ A2 ).
Eighth, we have
 J ⊙ (AP3∗ ) = J ⊙ (AP3 )
              = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A)))
              = J ⊙ A4 − A(I ⊙ A3 ) − (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + (J ⊙ A2 ). (47)
Ninth, we have
  J ⊙ (AC4f ) = J ⊙ (AC4 )
                 = J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 − A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A2 )A + A)))
                 = J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A3 )) − (J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + (J ⊙ A2 ).                (48)
Tenth, we have
           J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A))) = J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )A) − A(I ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )A)).                          (49)
Eleventh, we have
            J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))) = J ⊙ (A2 (A ⊙ A2 )) − A(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 ))).                        (50)
                                                               2       2                             2
From equalities (40) to (50) combined with J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A ⊙ A )) and J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A )) we obtain
the equivalence between J ⊙ (AP5∗ ) and all those matrices.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Twelfth, we have A3i,i =                2
                           P
                                k (A ⊙ A )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies

P3∗ ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) = (I ⊙ A3 )P3 − A2 ⊙ C4
                     = (I ⊙ A3 )(J ⊙ A3 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )A(I ⊙ A2 ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 )A + (I ⊙ A3 )A
                           − A2 ⊙ A ⊙ A3 + A2 ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )) + A2 ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A) −A2 ⊙ A
                                           |      {z       } |        {z       }
                                                                 =(A⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )                            =(I⊙A2 )(A⊙A2 )

                     = (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − (I ⊙ A )A(I ⊙ A ) − (I ⊙ A3 )(I ⊙ A2 )A
                                    3                3                   3                        2
                                                                                                                                        (51)
                           + (I ⊙ A )A − A ⊙ A ⊙ A + (A ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) + (I ⊙ A )(A ⊙ A2 )
                                            3                        2           3                      2          2            2

                       − A ⊙ A2 .
Thirteenth, we have (AP4∗ )i,i = k (C5f )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies
                                P

A ⊙ (C5f J) = (I ⊙ (AP4 ))A − C5
             = (I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A4 )))A − (I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))))A +2 (I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))A
               |       {z        } |               {z            }    |       {z        }
                      =(I⊙A5 )A                                  =(I⊙(A2 (I⊙A2 )A))A                                       =(I⊙A3 )A

                  − (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 )))A − (I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )))A
                    |            {z            } |             {z             }
                           =(I⊙(A(I⊙A2 )A2 ))A                                                   =(I⊙A3 )(I⊙A2 )A

                  − (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A))A − (I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A3 )A + 3(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A2 )))A − A ⊙ A4
                                            3                                2

                  + A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) + (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 )
                  + A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (I ⊙ A3 )A − 5A ⊙ A2
                                                                                                                                        (52)
                                3                2                                           3                                 2
                  − 2(I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )A − (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A))A + 3(I ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A )))A
                  + A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) + (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + 2(I ⊙ A3 )A
                 + A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (I ⊙ A3 )A − 5A ⊙ A2 .
Fourteenth, we have (A2 )i,i = k Ai,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies
                              P

P4∗ ⊙ (AJ) = (I ⊙ A2 )P4 − C5
            = (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A4 ) − J ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A(I ⊙ A2 )A) + 2(I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 )                                                     (53)
                 − (I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A ) − (I ⊙ A )A(I ⊙ A3 )
                            2               2                2                           2              2         2            2

                 − (I ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A3 )A + 3(I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − A ⊙ A4 + A ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A)
                 + (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) + (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + A(I ⊙ A3 ) + (I ⊙ A3 )A − 5A ⊙ A2 .
Fifteenth, we have (AP3∗ )i,i = k (C4f )i,k . Thus lemma D.1 implies
                               P

  (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ (C4f J) = (I ⊙ (AP3 ))(J ⊙ A2 ) − (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ C4
                        = (I ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A3 )))(J ⊙ A2 ) −(I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A))(J ⊙ A2 )
                          |           {z           }
                                        =(I⊙A4 )(J⊙A2 )

                                − (I ⊙ (A2 (I ⊙ A2 )))(J ⊙ A2 ) +(I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) − A2 ⊙ A ⊙ A3
                                  |            {z            }
                                            =(I⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )(J⊙A2 )

                                + (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((I ⊙ A2 )A) + (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )) −A2 ⊙ A
                                  |          {z          } |            {z          }
                                                =(I⊙A2 )(A⊙A2 )                                       =(A⊙A2 )(I⊙A2 )

                        = (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − (I ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A )A))(J ⊙ A2 )
                                        4                2                                        2
                                                                                                                                        (54)
                                                 2               2                   2                      2          2            2   3
                                − (I ⊙ A )(I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) + (I ⊙ A )(J ⊙ A ) − A ⊙ A ⊙ A
                                + (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) + (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) − A ⊙ A2 .
And eventually, from the previous equality, we have
    A ⊙ A2 ⊙ P3∗ = A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A3 − (I ⊙ A2 )(A ⊙ A2 ) − (A ⊙ A2 )(I ⊙ A2 ) + A ⊙ A2 ,                                                     (55)


                                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 14: Time computation of GRL formulae and preconsumption of GSN (log scale) on IMDB-
MULTI dataset for path of length 3 and 6.


and
         C4f A = J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A3 )A) − J ⊙ (A(I ⊙ A2 )A) − (I ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) + J ⊙ A2 ,             (56)
By removing the correct combination of J ⊙ (AP5∗ ) and equations (51) to (56) to P6 , we obtain
exactly P4∗ + C5f + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 )) + J ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )A) −
        2     2                 2                    2                    2
4J ⊙ A ⊙ A − 8A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A )) − 8A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )A) − 4J ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )A) − 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙
A2 )J) + 17A ⊙ A2 + 3J ⊙ A2 . It concludes the proof.

An alternative understanding of how P6∗ computes the number of 5-paths connecting two nodes can
be described as follows:
The expression AP6∗ calculates, from a given node, a non-closed 5-path followed by a 1-path. This
computation inherently includes non-closed 6-paths as well as 6-cycles. The 6-cycles are subse-
quently removed by the Hadamard multiplication with J, which zeroes out the diagonal elements.
However, this operation also allows the possibility of traversing a 5-path and then returning to an
intermediate node. To account for this and eliminate respectively paths returning to the fifth, fourth,
third and second nodes of the 4-paths, we subtract the other terms in P6∗ .
Thanks to formula (26), we can derive the 7-cycle formula.
Corollary D.5.1
The following formula, denoted as C7f computes the number of 7-cycles linking two nodes
C6f = A ⊙ (AP5∗ ) − C4f ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ (C5f J) − C5f ⊙ (AJ) + 2C5f                          (57)
                  2
       − (A ⊙ A ) ⊙ (C4f J) + 4A ⊙ A       2
                                               ⊙ P3∗ + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )(J ⊙ A2 ) + A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2
       + 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 ⊙ A2 )A) − 4A ⊙ A ⊙ A − 8A ⊙ (A(A ⊙ A )) − 12A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A )A)
                                                  2     2                  2                  2

       − 3A ⊙ ((A ⊙ A2 )J) + 20A ⊙ A2 .

In terms of time complexity, P6∗ is more efficient than P6 . The ratio of time complexity of P6∗ over
       4
P6 is 25 . It is directly derived from the number of matrix multiplications in both formulas. Figure 7
shows the gain of complexity of P6∗ and the ratio between the two formulas.
GRL improves the computation of path and cycle at edge-level for l = 6 by a factor 6.25.
We evaluated the computational time of P3∗ and P6∗ and the precomputation times of GSN on the
IMDB-MULTI dataset, with the results shown in Figure 14. This analysis underscores the efficiency
gains provided by the formulae.

E     GRL APPLIED ON DIRECTED GRAPHS
In this section, we extend the application of GRL to derive matrix formulae for counting paths and
cycles in directed graphs.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To adapt the grammar reduction approach proposed in Piquenot et al. (2024) for directed graphs,
minor modifications are necessary. Specifically, the transpose operation becomes critical due to the
asymmetry of the adjacency matrix in directed graphs. Despite this adjustment, the proof used to
eliminate the Vc variable remains valid. Consequently, the grammar Gd provided to GRL for this
task is defined as follows.
                            E → (E ⊙ M ) | (N E) | (EN ) | E T | A | J                           (58)
                            N → (N ⊙ M ) | (N ⊙ N ) | I
                            M → (M M ) | (EE) | M T

In addition to GRL, we explored search within the CFG using two alternative methods: MCTS
without GramFormer, referred to as MC, and a completely random rule selection process, referred
to as Rand. For both MC and Rand, we maintained the same rollout budget and maximum sentence
length as those used for GRL. In the following, we denote the path matrix for directed graphs as Pld .
For l = 2, since the task can be resolved by a single short formula, GRL, MC, and Rand all success-
fully identified P2d .


                                               P2d = J ⊙ A2 .

For l = 3, when GRL was initially applied to directed graphs, we aimed to identify a combination
of four sentences to construct the formula. However, GRL determined that, similar to the case
of undirected graphs, only two sentences were required. This resulted in the following simplified
formula.


                           P3d = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J).

Both MC and Rand failed to converge when tasked with finding a combination of four sentences.
However, after GRL revealed that only two sentences were necessary, we re-evaluated MC and Rand
under this condition. In this case, both methods successfully converged and identified P3d .
For l = 4, only GRL successfully discovered a solution.


      P4d = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J)))
               − J ⊙ ((A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J))A) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ (A2 )T )J) + 2 ∗ A ⊙ AT ⊙ A2 .

For l = 5, only GRL successfully discovered a solution.


 P5d = J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 )))))) − J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J)))))
          − J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ ((A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J))A))) − J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ ((A ⊙ (A2 )T )J)))
          − (J ⊙ A2 ) ⊙ ((AT ⊙ A2 )J) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))T )J)
          − ((A ⊙ AT )J) ⊙ (J ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))) − A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J) − A ⊙ AT ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J)
          − AT ⊙ A2 − 3A ⊙ (A ⊙ AT )2 + 2A ⊙ A2 ⊙ +T A ⊙ AT ⊙ (A(J ⊙ A2 ))(A2 )
          + J ⊙ ((A ⊙ (A2 )T )A) + 2J ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT ⊙ (A2 ))A)
          + J ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )(J ⊙ A2 )) + ((A ⊙ AT )J) ⊙ (A ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J))
          + A ⊙ (((A ⊙ AT ) ⊙ ((A ⊙ AT )J))J) + 2 ∗ J ⊙ (A(A ⊙ AT ⊙ A2 )).

To the best of our knowledge, the matrix formulae derived for counting paths of lengths 2 to 5 are
novel. This highlights the capability of GRL to generate new and meaningful formulae. Further-
more, when assuming that the adjacency matrix A is symmetric, the formulae discovered by GRL
for directed graphs align perfectly with those identified for undirected graphs. This alignment leads
us to conjecture that GRL has identified optimal formulae, at least in the undirected case.


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F    A LGORITHMS

This section provides the pseudo code of algorithm of section 2 through 4.

Algorithm 1: PDA sentence generation for a given grammar G.
Input:
    The PDA (Q, Σ, Γ, δ, q0 , Z, F ) derived from a given CFG G.
Output:
    A sentence w ∈ L(G) where each element of w is in Σ.
Initialisation:
    S ← [Z] # Initialisation of the stack
    w ← [ ] # Initialisation of the written sentence
while S ̸= [ ] do
    c ← pop(S)
    if c ∈ Σ then
         Append c to w # Write the terminal symbol c
    else
         Choose t ∈ δ(q0 , ε, c) # Choose a transposition for the variable c
         push(S, t) # Concatenate the rule t to the stack
Return: w



Algorithm 2: Definition of the algorithm read, that return the first variable token in input I and
its position if I contains variable token
Input:
     The set of token T := {Tv , Tr , Tt } derived from a given CFG G
     The Input I, concatenation of w ∈ Σ∗ the written terminal symbols with the stack S ∈ Γ∗
Output:
     b a boolean that indicate whether I contains elements of the variables token set Tv
     v ∈ Tv a variable token, None if b is False
     pos the position of v in I, None if b is False
Initialisation:
     b ← F alse v ← N one pos ← N one
for c, i ∈ enumerate(I) do
     if c ∈ Tv then
          b ← T rue
          v←c
          pos ← i
          Break
Return: b, v, pos



G    GRL PARAMETER FOR THE PATH COUNTING PROBLEM

To ensure reproducibility of our results, we provide detailed specifications of the hyperparameters
used in our experiments:

MCTS PARAMETERS
       • Exploration Parameter (c): The exploration-exploitation trade-off parameter in the UCT
         formula is set to c = 10.
       • Rollouts per Node: Each node is evaluated using 10000 rollouts, with a maximum trajec-
         tory length of 20 steps.


                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 3: Prediction algorithm of the gramformer model M = (encoder, decoder).
Input:
    A variable token v ∈ Tv of the set of token T := {Tv , Tr , Tt } derived from a given CFG G
    A variable mask Mv corresponding to the variable token v
    The Input I, concatenation of w ∈ Σ∗ the written terminal symbols with the stack S ∈ Γ∗
Output:
    policy the learned distribution of possible rules selection form the variable corresponding
     to v
    optional:value the learned empirical value
memory ← encoder(v)
latent ← decoder(memory, I)
value ← M LP (latent, 1) # Optional
pol ← M LP (latent, nbtoken)
policy ← sof tmax(pol + Mv ) # probability distribution of the possible transposition of token
 variable v
Return: policy,(value # Optional)


Algorithm 4: Replace the variable of I at position pos by the list of variable and/or terminal
tokens corresponding to the rule token at indices decision
Input:
    The Input I, concatenation of w ∈ Σ∗ the written terminal symbols with the stack S ∈ Γ∗
    The position of the variable token to replace pos
    The indice decision of the selected rule token
Output:
    A new I where, the variable at position I as been replaced by the list of variable and/or
     terminal tokens corresponding to the rule token at indices decision
sb ← I[: pos]
sf ← I[pos + 1 :]
si ← tokens(decision)
Return: concatenate(sb, si, sf )


Algorithm 5: Gramformer sentence generation for a given grammar G.
Input:
    The transformer model M , the set of token T := {Tv , Tr , Tt } and the dictionary of variable
     mask Mv derived from a given CFG G.
Output:
    A sentence w ∈ L(G) where each element of w is in Σ.
Initialisation:
    I ← [Z] # Initialisation of the input
    b, v, pos ← read(I) # read the input
while b do
    policy ← M (v, Mv [v], I) # Distribution proposed by the transformer model
    decision ← argmax(policy)
    I ← replace(I, pos, decision)
    b, v, pos ← read(I)
Return: I


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 6: GRL algorithm one agent acting phase
Input:
    A M CT S defined to search within a CFG G
    nbwords, the number of sentences to generate
    A fixed Gramformer M
    A buf f er
Output:
    A buf f er that contains empirical policy and value of the tree explored during MCTS for
     the selected nodes of this MCTS.
Initialisation:
    I ← [Z] ∗ nbwords # Initialisation of the input
    b, v, pos ← read(I) # read the input
    tree ← initM CT S(nbwords)
    buf f er ← [I]
while b do
    root ← tree(I)
    decision, tree ← M CT S(root, M )
    I ← replace(I, pos, decision)
    b, v, pos ← read(I)
    Append I to buf f er
Return: fill(buf f er, tree)


Algorithm 7: MCTS algorithm
Input:
    The gramformer model M , and root, a node of the tree.
Output:
    A child of the root node guided by the MCTS heuristic.
for i=1 to N (Number of simulations) do
    leaf ← selection(root, M )
    child ← Expansion(leaf )
    reward ← simulation(child)
    Backpropagation(child, reward)
Return: Bestchild(root, M )


Algorithm 8: MCTS selection step
Input:
   The gramformer model M and a node of the tree
Output:
   A descendant node of the input node guided by the MCTS heuristic.
while node is fully expanded and not leaf do
   node ← Bestchild(node, M )
Return: node


Algorithm 9: MCTS expansion step
Input:
    a node of the tree
Output:
    A descendant node of the input node or the input node.
if node is not leaf and not fully expanded then
    node ← RandomU nvisitedChild(node)
Return: node


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 10: MCTS simulation step
Input:
   a node of the tree
Output:
   A reward.
while node is not leaf do
   node ← RandomAction(node)
Return: Evaluate(node)


Algorithm 11: MCTS backpropagation step
Input:
   a node of the tree, a reward.
while node is not root do
   Add 1 to the visit count of node
   Add reward to the reward count of the node
   node ← parent of node



Algorithm 12: MCTS bestchild algorithm
Input:
    The gramformer model M and a node of the tree
Output:
    The best child of node.
policy, − ← M (node)
N ← visits count of node
res ← { }
for child of node do
    −, reward ← M (child)
    Nc ← visits count of child
    v ← M (child)
    Q ← value of child / visits count of child         √P
                                                           c Nc
    res[child] ← αQ + (1 − α)v + c × policy(child) ×     1+N
Return: argmax(res)


Algorithm 13: GRL learning phase algorithm
Input:
    The gramformer model M and a buf f er containing policy and value for given nodes of
     former trees.
Output:
    The updated gramformer M
optimiser ← ADAM (M, lr)
for i=1 to N (number of epoch) do
    for node in buf f er do
        policy, reward ← M (node)
        policyLoss ← KLLoss(policy,policy of node)
        valueLoss ← HubertLoss(reward,value of node)
        Loss ← policyLoss + valueLoss
        backward(Loss)
        step of optimser
Return: M



                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T RANSFORMER A RCHITECTURE (G RAM F ORMER )
       • Number of Layers: 4 transformer layers.
       • Hidden Dimension: 256.
       • Number of Attention Heads: 8.
       • Feedforward Dimension: 512.
       • Positional Encoding: Learned positional embeddings for sentences up to 100 tokens for
         each sentences.

O PTIMIZER AND T RAINING PARAMETERS
       • Optimizer: Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and ϵ = 10−8 .
       • Learning Rate: A learning rate of 10−4 was used.
       • Batch Size: 128 sentences per batch.

Resource consumption GRL, like other MCTS based algorithm, suffers from significant resource
consumption. For the 5-path and 6-path counting problems, it took weeks to converge. Even with
substantial CPU resources (124 AMD EPYC 9654) for the acting and GPU (4 NVIDIA A100)
resources for the learning, the process remains extremely time-consuming.
These hyperparameter choices are consistent across all experiments unless stated otherwise. Fur-
ther details specific to individual tasks and datasets are provided in the respective sections of the
Appendix.


                                                 33
