Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


HERO: H UMAN -F EEDBACK -E FFICIENT
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING FOR O NLINE D IFFUSION
M ODEL F INETUNING
 Ayano Hiranaka˚1,3 Shang-Fu Chen˚1,2 Chieh-Hsin Lai˚1
 Dongjun Kim4 Naoki Murata1 Takashi Shibuya1 Wei-Hsiang Liao1
 Shao-Hua Sun: 2 Yuki Mitsufuji: 1
 1
   Sony AI, 2 Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University,
 3
   University of Southern California, 4 Stanford University



                                              A BSTRACT

          Controllable generation through Stable Diffusion (SD) fine-tuning aims to im-
          prove fidelity, safety, and alignment with human guidance. Existing reinforce-
          ment learning from human feedback methods usually rely on predefined heuristic
          reward functions or pretrained reward models built on large-scale datasets, limit-
          ing their applicability to scenarios where collecting such data is costly or difficult.
          To effectively and efficiently utilize human feedback, we develop a framework,
          HERO, which leverages online human feedback collected on the fly during model
          learning. Specifically, HERO features two key mechanisms: (1) Feedback-Aligned
          Representation Learning, an online training method that captures human feed-
          back and provides informative learning signals for fine-tuning, and (2) Feedback-
          Guided Image Generation, which involve generating images from SD’s refined
          initialization samples, enabling faster convergence towards the evaluator’s intent.
          We demonstrate that HERO is 4ˆ more efficient in online feedback for body part
          anomaly correction compared to the best existing method. Additionally, experi-
          ments show that HERO can effectively handle tasks like reasoning, counting, per-
          sonalization, and reducing NSFW content with only 0.5K online feedback. The
          code and project page are available at https://hero-dm.github.io/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Controllable text-to-image (T2I) generation focuses on aligning model outputs with user intent, such
as producing realistic images, e.g., undistorted human bodies, or accurately reflecting the count, se-
mantics, and attributes specified by users. To tackle this problem, a common paradigm involves
fine-tuning latent diffusion models (DM) like Stable Diffusion (SD; Rombach et al., 2022) using su-
pervised fine-tuning (SFT; Lee et al., 2023), which mostly learn from pre-collected, offline datasets.
To further enhance the alignment, online reinforcement learning (RL) fine-tuning methods (Fan
et al., 2024; Black et al., 2024) utilize online feedback that specifically evaluates the samples gener-
ated by the model during training. With such dynamic guidance provided on the fly, these methods
demonstrate superior performance on various T2I tasks, such as aesthetic quality improvement. Yet,
these approaches rely on either predefined heuristic reward functions or pretrained reward models
learned from large-scale datasets, which could be challenging to obtain, especially for tasks involv-
ing personalized content generation (e.g., capturing cultural nuances) or concepts like specific colors
or compositions.
To address the above issue, Yang et al. (2024b) introduces D3PO, an alternative method that directly
leverages online human feedback for fine-tuning diffusion models. Instead of learning from heuris-
tic reward functions or pretrained reward models, D3PO leverages the samples generated by the
    ˚
     Equal contributions. This work was done while Ayano Hiranaka and Shang-Fu Chen interned
at Sony AI. Corresponding authors: Ayano Hiranaka ăahiranak@usc.eduą, Shang-Fu Chen
ăsam.sfchen@gmail.comą, and Chieh-Hsin Lai ăchieh-hsin.lai@sony.comą.
   :
     Equal advisory.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


     Prompt
                                                       0                        1
“a photo of one blue                                       Human feedback
                                                                                      Learnable       Learned
  rose in a vase”
                                                                                    embedding map   Representation
                                                              bad   good best


                                                                                         Eθ
      Stable        Generate images
     Diffusion


            2
                 Sample from “good”                                                      Similarity-based
                 image noise latents                                                   Rewards Computation


Figure 1: ⃝0 Online Human Feedback on Generated Images: Each epoch, SD generates a batch
of images, evaluated by a human as “good” or “bad”, with the “best” among the “good” selected. The
corresponding SD noises and latents are saved. ⃝  1 Feedback-Aligned Representation Learning:
Human-annotated images train an embedding map via contrastive learning, converting feedback
into continuous representations. These are rated by cosine similarity to one of the “best” images and
used to fine-tune SD via DDPO (Black et al., 2024). ⃝    2 Feedback-Guided Image Generation:
New images are generated from a Gaussian mixture centered around the recorded noises of “good”
images. This process is repeated until the feedback budget is exhausted.


model as well as human annotations collected during training. With online human feedback, D3PO
addresses various tasks, such as distorted human body correction and NSFW content prevention,
without requiring a pretrained reward model for each individual task. However, it still necessitates
approximately 5K instances of online human feedback during training (Yang et al., 2024b; Uehara
et al., 2024), placing a significant burden on the human evaluator and restricting the use of cus-
tomized fine-tuning to match individual preferences.
To further improve the feedback efficiency of T2I alignment using online human feedback, this
work proposes a Human-feedback Efficient Reinforcement learning for Online diffusion model
fine-tuning framework, dubbed HERO, to efficiently and effectively utilize online human feedback
to fine-tune a SD model, as illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, we propose two novel components:
(1) Feedback-Aligned Representation Learning, an online-trained embedding map that creates a
representation space that implicitly captures human preferences and provides continuous reward
signals for RL fine-tuning, and (2) Feedback-Guided Image Generation, which involve generating
images from SD’s refined initialization samples aligned with human intent, for faster convergence
to the evaluator’s preferences.
Feedback-aligned representation learn-
ing (Figure 1’s ⃝)
                1 aims to create a rep-
resentation space that implicitly reflects
human preferences, offering continu-
ous reward signals for RL fine-tining.
At each epoch, SD generates a batch
of images, and a human evaluator clas-
sifies the images as “good” or “bad”,
selecting one “best” image from the Figure 2: Result preview. Randomly sampled out-
“good” set. The latents of the human- puts generated by HERO and baselines given the prompt
annotated images are then employed to “photo of one blue rose in a vase” are presented. Suc-
train an embedding map through con- cessful samples are marked with , and unsuccessful sam-
trastive learning (Chen et al., 2020), ples are marked with , which fail to accurately capture
aiming to develop a feedback-aligned the specified count (more than one roses), color (non-blue
representation space. By calculating roses), and context (missing vase). HERO successfully
the cosine similarity to the “best” rep- captures these aspects, outperforming the baselines.
resentation vector in the learned repre-
sentation space, we obtain a continuous evaluation for each latent. Subsequently, we utilize the
computed similarity as continuous reward signals to fine-tune SD via LoRA (Hu et al., 2022).
After fine-tuning the SD for the first iteration, our feedback-guided image generation (Figure 1’s ⃝) 2
samples a new batch of images from a Gaussian mixture centered on the stored “good” and “best”
initial noises from the previous iteration. This process facilitates the generation of images that align


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


with human intentions better than random initial noises, thereby enhancing the efficiency of fine-
tuning. HERO effectively achieves controllable T2I generation with minimal online human feedback
through iterative feedback-guided image generation, feedback-aligned representation learning, and
SD model finetuning.
We conduct extensive experiments on various T2I tasks to compare HERO with existing methods.
The experimental results show that HERO can effectively fine-tune SD to reliably follow given
text prompts with 4ˆ fewer amount of human feedback compared to D3PO (Yang et al., 2024b).
On the other hand, the results show that these tasks are difficult to solve through prompt enhance-
ment (Winata et al., 2024) or fine-tuning approaches, e.g., DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023), that rely
on a few reference images (Gal et al., 2023). Figure 2 presents a preview of the results. Extensive ab-
lation studies verify the effectiveness of our proposed feedback-aligned representation learning and
the technique of generating images from refined noises. Additionally, we show that the model fine-
tuned by HERO demonstrates transferability to previously unseen inference prompts, showcasing
that the desired concepts were acquired by the model.


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Recent research has explored controllable generation with SD for tasks like T2I alignment (Black
et al., 2024; Prabhudesai et al., 2023), conceptual generation (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhong et al., 2023),
correcting generation flaws (Zhang et al., 2023), personalization (Gal et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023)
and removing NSFW content (Gandikota et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024).
Supervised fine-tuning. DreamBooth (DB; Ruiz et al., 2023) and Textual Inversion (Gal et al.,
2023) take images as input and fine-tunes SD via supervised learning to learn the specific sub-
ject present in the input images. However, such methods require reference images, limiting their
applicability to general T2I tasks, such as conceptual generation, e.g., emotional image content
generation (Yang et al., 2024a), or accurately reflecting user-specified counts, semantics, and at-
tributes (Lin et al., 2024). On the other hand, Prabhudesai et al. (2023); Gandikota et al. (2023); Xu
et al. (2024); Clark et al. (2024) use pretrained reward models to calculate differentiable gradients
for SD fine-tuning. However, such pretrained models are not always accessible for tasks of interest,
and moreover, these methods cannot directly utilize human feedback, which is non-differentiable.
RL fine-tuning. Various methods have explored incorporating non-differentiable signals, such as
human feedback, as rewards to fine-tune SD using RL. For example, DDPO (Black et al., 2024)
uses predefined reward functions for tasks like compressibility, DPOK (Fan et al., 2024) leverages
feedback from an AI model trained on a large-scale human dataset, and SEIKO (Uehara et al., 2024)
obtain rewards from custom reward functions trained from extensive feedback datasets. Yet, these
methods require a predefined reward function or reward model, which can be difficult to obtain
for tasks that involve generating personalized content (e.g., reflecting cultural nuances) or abstract
concepts, such as specific colors or compositions (Amadeus et al., 2024; Kannen et al., 2024).
Direct preference optimization (DPO). Diffusion-DPO (Wallace et al., 2023) applies
DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023) to directly utilize preference data to fine-tune SD, eliminating the need
for predefined rewards. Despite encouraging their results, such a method requires a large-scale
pre-collected human preference dataset e.g., Diffusion-DPO uses the Pick-a-Pic dataset with 851K
preference pairs, making it costly to collect and limiting its applicability to various tasks, including
personalization. Instead of leveraging offline datasets, D3PO (Yang et al., 2024b) uses online human
feedback collected on-the-fly during model training for DPO-style finetuning of SD. It demonstrates
success in tasks such as body part deformation correction and content safety improvement while
avoiding the demand for large-scale offline datasets. However, the amount of human feedback re-
quired for D3PO is still high, requiring 5-10k feedback instances per task, which motivates us to
develop a more human-feedback-efficient framework.


3   P RELIMINARIES

Stable Diffusion (SD) operates in two stages. First, an autoencoder compresses images x from
pixel space into latent representations z0 , which can later be decoded back to pixel space. Second, a
diffusion model (DM) is trained to model the distribution of these latent representations conditioned


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


on text c. The forward diffusion process is defined as ppzt |z0 q :“ N pzt ; αt z0 , σt2 Iq, where αt
and σt are pre-defined time dependent constants for t P r0, T s. Both the forward transition kernel
ppzt |zt´1 , cq and the backward conditioned transition kernel ppzt´1 |zt , c, z0 q are Gaussian with
closed-form expressions. The DM is trained to predict the clean sample z0 using a neural network
ẑϕ pzt , t, cq, denoising the noisy sample zt at time t:
                                                   `                                   ˘
                             pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cq :“ p zt´1 |zt , c, z0 :“ ẑϕ pzt , t, cq
by optimizing the following objective:
                                 ”                                ı
                                                                2
                   min Ez0 ,c,ϵ,t ∥ẑϕ pαt z0 ` σt ϵ, t, cq ´ z∥2 ,   ϵ „ N p0, Iq.
                     ϕ

At inference, random noise zT is sampled from a prior and iteratively denoised using samplers
like DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and DDIM (Song et al., 2020a) to obtain a latent code z0 , which is
then decoded into an image. This denoising and decoding process forms a text-to-image generative
model, with random noise zT sampled from a prior and c as the user-provided prompt.

Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization (DDPO) formulates the denoising process of diffu-
sion models as a multi-step Markov decision process. With this formulation, one can make di-
rect Monte Carlo estimates of the reinforcement learning objective. Given a denoising trajectory
tzT , zT ´1 , ..., z0 u, the denoising diffusion RL update is defined as the following:
                                              „ÿT                                  ȷ
                           ∇ϕ LDDRL pϕq “ E       ∇ϕ log pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cqrpz0 , cq ,        (1)
                                            t“0
where ϕ is the diffusion model, and rpx0 , cq is the received reward computed according the output
image x0 and the input prompt c. Based on the above update, DDPO further utilizes the impor-
tance sampling estimator (Kakade & Langford, 2002) and the trust region clipping from Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO; Schulman et al., 2017) to perform multiple steps of optimization while
maintaining the diffusion model ϕ not deviating too far from the previous iteration ϕold . The DDPO
update is defined as the following:
                                 „ÿ T                                                     ȷ
                                       pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cq
              ∇ϕ LDDPO pϕq “ E                           ∇ϕ log pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cqrpz0 , cq .     (2)
                                      p pz |z , cq
                                  t“0 ϕold t´1 t


4     P ROBLEM S ETUP AND THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
Given a user-specified text prompt, our goal is to fine-tune SD to generate images that align with
the prompt by learning from human feedback guidance. In this paper, we focus on challenging T2I
tasks that require spatial reasoning, counting, feasibility understanding, etc., as detailed in Table 1.
To efficiently and effectively utilize online human feedback, we propose a human-feedback-efficient
reinforcement learning for online diffusion model fine-tuning framework, dubbed HERO, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. Feedback-Aligned Representation Learning (Figure 1 ⃝)      1 makes efficient use
of limited human feedback by converting discrete feedback to informative, continuous reward sig-
nals. In addition, Feedback-Guided Image Generation (Figure 1 ⃝)       2 leverages human-preferred
noise latents from previous iterations and encourages SD outputs to align more quickly with human
intention, further improving sample efficiency.

4.1   O NLINE H UMAN F EEDBACK

In the first iteration of HERO, we generate synthetic images X from a batch of random noises ZT
sampled from SD’s prior distribution πHERO pzT q :“ N pzT ; 0, Iq using DDIM (Song et al., 2020a;
Ho et al., 2020). For each zT P Z, the sampling trajectories are denoted as tzT , zT ´1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , z0 u,
and each z0 is decoded to an image for human evaluation. A human evaluator reviews X , selects
the “good” images X ` , and labels the remaining images as X ´ . To obtain a gradation among all
“good” images and all “bad” images by representation learning, we ask the evaluator to identify the
“best” image in X ` , denoted as xbest . The details of our feedback-aligned representation learning
are discussed in the following section and we store the following for future use: the sets of images
X , X ` , X ´ , xbest ; their corresponding SD’s clean latents Z0 , Z0` , Z0´ , zbest
                                                                                 0    from which they are
decoded; and their initial noises (at time T ) ZT , ZT` , ZT´ , zbest
                                                                 T    used in SD’s sampling.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


4.2     F EEDBACK -A LIGNED R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

HERO fine-tunes SD with minimal online human feedback by learning representations via a con-
                                                                                                    `
trastive objective that captures discrepancies between the best SD’s clean latent zbest
                                                                                    T , positive Z0 ,
                ´
and negative Z0 SD’s clean latents (Section 4.2.1). By calculating similarity to the best image’s rep-
resentation, we use these similarity scores as continuous rewards for RL fine-tuning (Section 4.2.2).
This approach bypasses reward model training by directly converting human feedback into learning
signals, avoiding the need for over 100k training samples typically required to train a reward model
for unseen data (Wallace et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2023).

4.2.1    L EARNING R EPRESENTATIONS
To learn a representation space of Z0 aligned with human feedback, we build on the contrastive
learning framework of Chen et al. (2020). We design an embedding network Eθ p¨q to map Z0 into
the representation space, followed by a projection head gθ p¨q for loss calculation. Triplet margin
loss is applied to the projection head’s output:
                                                   " ´                                      ¯
                                                          `             ˘ `          good ˘
    Lpθ; zbest
           0   , Z `
                   0 , Z ´
                         0 q “ E good `  bad ´
                                z0 „Z0 ,z0 „Z0 max  S  gθ   Eθ pz best
                                                                  0    q , gθ E θ pz 0   q
                                                      ´ `                                     * (3)
                                                                  best
                                                                        ˘ `          bad
                                                                                         ˘¯
                                                  ´S gθ Eθ pz0 q , gθ Eθ pz0 q `α, 0 .

Eθ pzbest
      0 q serves as the anchor in the contrastive loss, with Sp¨, ¨q representing the similarity score
(using cosine similarity) and α as the triplet margin set to 0.5. By using the best image in the triplet
loss, we obtain a gradation within positive and negative categories based on the distance to the best
sample. With the learned representation Eθ pz0 q for z0 P Z0 , we can compute continuous rewards
for RL fine-tuning.

4.2.2    S IMILARITY- BASED R EWARDS C OMPUTATION
After training the embedding Eθ p¨q on the current batch of human feedback, reward values are
computed as the cosine similarity in the learned representation space between each Eθ pz0 q for z0 P
Z0 and Eθ pzbest
             0 q:

                                  Eθ pz0 q ¨ Eθ pzbest
                                                  0 q
                  Rpz0 q “        ␣                         (        for each z0 P Z0 ,               (4)
                             max ∥Eθ pz0 q∥2 Eθ pzbest
                                                    0 q 2,δ

where δ “ 1 ˆ 10´8 to avoid zero division. By using the learned representations to convert simple
(discrete) human feedback into continuous reward signals, we avoid the need for a large pretrained
reward model or costly training of such a model.
Besides the “similarity-to-best” design, we also consider a “similarity-to-positives” design, which
uses the similarity between an image and the average of all “good” images in the learned repre-
sentation space. We choose the “similarity-to-best” design for its superior performance. Further
discussion is available in Section 5.3.1.

4.2.3    D IFFUSION M ODEL F INETUNING
DDPO fine-tunes SD by reweighting the likelihood with reward values. For a noise latent zT P ZT
and its sampling trajectory tzT , zT ´1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , z0 u, we incorporate the reward Rpz0 q from Eq. (4) into
the DDPO update rule in Eq. (2) to fine-tune the SD model ϕ. To reduce costly gradient computa-
tions, we adopt LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) for fine-tuning.

4.3     F EEDBACK -G UIDED I MAGE G ENERATION

After the previous iteration of fine-tuning, we propose feedback-guided image generation to facil-
itate the fine-tuning process by generating images that reflect human intentions. We sample the
noise latents for a new batch of images from the Gaussian mixture with means centered around
the human-selected “good” ZT` and “best” zbestT SD noise latents from the previous iteration, with


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


a small variance ε0 . Specifically, we sample the noise latent zT from the distribution πHERO pzT q
defined as:
                  #
                     N pzT ; 0, Iq,                                                  first iteration
    πHERO pzT q “                      2      p1´βq ř                    good 2                      (5)
                     βN pzT ; zbest
                                T   , ε0 Iq `  |Z ` |
                                                       good
                                                      z PZ  ` N pz T ; z T   , ε0 Iq otherwise.
                                               T       T    T


Here, we introduce a hyperparameter best image ratio β to control the proportion of the next batch
sampled from the “best” image noise latent. We find that leveraging zbest
                                                                        T with a larger β can accel-
erate training convergence to evaluator preferences but may reduce the diversity or the converged
accuracy. The above tradeoff can be controlled by the best image ratio β. We generally set β “ 0.5
to balance these effects. Further discussion on the best image ratio parameter is in Section 5.3.2.
We remark that since the variance ε0 is small, after a few iterations, samples from πHERO pzT q still
concentrate near the prior N pzT ; 0, Iq at high probability (see Proposition A.1). Also, zgood
                                                                                           T    and zbest
                                                                                                     T
                                                                    good
may retain semantic information about human alignment from z0 and zbest       0 , as they are connected
through the finite-step discretization of the SD sampler (see Proposition A.2). Thus, these validate
our proposed πHERO pzT q as refined initializations for sampling.
Given a new batch of images X decoded from the clean latents Z0 generated by SD, with corre-
sponding initial noises ZT sampled from πHERO pzT q in Eq. (5), the human evaluator provides their
evaluation as described in Section 4.1. The process is repeated until the feedback budget is exhausted
or the evaluator is satisfied with the generation from πHERO pzT q. After obtaining the fine-tuned SD
model ϕ and πHERO pzT q through HERO, we use SD random noises from refined πHERO pzT q and
generate images using any DM sampler (Song et al., 2020a).

5   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We demonstrate HERO’s performance on a variety of tasks, including hand deformation correction,
content safety improvement, reasoning, and personalization. Many of them cannot be easily solved
by the pretrained model, prompt enhancement, or prior methods. A full list of tasks and their success
conditions are shown in Table 1. We adopt SD v1.5 (Rombach et al., 2022) as the base T2I model,
using DDIM (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a) with 50 diffusion steps (20 for hand deformation
correction for fair comparison to the baselines) as the sampler.
We compare HERO to the following baselines:

• SD-pretrained prompts the pretrained SD model with the
  original task prompt shown in Table 1.
• SD-enhanced prompts the pretrained SD model with
  an enhanced version of the prompt generated by GPT-
  4 (Brown, 2020; Achiam et al., 2023).
• DreamBooth (DB; Ruiz et al., 2023) finetunes diffusion
  models via supervised learning, taking images as input.
  We use the four best images chosen by the human evalua-
  tors as model inputs.                                        Figure 3: Hand anomaly correc-
• D3PO (Yang et al., 2024b) utilize online human feedback tion success rates. Performance of
  for DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023)-based diffusion model methods except D3PO are average of
  finetuning. Due to the high feedback cost for training, this 8 seeds, where each seed is evalu-
  baseline is considered only for the hand anomaly correc- ated on 128 images per epoch. DB,
  tion task directly adopted from their work. Success rates SD-P, and SD-E are DreamBooth,
  are reported as presented in the original paper.             SD-pretrained, and SD-enhanced, re-
                                                               spectively.
5.1 H AND D EFORMATION C ORRECTION

Following the problem setup of D3PO (Yang et al., 2024b), we use the prompt “1 hand” for image
generation and use human discretion to evaluate the normalcy of the generated hand images. Param-
eters such as sampling steps are set to be consistent with D3PO. In each epoch of HERO, feedback
on 128 images is collected, and the human evaluator provides a total of 1152 feedback over 9 epochs.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Performance of HERO in comparison to the baselines is shown in Figure 3. As shown in Figure 3,
the pretrained SD model struggles on this task, with a normalcy rate of 11.9% (SD-pretrained) and
7.5% (SD-enhanced), and DB achieves 28%. D3PO reaches 33.3% normalcy rate at 5K feedback,
while HERO achieves a comparable success rate of 34.2% with only 1152 feedback (over 4ˆ more
feedback efficient). The sampled images are shown in Appendix H in the appendix.

5.2     D EMONSTRATION ON THE VARIETY OF TASKS

                                               Table 1: Task summary.
      Task Name     Prompt                                                          Task Categories
      hand          “1 hand”                                                        correction, feasibility
      blue-rose     “photo of one blue rose in a vase”                              reasoning, counting
      black-cat     “a black cat sitting inside a cardboard box”                    reasoning, feasibility, functionality
      narcissus     “narcissus by a quiet spring and its reflection in the water”   feasibility, homonym distinction
      mountain      “beautiful mountains viewed from a train window”                reasoning, functionality, personalization



We further demonstrate the effectivity of HERO on a variety of tasks involving reasoning, correction,
feasibility and functionality quality enhancement, and personalization. Tasks are listed in Table 1,
and descriptions of task success conditions and task categories are found in Appendix D. For each
task, human evaluators are presented with 64 images per epoch and provide a total of 512 feedback
over 8 epochs. We report the average and standard deviation of the success rates across three seeds,
where success is evaluated on 64 images generated in the final epoch. For methods that require
human feedback (DB and HERO), three different human evaluators were each assigned a different
seed to provide feedback on. Each evaluator was also responsible for evaluating the success rates of
all methods for their assigned seed. Results are shown in Table 2. For all tasks, HERO achieves a
success rate at or above 75%, outperforming all baselines. This trend is consistent for all three hu-
man evaluators, suggesting HERO’s robustness to individual differences among human evaluators.
Sample images generated by SD-pretrained, DB, and HERO are shown in Figure 4 and more results
can be found in Appendix H. While the baselines often struggle in attribute reasoning (e.g., color,
count), spatial reasoning (e.g., inside), and feasibility (e.g., reflection consistent with the subject),
HERO models consistently capture these aspects correctly.
In Appendix B, we comprehensively evaluate HERO using various metrics beyond the success rate,
including aesthetic quality, image diversity, and text-to-image alignment.

Table 2: Task performance. Mean and standard deviation of success rates of different methods
on the four tasks. HERO achieves a success rate at or above 75% and outperforms all baselines,
demonstrating effectiveness on a variety of tasks.
                  Method            blue-rose           black-cat          narcissus             mountain
                  SD-Pretrained     0.354 (0.020)       0.422 (0.092)      0.406 (0.077)       0.412 (0.063)
                  SD-Enhanced       0.479 (0.030)       0.365 (0.134)      0.276 (0.041)       0.938 (0.022)
                  DB                0.479 (0.085)       0.453 (0.142)      0.854 (0.092)       0.922 (0.059)
                  HERO (ours)       0.807 (0.115)       0.750 (0.130)      0.912 (0.007)       0.995 (0.007)

5.3     A BLATIONS

This section presents ablation studies illustrating the roles of each component of HERO. In regards to
Feedback-Aligned Representation Learning, we investigate the effects of (1) computation of rewards
using learnable feedback-aligned representations and (2) “similarity-to-best” design for reward com-
putation. For Feedback-Guided Image Generation, the effect of best image ratio is explored.

5.3.1     E FFECT OF F EEDBACK -A LIGNED R EPRESENTATION L EARNING AND R EWARD D ESIGN
The effects of using learned feedback-aligned representations and our reward design are investi-
gated through three ablation experiments. Firstly, we demonstrate the benefit of converting discrete
human feedback into continuous reward signal by investigating HERO-binary, a variant of HERO
using binary rewards for training. Secondly, we explore the effect of learned representations by re-
placing the learned representations in HERO with SD image latents Z0` (HERO-noEmbed). Finally,


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: Qualitative results. The randomly generated samples for the four tasks are shown, with
denoting successful samples and for failures. In the blue-rose task, the pretrained SD model
often omits the vase, while DB generates roses with incorrect color or count. In narcissus, SD
frequently fails to capture the subject or produces inconsistent reflections. For black-cat, base-
line models exhibit more issues (e.g., the cat’s body penetrating the box). In mountain, baseline
images often miss the window frame or depict impossible views. Our fine-tuned models mitigate
these issues and show significantly higher success rates across all tasks.


we justify our choice of the ”similarity-to-best” reward design by comparing it with an alternative
using similarity to the average of all Z0` and z0best (HERO-positives). We test each setting on the
narcissus task with 512 training feedback and 200 images generated by the fine-tuned model for
success rate evaluation. HERO outperforms all other settings, with results summarized in Table 3.
Directly using human labels as binary rewards. An intu-
itive way to extract a reward signal from binary human feed- Table 3: Representation learning
back is to directly convert the feedback into a binary reward. and reward design ablation.
To investigate the effect of similarity-based conversion of hu-
man feedback to continuous rewards, we test HERO-binary, a         Method           Success rate
variant where the reward in HERO is replaced with a binary         SD-Pretrained       0.40
reward. Images labeled as “good” or “best” receive a reward        HERO-binary         0.78
                                                                   HERO-noEmbed        0.76
of 1.0, and all other images receive a reward of 0.0. HERO-        HERO-positives      0.82
binary only reaches 78% success rate while HERO reaches            HERO                0.91
91%. This may be because the continuous rewards contain
additional information beneficial for DDPO training: While the binary reward only labels images as
“good” or “bad”, the continuous reward additionally captures a gradation of human ratings within
the “good” and “bad” categories, supplying additional information such as which “good” images are
nearly “best”, and which are barely “good”.
Computing rewards from pretrained image representations. Experiments with binary rewards
showed the benefit of using continuous rewards in the learned representation space. To further
understand HERO’s use of feedback-aligned learned representations, we replace the learned repre-


                                                8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 5: Effect of best image ratio β evaluated on the black-cat task. Three iterations with
different seeds are performed for each setting, and the mean and standard deviation of the success
rate are reported separately for clearer visualization. “random” refers to the case where random
noise latents are used for sampling (good and best noises latents are not used).


sentations Eθ pZ0 q with SD’s clean latents Z0 , obtained by denoising SD’s initial noises ZT , and call
this setup HERO-noEmbed. Without embedding map training, Z0` no longer cluster around z0best ,
making a “similarity-to-best” reward design impractical. Thus, we only consider the “similarity-to-
positives” reward design for this ablation. While HERO-positives achieves 82% success, HERO-
noEmbed reaches 76%, highlighting the advantage of learned representations. Training the embed-
ding map also enables the “similarity-to-best” reward design, which yields superior performance.
Computing reward as similarity to average of all “good” representations. The reward in HERO
is computed as the similarity to z0best . However, another natural choice is to compute similarity to
the average of all Z0` . Comparing this “similarity-to-positives” design to the “similarity-to-best”
design employed in HERO, we find that the “similarity-to-best” design achieves 91% success, while
the “similarity-to-positives” design reaches 82%. We adopt the “similarity-to-best” design, which
empirically gives superior performance.

5.3.2    E FFECT OF B EST I MAGE R ATIO IN F EEDBACK -G UIDED I MAGE G ENERATION

To investigate the effect of the best image ratio, we compare the performance of the black-cat
task for β “ 0.0, 0.5, 1.0. Further, we compare to the case where the images are sampled from
random SD noise latents to demonstrate the benefit of using ZT` and zTbest as initial noises for image
generation. Results are shown in Figure 5. Sampling all images from the zTbest (β “ 1.0) reaches an
average of 70.8% success at the end of the training. However, as the high standard deviation in the
initial stage of training suggests, over-exploiting a single “best” noise latent can cause instability in
training, potentially causing the model to settle on a suboptimal output. Sampling uniformly from
ZT` and zTbest (β “ 0.0) results in a similar success rate as β “ 1.0, but is less likely to converge to a
suboptimal point. We empirically find that, for our tasks, β “ 0.5 results in the highest success rate
while avoiding the risks of fully relying on the single “best” noise latent, thus using β “ 0.5 for our
experiments. When images are sampled from random SD noise latents, the task success rate does
not grow significantly slower in the given amount of feedback, demonstrating the benefit of using
ZT` and zTbest for efficient fine-tuning.


5.4     T RANSFERABILITY

While HERO is trained to optimize for a single input prompt, we observe that some personal pref-
erences and general concepts learned from one prompt can generalize to other related prompts in
some cases.
Transfer of personal preference. In the mountain task, we observe the transfer of learned in-
dividual preferences. Two human evaluators trained two separate models for the mountain task,
where one evaluator preferred green scenery while the other preferred snowy scenery. Each eval-
uator’s trained model as well as the corresponding ZT` and zTbest are used to generate images for a
related task “hiker watching beautiful mountains from the top of a hill”. As shown in Figure 6, the
preference for green or snowy scenery transfers to this new task.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Transfer of content safety. To further investigate whether a general concept, such as content safety,
learned through one task can transfer to another, we prompt the SD model using the prompt “sexy”
and train it to reduce NSFW content in the generated images. The fine-tuned model (as well as
the saved ZT` and zTbest ) are used to generate images from a set of 14 potentially-unsafe prompts
used in D3PO’s content safety task. Utilizing the finetuned model and the saved SD noise latents
significantly improves the content safety rate from 57.5% of the pretrained SD model to 87.0%,
demonstrating HERO-finetuned model’s potential to transfer a general concept learned from one
prompt to a set of related, unseen prompts. Visual results are shown in Figure 7, and the full list of
prompts with more results are shown in Appendix H in the appendix.


Figure 6: Demonstration of personal preference transferability. Models trained with two dis-
tinct personal preferences (green and snowy) generate images that inherit these preferences when
prompted with a similar task (“hiker watching beautiful mountains from the top of a hill”).


Figure 7: Qualitative results for the NSFW content hidden task showcasing transferability
of HERO. The images were randomly generated using the potentially unsafe prompt set provided
by Yang et al. (2024b). The model is the HERO-finetuned version, trained with the “sexy” prompt
to reduce nudity. The safety rate improves from 57.5% (pretrained SD) to 87.0% (HERO), showing
HERO’s ability to transfer the concept of safety to unseen, potentially unsafe prompts.


6   C ONCLUSION
This work presents HERO, a framework that uses online human feedback to fine-tune SD with
RLHF. By learning a representation aligned with feedback, we capture human preferences and turn
simple feedback into a continuous reward that enhances DDPO fine-tuning. Starting with human-
preferred image noise speeds up the alignment with preferences. Together, these elements make
HERO much more efficient, needing 4 times less feedback than the baseline. It also shows potential
for transferring personal preferences and concepts to similar tasks.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank the reviewers for their constructive feedback, which greatly helped improve this
work. We are also deeply grateful to our colleague, Takida Yuhta, for revising the manuscript and
providing valuable comments. Their contributions have been instrumental in enhancing the quality
of this paper. Shao-Hua Sun was supported by the Yushan Fellow Program by the Ministry of
Education, Taiwan.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
  man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
  report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Marcellus Amadeus, William Alberto Cruz Castañeda, André Felipe Zanella, and Felipe Ro-
 drigues Perche Mahlow. From pampas to pixels: Fine-tuning diffusion models for gaz’ucho
 heritage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05520, 2024.
Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion
  models with reinforcement learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2024.
Tom B Brown. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2020.
Kevin Clark, Paul Vicol, Kevin Swersky, and David J. Fleet. Directly fine-tuning diffusion models
  on differentiable rewards. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.
Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok: reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Rohit Gandikota, Joanna Materzynska, Jaden Fiotto-Kaufman, and David Bau. Erasing concepts
  from diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2023.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Yaozhong Hu. Semi-implicit euler-maruyama scheme for stiff stochastic equations. In Stochastic
  Analysis and Related Topics V: The Silivri Workshop, 1994, pp. 183–202. Springer, 1996.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning.
  In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267–274,
  2002.
Nithish Kannen, Arif Ahmad, Marco Andreetto, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Utsav Prabhu,
  Adji Bousso Dieng, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Shachi Dave. Beyond aesthetics: Cultural com-
  petence in text-to-image models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06863, 2024.
Dongjun Kim, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Wei-Hsiang Liao, Naoki Murata, Yuhta Takida, Toshimitsu Uesaka,
  Yutong He, Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Ermon. Consistency trajectory models: Learning proba-
  bility flow ode trajectory of diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024a.
Dongjun Kim, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Wei-Hsiang Liao, Yuhta Takida, Naoki Murata, Toshimitsu Uesaka,
  Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Ermon. Pagoda: Progressive growing of a one-step generator from a
  low-resolution diffusion teacher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14822, 2024b.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy. Pick-
  a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36:36652–36663, 2023.
Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Sheng-Yu Wang, Eli Shechtman, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan
  Zhu. Ablating concepts in text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 22691–22702, 2023.
Chieh-Hsin Lai, Yuhta Takida, Naoki Murata, Toshimitsu Uesaka, Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Er-
  mon. Fp-diffusion: Improving score-based diffusion models by enforcing the underlying score
  fokker-planck equation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18365–18398.
  PMLR, 2023a.
Chieh-Hsin Lai, Yuhta Takida, Toshimitsu Uesaka, Naoki Murata, Yuki Mitsufuji, and Stefano Er-
  mon. On the equivalence of consistency-type models: Consistency models, consistent diffusion
  models, and fokker-planck regularization. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic
  Inference and Generative Modeling, 2023b.
Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, 2022.
Wang Lin, Jingyuan Chen, Jiaxin Shi, Yichen Zhu, Chen Liang, Junzhong Miao, Tao Jin, Zhou Zhao,
 Fei Wu, Shuicheng Yan, et al. Non-confusing generation of customized concepts in diffusion
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06914, 2024.
Shilin Lu, Zilan Wang, Leyang Li, Yanzhu Liu, and Adams Wai-Kin Kong. Mace: Mass concept
  erasure in diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6430–6440, 2024.
Mihir Prabhudesai, Anirudh Goyal, Deepak Pathak, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Aligning text-to-
 image diffusion models with reward backpropagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03739, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, A. Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
  Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Thirty-
  seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
  ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In Interna-
   tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Masatoshi Uehara, Yulai Zhao, Kevin Black, Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Gabriele Scalia, Nathaniel Lee
 Diamant, Alex M Tseng, Sergey Levine, and Tommaso Biancalani. Feedback efficient online
 fine-tuning of diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2024.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Dimitri von Rütte, Elisabetta Fedele, Jonathan Thomm, and Lukas Wolf. Fabric: Personalizing
  diffusion models with iterative feedback, 2023.
Bram Wallace, Meihua Dang, Rafael Rafailov, Linqi Zhou, Aaron Lou, Senthil Purushwalkam,
  Stefano Ermon, Caiming Xiong, Shafiq Joty, and Nikhil Naik. Diffusion model alignment using
  direct preference optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
Genta Indra Winata, Hanyang Zhao, Anirban Das, Wenpin Tang, David D Yao, Shi-Xiong Zhang,
  and Sambit Sahu. Preference tuning with human feedback on language, speech, and vision tasks:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11564, 2024.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao
   Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jingyuan Yang, Jiawei Feng, and Hui Huang. Emogen: Emotional image content generation with
   text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, 2024a.
Kai Yang, Jian Tao, Jiafei Lyu, Chunjiang Ge, Jiaxin Chen, Weihan Shen, Xiaolong Zhu, and Xiu Li.
  Using human feedback to fine-tune diffusion models without any reward model. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8941–8951, 2024b.
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image
  diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 3836–3847, 2023.
Shanshan Zhong, Zhongzhan Huang, Wushao Wen, Jinghui Qin, and Liang Lin. Sur-adapter: En-
  hancing text-to-image pre-trained diffusion models with large language models. In The 31st ACM
  International Conference on Multimedia, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A PPENDIX
Table of Contents
      A Theoretical Explanations                                                          14
        A.1 Concentration of Human-Selected Noises in SD’s Prior Distribution . . . . . . 14
        A.2 Information Link Between Human-Selected Noises and SD’s Latents in Generation 16

      B   Additional Evaluation Metrics                                                          17
          B.1 Measurement in Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
          B.2 Measurements in Training Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18

      C Additional Experiments                                                                   19
        C.1 RL Fine-tuning with Existing Reward Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
        C.2 Imporve Time Efficiency for Online Finetuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
        C.3 DreamBooth Prompting Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20

      D Details of Tasks and Task Categories                                                     20

      E   HERO Implementation                                                                    21
          E.1 HERO Detailed Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
          E.2 HERO Training Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22

      F   Baseline Implementations                                                               22
          F.1 DreamBooth Training Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
          F.2 Prompt Enhancement with a Large VLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24

      G Additional Elaboration of HERO’s Mechanisms                                              24

      H Additional Results                                                                       25



A     T HEORETICAL E XPLANATIONS
In this section, we provide theoretical justifications for the validity of our proposed distribution
πHERO in Eq. (5) from two perspectives, refining the initial distribution for human-feedback-aligned
generation.

A.1   C ONCENTRATION OF H UMAN -S ELECTED N OISES IN SD’ S P RIOR D ISTRIBUTION

It is known that the initial distribution of SD sampling is typically the standard normal distribution
                                                                                            ?
N p0, ID q, which yields a random vector that concentrates around the sphere of radius D with
high probability. In the following proposition, we show that a random vector?    drawn from our pro-
posed distribution πHERO also concentrates around the sphere of radius D with high probability,
provided that the variance ε0 ą 0 of the Gaussian mixture is sufficiently small. This ensures that
the sampling from the refined initial noise provided by πHERO remains consistent with the sampling
from the original prior distribution of the SD model.
Proposition A.1 (Concentration of πHERO ). Let π be a Gaussian mixture with each component as
N pµi , ε20 ID q, where each mean µi „ N p0, ID q, and ε0 ą 0 is a small constant. Let y „ π be
a random vector drawn from π. Then, for any δ ą 0, we have the following concentration if ε0 is
sufficiently small:
                             ´?                    ?          ¯
                           P    Dp1 ´ ε0 q ď }y} ď Dp1 ` ε0 q ě 1 ´ δ.
                                                        ?                     ?
Namely, y is concentrated around the shell of radius        D and thickness       Dε0 .


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                                                                 ?
Proof. We will show that the overall probability mass is concentrated
                                                           ?          in a shell around radius       D,
which means that for a sample y from the GMM π, }y} « D with high probability.
From the properties of high-dimensional
                                      ?    Gaussians (Vershynin, 2018), we know that the norm of
each mean µi concentrates around D. Specifically, for any small δ ą 0, we have the following
concentration bound:
                   ´?                                                     ˆ 2 ˙
                                              ?            ¯                   δ D
                 P    Dp1 ´ δq ď }µi } ď Dp1 ` δq ě 1 ´ 2 exp ´                                  (6)
                                                                                 8
                                                                                        ?
                 ? means µ1 , . . . , µn are likely to lie within a thin shell of radius D and width
This means that the
proportional to δ D.
Now consider the Gaussian component corresponding to µi , which is distributed as N pµi , ε20 ID q.
The probability density function for this Gaussian at a point y P RD is:
                                                           }y ´ µi }2
                                                       ˆ              ˙
                                           1
                             pi pyq “              exp ´
                                       p2πε20 qD{2             2ε20
We need to analyze the concentration of this Gaussian around µi . The squared distance }y ´ µi }2
follows a chi-squared distribution with D degrees of freedom, scaled by ε20 . Specifically, for any
δ ą 0, using a concentration inequality (e.g., Chernoff’s bound), we can show that:
                                                                  ˆ 2 ˙
                         `ˇ                    ˇ        ˘             δ D
                       P ˇ}y ´ µi }2 ´ Dε20 ˇ ě δDε20 ď 2 exp ´
                                                                       8
                                                       ?
This implies that }y ´ µi } is concentrated around ε0 D with high probability. For small ε0 , the
                        ? will be tightly concentrated around µi , and the typical distance from µi
samples from the Gaussian
will be approximately ε0 D.
Next, we want to understand the behavior of }y}, where y is a sample from the GMM π. Since y is
a sample from one of the Gaussian components, say N pµi , ε20 ID q, we have:
                               y “ µi ` z,    where z „ N p0, ε20 ID q.
We analyze the expression
                            }y}2 “ }µi ` z}2 “ }µi }2 ` 2xµi , zy ` }z}2
term by term.
For }µi }2 term, we know from Ineq. (6) that }µi }2 concentrates around D, meaning:
                                      }µi }2 “ Dp1 ` Opδqq.
For the cross term xµi , zy term, since z „ N p0, ε20 ID q and µi „ N p0, ID q, we have that xµi , zy
is a sum of independent normal random variables with mean 0 and variance ε20 . Hence, xµi , zy „
N p0, ε20 Dq, and we can apply a concentration inequality (e.g., Hoeffding’s inequality) to show that:
                                                                t2
                                                          ˆ         ˙
                               P p|xµi , zy| ě tq ď 2 exp ´ 2         .
                                                              2ε0 D
Therefore, with high probability, the cross term is small:
                                                       ?
                                        xµi , zy “ Opε0 Dq.
For }z}2 term, it is the squared norm of a Gaussian random vector with covariance ε20 ID , and hence
follows a chi-squared distribution with D degrees of freedom, scaled by ε20 . We know that:
                               Er}z}2 s “ Dε20 ,    Varr}z}2 s “ 2Dε40
Using concentration inequalities for chi-squared distributions, we get:
                                                                ˆ 2 ˙
                           `ˇ 2            ˇ
                                          2ˇ       2
                                                     ˘             δ D
                         P }z} ´ Dε0 ě δDε0 ď 2 exp ´
                             ˇ
                                                                     8
Thus, }z}2 is concentrated around Dε20 with high probability.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Combining these terms:
                                   }y}2 “ }µi }2 ` 2xµi , zy ` }z}2
we have:
                                                      ?
                     }y}2 “ Dp1 ` Opδqq ` Opε0 Dq ` Dε20 p1 ` Opδqq
                                                `            ˘      ?
                           “ Dp1 ` ε20 q ` O Dp1 ` ε20 qδ ` Opε0 Dq.
                                                                   ?
Therefore, whenever ε0 is sufficiently small, this shows that }y} « D with high probability.



A.2    I NFORMATION L INK B ETWEEN H UMAN -S ELECTED N OISES AND SD’ S L ATENTS IN
       G ENERATION

We consider the general form of the backward SDE for diffusion model sampling (Song et al.,
2020b; Lai et al., 2023a;b):
                       `                             ˘
                dzt “ f ptqzt ´ g 2 ptq∇ log pt pzt q dt ` gptqdw̄t , zT „ πHERO ,     (7)
where f : R Ñ R is the drift scaling term, g : R Ñ Rě0 is the diffusion term determined by the
forward diffusion process, and w̄t represents the time-reversed Wiener process.
In the following proposition, we demonstrate that if ∆t ff 0, then the initial condition zT „ πHERO
and the solution z0 obtained from a finite-step numerical solver will possess mutual information.
This suggests that the information of either z0 or zT is preserved during SDE solving with common
forward designs, such as the variance-preserving SDE (Ho  ` et al., 2020;
                                                                       ˘    Song?et al., `2020b) in SD.˘
Typical
´        choices include
                   ¯     the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck   process   f ptq, gptq  “ p´1,   2q, or   f ptq, gptq   “
    1
            a
  ´ 2 βptq, βptq , where βptq :“ βmin ` tpβmax ´ βmin q, with βmin “ 0.1 and βmax “ 20.

We consider discretized time using a uniform partition (Kim et al., 2024a; Hu, 1996; Kim et al.,
2024b) 0 “ tn ă tn´1 ă . . . ă t0 “ T with ∆t “ tk`1 ´ tk for our analysis. More general results
can be obtained via a similar argument as our proof.
Proposition A.2 (Information Link Between zT and Generated z0 ). Let zT „ πHERO . The diffusion
model sampling via Euler-Maruyama discretization of solving Eq. (7) with uniform stepsize ∆t will
lead to the following form:
                     řn´1              n´1
                                       ÿ                              řn´1
           z0 “ zT e k“0 f ptk q∆t ´         g 2 ptk q∇ log ptk pyk q∆te j“k`1 f ptj q∆t ` Rp∆tq,
                                       k“0

where Rp∆tq is the residual term concerning the accumulated stochastic component gptn q∆w̄n and
stepsize ∆t. Therefore, whenever ∆t ff 0, z0 and zT are dependent.

Proof. For the simplicity of notations, we write yn :“ ztn (i.e., y0 “ zT ). Applying the Euler-
Maruyama scheme, we obtain:
                              `                                ˘
               yn`1 “ yn ` f ptn qyn ´ g 2 ptn q∇ log ptn pyn q ∆t ` gptn q∆w̄n ,
where y0 „ πHERO , and ∆w̄n „ N p0, ∆tIq represents the increment of the Wiener process.
We first ignore the stochastic term gptn q∆w̄n for simplicity, rewriting the equation as:
                                       `                                  ˘
                        yn`1 “ yn ` f ptn qyn ´ g 2 ptn q∇ log ptn pyn q ∆t.

This can be rearranged into:
                        yn`1 “ yn p1 ` f ptn q∆tq ´ g 2 ptn q∇ log ptn pyn q∆t.
To derive a recursive formula for yn , we substitute the above equation back into itself. Starting from
y0 :
                          y1 “ y0 p1 ` f pt0 q∆tq ´ g 2 pt0 q∇ log pt0 py0 q∆t,
                          y2 “ y1 p1 ` f pt1 q∆tq ´ g 2 pt1 q∇ log pt1 py1 q∆t.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


By continuing this process, we express yn recursively as:
                   yn “ yn´1 p1 ` f ptn´1 q∆tq ´ g 2 ptn´1 q∇ log ptn´1 pyn´1 q∆t.
Iterating this process (mathematical induction), we derive a general expression for yn :
                    n´1
                    ź                     n´1
                                          ÿ                              n´1
                                                                         ź
           yn “ y0      p1 ` f ptk q∆tq ´     g 2 ptk q∇ log ptk pyk q∆t     p1 ` f ptj q∆tq.
                   k“0                    k“0                           j“k`1
We can utilize the exponential Taylor expansion
                               ef ptq∆t “ p1 ` f ptq∆tq ` Opp∆tq2 q.
to reduce the above expression to:
                   řn´1             n´1
                                    ÿ                              řn´1
         yn “ y0 e k“0 f ptk q∆t ´      g 2 ptk q∇ log ptk pyk q∆te j“k`1 f ptj q∆t ` Opp∆tq2 q
                                    k“0

When considering the stochastic component gptn q∆w̄n , the overall solution can be expressed as:
          řn´1             n´1
                           ÿ                              řn´1
 yn “ y0 e k“0 f ptk q∆t ´     g 2 ptk q∇ log ptk pyk q∆te j“k`1 f ptj q∆t ` Op∆wn q ` Opp∆tq2 q.
                             k“0

Therefore, the solution presented indicates that the state variable retains the memory of its initial
condition for a finite time, influenced by both deterministic drift and stochastic components if ∆t ff
0.

B     A DDITIONAL E VALUATION M ETRICS
In this section, we present evaluation metrics beyond task success rates and supplement the results
of these measurements during inference time in Appendix B.1, as well as during training in Ap-
pendix B.2.

B.1   M EASUREMENT IN I NFERENCE

Results of samples from the final epoch for aesthetic quality, image diversity, and text-to-image
alignment are presented in Figure 8. The descriptions of each measurement are detailed as follows.
Aesthetic Quality. We report ImageReward (Xu et al., 2024) scores, which demonstrate stronger
perceptual alignment with human judgment compared to traditional metrics. Higher scores reflect
better aesthetic quality. Although human evaluators prioritized task success based on the criteria in
Appendix D over aesthetic quality and were not instructed to consider aesthetics, HERO demon-
strates comparable aesthetic performance to the baselines, surpassing them in 3 out of 5 tasks.
Image Diversity. Following Section 4.3.3 of von Rütte et al. (2023), we compute “In-Batch Di-
versity”, defined as the complement of the average similarity of CLIP image embeddings (Radford
et al., 2021) between pairs of images in a generated batch. Specifically, for a batch of N generated
images I1 , I2 , . . . , IN , and the cosine similarity CLIPSimpIi , Ij q of their embeddings in the CLIP
feature space, the in-batch diversity is calculated as:
                                                2         ÿ
                              Dbatch “ 1 ´                     CLIPSimpIi , Ij q,
                                            N pN ´ 1q 1ďiăjďN
where 1 ´ CLIPSimpIi , Ij q represents the dissimilarity between two images. A higher Dbatch sig-
nifies greater diversity. Although HERO shows a slight reduction in diversity compared to the pre-
finetuned Stable Diffusion model, it generally outperforms the DreamBooth-finetuned model, except
in the black-cat example and mountain example. HERO remains comparable to Stable Diffusion
with enhanced prompts in terms of diversity.
Text-to-Image Alignment CLIP Score (Radford et al., 2021) evaluates the similarity between text
and image embeddings, while BLIP Score (Li et al., 2022) assesses the probability of text-to-image
matching. Together, these metrics provide a quantitative measure of how well the generated images
align with the given prompts. Higher scores on both metrics indicate better alignment between the
generated images and the prompts. HERO’s finetuned model generally produces images that are
more aligned with the given prompts.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: Additional evaluation results. For all metrics, a higher value indicates better performance.
Top Left. Aesthetic quality measured with ImageReward (Xu et al., 2024). Top Right. In-Batch
Diversity computation following Radford et al. (2021). Bottom. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
BLIP (Li et al., 2022) Text-to-image alignment scores.


B.2   M EASUREMENTS IN T RAINING P ROGRESS

We also provide supplementary results showing different metrics versus training epochs to observe
the influence of the number of feedback samples. As shown in Figure 9, we present results from
samples generated during the first 8 epochs, where we observe the following trends:

       • Aesthetic Quality (measured with ImageReward): Aesthetic quality is generally main-
         tained throughout the fine-tuning process, demonstrating that HERO does not compromise
         aesthetic appeal even with increased human feedback.
       • Image Diversity (measured with In-Batch Diversity Score): As HERO fine-tuning pro-
         gresses, the generated outputs may become more aligned with human intentions, potentially
         reducing diversity. This aligns with the common phenomenon where stronger guidance of-
         ten leads to lower diversity. Note that HERO still generally outperforms the DreamBooth-
         finetuned model in terms of the diversity score.
       • T2I Alignment (measured with CLIP and BLIP Scores): The alignment between prompts
         and generated images consistently improves with HERO fine-tuning. This provides implicit
         evidence that HERO fine-tuning effectively converges toward human intention, as reflected
         in the prompts.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


         (a) Aesthetic Quality (ImageReward)                   (b) Diversity (In-batch Diversity Score)


           (c) T2I Alignment (CLIP Score)                         (d) T2I Alignment (BLIP Score)

Figure 9: Addtional Evaluation Measurements across Training Progress. We present additional
evaluation results by assessing samples generated at each training epoch across all tasks, measuring
aesthetic quality (a), diversity (b), and T2I alignment quality (c and d).


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

C.1   RL F INE - TUNING WITH E XISTING R EWARD M ODELS

To investigate the benefits of leveraging online human feedback, we compare our HERO to
DDPO (Black et al., 2024) with PickScore-v1 (Kirstain et al., 2023) as the reward model on rea-
soning and personalization tasks in this paper. PickScore-v1 (Kirstain et al., 2023) is pretrained on
584K preference pairs and aims to evaluate the general human preference for t2I generation. For
the DDPO baseline, we use the same training setting as our HERO and increase the training epochs
from 8 to 50. The success rate is calculated using 200 evaluation images.
As shown in Table 4, using DDPO with a large-scale pretrained model as the reward model can
not address these tasks easily. Moreover, in the mountain task, the success rate is even worse
than the pretrained SD model. A possible reason is that the target of this task (viewed from a train
window) contradicts the general human preference, where a landscape with no window is usually
preferred. The above results verify that existing large-scale datasets for general t2I alignment may
not be suitable for specific reasoning and personalization tasks. Although one could collect large-
scale datasets for every task of interest, our online fine-tuning method provides an efficient solution
without such extensive labor.

               Table 4: Success rates of RL fine-tuning with existing reward models

                Method                blue-rose   black-cat          narcissus     mountain
                SD-Pretrained           0.354          0.422            0.406         0.412
                DDPO + PickScore-v1     0.710          0.555            0.615         0.375
                HERO (ours)             0.807          0.750            0.912         0.995


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   I MPORVE T IME E FFICIENCY FOR O NLINE F INETUNING

Inspired by Clark et al. (2024), we only consider the last K ` 1 (ď T ) steps of the denoising
trajectories during loss computation in Equation (2) to accelerate training and reduce the workload
for human evaluators:
                                       K „                                                    ȷ
                                      ÿ     pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cq
           ∇ϕ LDDPO-K pϕq “ EzT „ZT                             ∇ϕ log pϕ pzt´1 |zt , cqRpz0 q . (8)
                                      t“0
                                           pϕold pzt´1 |zt , cq

We evaluate the relationships between K and the training time for 1 epoch on the hand task and
show the results in Table 5. Empirically, we found that using K “ 5 performs reasonably well while
boosting the training time significantly by 4 times.
                           Table 5: The impact of update steps K on training time

                            K                    1         2         5         10          20
                            Training time(s)   30.34      60.24   149.58     298.55     595.49


C.3   D REAM B OOTH P ROMPTING E XPERIMENTS

To investigate the effect of training prompt, class prompt, and generation prompt selection on the
performance of our tasks, we test various prompt combinations with the narcissus task. For the
training prompt, we consider specific (“[V] narcissus”) and general (“[V] flower”) prompts, where
“[V]” is a unique token. We test three class prompts: the most general “flower”, one that specifies
the type of subject (“narcissus flower”), and one that uses a general term describing the subject but
specifies the context (“flower by a quiet spring and its reflection in the water”). Similarly, we test
three generation prompts with different levels of specificity. Results are shown in Table 6. While
most settings achieve over 90% success rate, we select setting 7 with high visual quality and closest
alignment with the prompt selection used in the original paper’s experiments.

    Table 6: DreamBooth success rates for different prompt combinations on narcissus task

          Training Prompt              Class Prompt                      Generation Prompt            Success Rate
                                                                  “[V] narcissus by a quiet spring
          “[V] narcissus”                 “flower”                                                        0.43
      1                                                            and its reflection in the water”
          “[V] narcissus”                 “flower”                         “[V] narcissus”                0.94
      2
          “[V] narcissus”            “narcissus flower”                    “[V] narcissus”                0.92
      3
                                                                  “[V] narcissus by a quiet spring
          “[V] narcissus”            “narcissus flower”                                                   0.84
      4                                                            and its reflection in the water”
                                “flower by a quiet spring and
          “[V] narcissus”                                                  “[V] narcissus”                0.96
      5                          its reflection in the water”
                                “flower by a quiet spring and     “[V] narcissus by a quiet spring
          “[V] narcissus”                                                                                 0.91
      6                          its reflection in the water”      and its reflection in the water”
            “[V] flower”                  “flower”                          “[V] flower”                  0.95
      7
          “[V] narcissus”               “narcissus”                        “[V] narcissus”                0.92
      8


D     D ETAILS OF TASKS AND TASK C ATEGORIES
Here, we provide the detailed success conditions the human evaluators were provided with and
explanations of each task category.
Detailed Task Success Conditions

• hand: A hand has exactly five fingers with exactly one thumb, and the pose is physically feasible.


                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


• blue-rose: The generated subject is a rose and has the correct color (blue), count (one), and
  context (inside a vase).
• black-cat: A single cat with the correct color (black) and action (sitting inside a box) is gen-
  erated. The cat’s pose is feasible, with no parts of the body penetrating the box. The cardboard is
  shaped like a functional box.
• narcissus: The image correctly captures the narcissus flower, rather than the mythological
  figure, as the subject. Reflection in the water contains, and only contains, subjects present in the
  scene, and the appearance of reflections is consistent with the subject(s).
• mountain: View of the mountains is from a train window. The body of the train the mountain
  is seen from is not in the view. If other trains or rails are in view, they are not oriented in a way
  that may cause collision. Any rails in the view are functional (do not make 90-degree turns, for
  instance).

Description of Task Categories

• Correction: Removing distortions or defects in the generated image. For example, generating
  non-distorted human limbs.
• Reasoning: Capturing object attributes (e.g., color or texture), spatial relationships (e.g., on top
  of, next to), and non-spatial relationships (e.g., looking at, wearing).
• Counting: Generating the correct number of specified objects.
• Feasibility: Whether the characteristics of generated images are attainable in the real world. For
  example, the pose of articulated objects is physically possible, or reflections are consistent with
  the subject.
• Functionality: For objects with certain functionalities (such as boxes or rails), the object is shaped
  in a way that makes the object usable for this function.
• Homonym Distinction: Understanding the desired subject among input prompts containing
  homonyms.
• Personalization: Aligning to personal preferences, such as preference for certain colors, styles, or
  compositions.

E     HERO I MPLEMENTATION
E.1   HERO D ETAILED A LGORITHM

In this section, we summarize the algorithm of HERO as presented in Algorithm 1. In the first
iteration, the human evaluator selects ”good” and ”best” images from the batch generated by the
pretrained SD model. This method assumes the model can generate prompt-matching images with
non-zero probability and focuses on increasing the ratio of successful images rather than producing
previously unattainable ones.

Algorithm 1 HERO’s Training
Require: pretrained SD weights ϕ, best image ratio β, feedback budget Nfb
Initialize: learnable weights θ, # of feedback nfb “ 0, latent distribution πHERO “ N pzT ; 0, Iq
 1: while nfb ă Nfb do
 2:      Sample nbatch noise latents zT from πHERO                Ź Feedback-Guided Image Generation
 3:      Perform denoising process for each zT to obtain trajectory tzT , zT ´1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , z0 u.
 4:      Decode Z0 with SD decoder for images X .
 5:      Query human feedback on X , and save corresponding ZT` , ZT´ , zbest
                                                                            T .
 6:      Update θ of Eθ and gθ by minimizing Eq. (3). Ź Feedback-Aligned Representation Learning
 7:      Compute reward Rpz0 q according to Eq. (4).
 8:      Update ϕ via DDPO by minimizing Eq. (8).
 9:      Update latents distribution πHERO using Eq. (5).
10:      nfb `“ nbatch .
11: end while



                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E.2   HERO T RAINING PARAMETERS

HERO consists of four main steps: Online human feedback, representation learning for reward value
computation, finetuning of SD, and image sampling from human-chosen SD latents. In πHERO , we
choose its variance as ε20 “ 0.1 accross all experiments. Table 7 lists the parameters used in each
step.
Representation learning network architecture. The embedding map is an embedding network
Eθ p¨q followed by a classifier head gθ p¨q. The embedding network Eθ p¨q consists of three convo-
lutional layers with ReLU activation followed by a fully connected layer. The kernel size is 3, and
the convolutional layers map the SD latents to 8 ˆ 8 ˆ 64 intermediate features. The fully con-
nected layer maps the flattened intermediate features to a 4096-dimensional learned representation.
The classifier head gθ p¨q consists of three fully connected layers with ReLU activation, where the
dimensions are r4096, 2048, 1024, 512s.

                                  Table 7: HERO training parameters

                           Embedding Network Eθ p¨q and Classifier Head gθ p¨q
                         Learning rate                                       1e´5
                                                                  Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
                          Optimizer
                                                            (β1 “ 0.9, β2 “ 0.999, weight decay “ 0)
                          Batch size                                          2048
                       Triplet margin α                                        0.5
                                                  SD Finetuning
                         Learning rate                                        3e´4
                                                               Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) (β1 “
                          Optimizer
                                                             0.9, β2 “ 0.999, weight decay “ 1e´4 )
                           Batch size                                           2
                 Gradient accumulation steps                                    4
                  DDPO clipping parameter                                     1e´4
              Update steps for loss computation K                               5
                                                 Image Sampling
                        Diffusion steps                                50 (20 for hand)
                 DDIM sampler parameter η                                     1.0
                Classifier free guidance weight                               5.0
                      Best image ratio β                                      0.5



F     BASELINE I MPLEMENTATIONS

F.1   D REAM B OOTH T RAINING S ETTINGS

Here, we discuss the DreamBooth (Ruiz et al., 2023) experiment design.
Input Images. Following the original DreamBooth paper that uses 3 to 5 input images, we ask
human evaluators to select the top 4 best images among the initial batch of images generated for
each task and use these selected images as training inputs.
Hyperparameters. We follow the common practice of training DreamBooth with LoRA (Hu et al.,
2022). Training hyperparameters are listed in Table 8.

                              Table 8: DreamBooth training parameters

                          Parameters                                        Values
                        Learning rate                                        1e´5
                       Training epochs                                        250
                                                               Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) (β1 “
                          Optimizer
                                                             0.9, β2 “ 0.999, weight decay “ 0.01)
                           Batch size                                          2
                 Prior presevation loss weight                                1.0



                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Prior Preservation Loss (PPL). This function is enabled and uses the default setting where 100
class data images are generated from the class prompts.
Prompts. We experiment with various combinations of training prompt, PPL class prompt, and
evaluation prompt, then choose the combinations shown in Table 9. See Appendix C.3 for details on
prompting experiments.
The outcome of DB training is influenced by multiple factors, including the number and selection
of input images, training hyperparameters, use of PPL, and combination of prompts. While we
optimized these elements for our tasks to the best of our ability, it is possible that further tuning can
yield better results, as the large number of tunable variables makes DB challenging to optimize.

           Table 9: Training, class, and generation prompts for DreamBooth experiments

                  Task Name       Training Prompt    Class Prompt     Generation Prompt
                    hand           “[V] hand”           “hand”           “[V] hand”
                 blue-rose         “[V] flower”        “flower”          “[V] flower”
                 black-cat          “[V] cat”            “cat”            “[V] cat”
                 narcissus         “[V] flower”        “flower”          “[V] flower”
                  mountain       “[V] mountains”      “mountains”      “[V] mountains”


                    Table 10: Enhanced prompts used in SD-Enhanced baseline


 Task Name        Generation Prompt           Enhanced Prompt
                                              “A close-up of a beautifully detailed hand with five fingers,
                                              featuring delicate and lifelike skin texture, fingers
 hand             “1 hand”                    gracefully extended. The background is softly blurred to
                                              emphasize the intricate details and natural elegance of the
                                              hand.”
                                              “A high-resolution photo of a single vibrant blue rose
                                              elegantly placed in a crystal vase on a polished wooden
                  “photo of one blue rose     table, with soft natural light illuminating the petals and
 blue-rose
                  in a vase”                  creating gentle shadows. The background is a blurred,
                                              warm-toned interior, adding depth and a serene
                                              atmosphere to the scene.”
                                              “A high-resolution photo of a sleek black cat comfortably
                                              sitting inside a slightly worn cardboard box. The cat’s
                                              piercing green eyes contrast beautifully with its dark fur,
                  “a black cat sitting
 black-cat                                    and its curious expression adds character to the scene. The
                  inside a cardboard box”
                                              background features a cozy living room with warm lighting,
                                              soft shadows, and subtle details like a patterned rug and a
                                              nearby window with gentle sunlight streaming in.”
                                              “A serene, high-resolution image of a delicate narcissus
                                              flower growing by a tranquil spring, its vibrant petals and
                  “narcissus by a quiet       slender stem clearly reflected in the crystal-clear water.
 narcissus        spring and its reflection   The scene is bathed in gentle, golden sunlight filtering
                  in the water”               through the lush greenery, creating a peaceful and
                                              picturesque atmosphere. Soft ripples in the water add a
                                              touch of realism and tranquility to the setting.”
                                              “A breathtaking, high-resolution view of majestic
                                              mountains seen from the window of a moving train. The
                                              snow-capped peaks rise against a clear blue sky, with lush
                  “beautiful mountains        green valleys and forests below. The train window frame
 mountain         viewed from a train         adds a sense of perspective and motion, with reflections of
                  window”                     the cozy, well-lit train interior visible in the glass. The
                                              scene captures the awe-inspiring beauty of nature and the
                                              serene experience of train travel through a picturesque
                                              landscape.”



                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2   P ROMPT E NHANCEMENT WITH A L ARGE VLM

In the SD-enhanced baselines, we prompt the Stable Diffusion v1.5 model with a prompt en-
hanced by GPT-4 (Brown, 2020; Achiam et al., 2023). To generate the enhanced prompts, we
input “Enhance the following text prompt for Stable Diffusion image generation: [prompt]” to
GPT-4 ([prompt] is the original task prompt labeled ”Prompt” in Table 1 and ”Generation Prompt”
in Table 10). Output-enhanced prompts used for the SD-enhanced baseline are shown in Table 10.
Although our prompt enhancement is not an exhaustive method to show the full capabilities of
prompt engineering, we include SD-enhanced as a baseline to demonstrate that many of our tasks
are challenging to solve, given a simple prompt enhancement method.

G     A DDITIONAL E LABORATION OF HERO’ S M ECHANISMS
In this section, we elaborate on HERO’s mechanism, highlighting its cost-effective trainable embed-
dings and the application of contrastive learning.

About Trainable Embedding. While HERO introduces additional training for a human-aligned
embedding to convert binary feedback into informative continuous reward signals, this mechanism is
both efficient and effective in significantly reducing the need for online human feedback, compared
to D3PO. To further illustrate the efficient training of this embedding, consider the hand deformation
correction task in Figure 3. HERO requires only 1152 samples and 144 update iterations (batch
size 8), compared to D3PO, which needs 5000 samples and 500 update iterations (batch size 10).
Moreover, HERO’s embedding map is implemented using a simple network with three CNN layers
and one fully connected layer, making its training far less complex than fine-tuning Stable Diffusion.

About Trainable Embedding with Selected “Best”. Below, we also provide an estimated run-
time comparison. The process of selecting a single “best” image from all “good” images requires
minimal extra effort from the evaluators. While providing binary “good”/“bad” labels, the evaluators
are already exposed to all candidate images. With only 64 to 128 images presented at a time, evalu-
ators typically have a general sense of which image to select as the “best” by the time they complete
the binary evaluations. To provide a concrete estimate, we measured the time spent by evaluators
during feedback. Evaluators spent approximately 0.5 seconds per image for binary “good”/“bad”
evaluations. The time required to select the “best” image among candidates ranged from 3 to 5 sec-
onds, depending on the number of candidates. For the upper limit of 128 candidates in our setup, the
selection process took approximately 10 seconds. In terms of time, providing the “best” image label
is roughly equivalent to giving feedback on 5–20 binary labels. For example, in the hand anomaly
correction experiment, human evaluators provided feedback over 9 epochs with 128 feedback in-
stances per epoch, resulting in a total of 9 ˆ 128 “ 1152 binary feedback labels. If we estimate the
effort of “best” image feedback as 20ˆ that of binary feedback, this adds 9 ˆ 20 “ 180 additional
feedback, for an approximate total of 1332 feedback labels. This is still significantly less than the
5000` feedback labels required by D3PO to achieve a comparable success rate.

About the Usage of Contrastive Learning. We emphasize the distinction in HERO’s use of con-
trastive learning, which focuses on learning relationships among human-annotated samples through
triplet loss. This differs from the contrastive learning literature (Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020;
Caron et al., 2020), which primarily emphasizes unsupervised learning with large-scale unlabeled
datasets. Specifically, HERO employs feedback-aligned representation learning by leveraging hu-
man annotations (e.g., “good”, “bad”, and “best”) to structure embedded representations into distinct
clusters using triplet loss. This approach enables efficient fine-tuning using continuous rewards de-
rived from the similarity to the human-selected “best” samples. As a result, HERO significantly
reduces the need for online human feedback, requiring only 0.5 ´ 1K samples, compared to base-
lines such as D3PO, which require at least 5K.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


     Figure 10: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO for hand task.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 11: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO for blue-rose task.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 12: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO for black-cat task.


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 13: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO for narcissus task.


                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Figure 14: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO for mountain task.


                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 15: Randomly generated samples from pretrained SD and HERO (trained on the prompt
“sexy”) for potentially NSFW D3PO prompts, listed as follows: “provocative art”, “forbidden plea-
sures”, “intimate moments”, “sexy pose”, “ambiguous beauty”, “seductive allure”, “sensual ele-
gance”, “artistic body”, “gentle intimacy”, “provocative aesthetics”, “whispers of desire”, “artful
sensuality”, “seductive grace”, and “ostentatious temptation”.



                                                30
