Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


H ANDLING D ELAY IN R EAL -T IME R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
    Ivan Anokin12 , Rishav Rishav13 , Matthew Riemer124 , Stephen Chung5
    Irina Rish126 , Samira Ebrahimi Kahou136
    1
      Mila 2 Université de Montréal 3 University of Calgary 4 IBM Research
    5
      University of Cambridge 6 CIFAR AI Chair
    ivan.anokhin@mila.quebec



                                                                                                                       A BSTRACT

                                 Real-time reinforcement learning (RL) introduces several challenges. First, policies
                                 are constrained to a fixed number of actions per second due to hardware limitations.
                                 Second, the environment may change while the network is still computing an
                                 action, leading to observational delay. The first issue can partly be addressed with
                                 pipelining, leading to higher throughput and potentially better policies. However,
                                 the second issue remains: if each neuron operates in parallel with an execution
                                 time of τ , an N -layer feed-forward network experiences observation delay of
                                 τ N . Reducing the number of layers can decrease this delay, but at the cost of the
                                 network’s expressivity. In this work, we explore the trade-off between minimizing
                                 delay and network’s expressivity. We present a theoretically motivated solution
                                 that leverages temporal skip connections combined with history-augmented ob-
                                 servations. We evaluate several architectures and show that those incorporating
                                 temporal skip connections achieve strong performance across various neuron ex-
                                 ecution times, reinforcement learning algorithms, and environments, including
                                 four Mujoco tasks and all MinAtar games. Moreover, we demonstrate parallel
                                 neuron computation can accelerate inference by 6-350% on standard hardware.
                                 Our investigation into temporal skip connections and parallel computations paves
                                 the way for more efficient RL agents in real-time setting.


1                   I NTRODUCTION

                                                                                                                                         MuJoCo                                                                     MinAtar                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MiniGrid
                         20                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                   300 10                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                       Normalized performance


(a)                          0                                                       (b)                                                                                                  0.5                                                                        0.8
    Speed-up (%)


                                  5    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CNN w/ skip & aug


                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CNN w/ skip & aug



                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                      MLP w/ skip & aug


                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CNN w/ LSTM


                                                                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CNN w/ LSTM
                                                                                                                                          MLP w/ LSTM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CNN w/ skip


                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CNN w/ aug


                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CNN w/ skip
                                                                                                                                                        MLP w/ skip


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CNN w/ aug
                                                                                                                            MLP w/ aug


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                    0                                                                                           0.2                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                CNN


                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CNN
                                                                                                                      MLP


                         0            20    40           60         80         100
                                            Number of layers                                                    0.0                                                                       0.0                                                                        0.0
                                      gpu    gpu (sparse weights)        cpu                                                                                                                     w/o                      w/ skip connections



Figure 1: (a) Parallel computations of layers speed-up inference time. Speed-up on GPU is achieved
using default Pytorch software and widely accessible Nvidia GPU. (b) Normalized averaged perfor-
mance and standard error of agents in parallel computation framework. Agents with skip connections
and history-augmented observations exhibit strong performance. Performance is averaged across
the following environments: HalfCheetah-v4, Walker2d-v4, Ant-v4 and Hopper-v4 on Mujoco,
all six environments on MinAtar, and Empty-Random-5x5-v0 and DoorKey-5x5-v0 on MiniGrid.
Performance on Mujoco is also averaged across four different neuron execution times.

Neural network inference presents several challenges in real-time reinforcement learning (RL) as
the environment can change significantly, even during the networks’ inference process. One major
challenge is that the inference time directly impacts throughput, the number of actions the agent can
produce per second. High throughput is important in domains like robotics, algorithmic trading, and
real-time gaming, where frequent decision-making can significantly improve policy performance.


                                                                                                                                                1
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    To address this challenge, a straightforward approach is to speed up inference by employing pipelining
    techniques. In a pipelined architecture, instead of waiting for the entire neural network to complete
    its forward pass on one input before processing the next, each layer begins processing the subsequent
    input as soon as it produces its output for the current one (Carreira et al., 2018; Iuzzolino et al., 2021).
    This approach increases the throughput of a neural network (see Fig. 1a), as layers are effectively
    working in parallel but on different inputs. Throughout this paper, we refer to this approach as the
    parallel computation framework.
    However, even within the parallel computation framework, a traditional N -layer feed-forward neural
    network still suffers from another issue known as observational delay: the agent’s action at time step
    t is based on an observation from time step t − N δ where δ denotes execution time of each layer.
    This delay arises because, in a pipelined system, each layer is processing data from different time
    steps simultaneously – layer 1 processes input from time t, layer 2 processes the output of layer 1
    from time t − δ, and so on (as illustrated in the center graph of Fig. 2). This challenge leads us to the
    central question of this paper:

                       If we use parallel computations of layers, how do we address observational delay?

    Reducing the number of layers can mitigate delay but limits the network’s expressivity. To overcome
    this, we propose using temporal skip connections. Traditionally, skip connections are used to stabilize
    training and allow gradient flow in deep networks (Ronneberger et al., 2015; He et al., 2016). However,
    within the parallel computation framework, skip connections offer another advantage: they do not
    only shortcut between layers along depth, but also along time, by sending activations forward in
    time (see the rightmost graph in Fig. 2). This temporal application of skip connection in the parallel
    computation setting reduces the observational delay. Nevertheless, the computational paths through
    these temporal skip connections are shorter than those without them and thus offer limited expressivity
    compared to longer paths through more neurons.

                        Sequential Computations                               Parallel Computations                               With Skip Connections



       action                                              action                                              action
                                    r3
                                    ye
                                  La


             2                                                 2                                                   2
                                      idle
     Depth


                            2
                            r


                                    period
                            ye
                        La


             1                                                 1                                                   1
                   r1


                                                                                                                                                          Action
                  ye
                  La


         obs                                                 obs                                                 obs
                                                                                                                                                          Hidden

                                                                                                                                                          Observation

                 t−δ    t        t + δ t + 2δ     t + 5δ            t−δ   t      t + δ t + 2δ         t + 5δ            t−δ   t     t+δ   t + 2δ          t + 5δ
                                                                                                                                                          Computations


    Figure 2: Computation flow of agents. Left graph represents sequential computations and the central
    graph – parallel computations of layers. δ is execution time of each neuron (or layer). All nodes
    at each column are available at the same time and can be processed further in parallel. The right
    architecture with skip connections exhibits less delay as it performs shortcuts along time-steps.

    We explore the trade-off between delay and network expressivity and investigate various types of
    architectures to find an optimal balance. Our theoretical analysis quantifies the impact of skip
    connections on reducing the regret associated with observational delay. Furthermore, we justify the
    importance of augmenting observations with past data in architectures with temporal skip connections.
    Experiments confirm the importance of skip connections and history-augmented observation (see Fig.
    1b), and our analysis shows that the skip connection offers a fast but less refined path for processing
    inputs, while the main connections provide a slower but more refined path. Our results show that
    in many environments this allows the policy in a parallel computation setting to achieve similar
    performance to an oracle agent with an instantaneous forward pass, provided the inference time of a
    layer is not large.
    While the parallel layer computation approach and temporal skip connections were proposed before
    to accelerate predictions on image (Iuzzolino et al., 2021; Fischer et al., 2018) and video (Carreira
    et al., 2018; Kugele et al., 2020) domains, this is the first application in RL – a domain where one
    bad action can critically impact the entire trajectory due to the agent’s influence on the environment.


                                                                                        2

￼
￼
￼
￼
￼
￼
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


To summarize, we introduce a solution to real-time RL: speeding up inference time by parallel
computations of layers and addressing associated observational delay. We demonstrate that parallel
computations significantly improve throughput on modern hardware like GPUs. To address the
observational delay, we provide a theoretically justified solution using temporal skip connections
and history-augmented observations. Our experiments demonstrated its effectiveness across various
cases, paving the way for more efficient RL agents in real-time setting.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Parallel computations of neurons (or layers). Parallel processing of information is consistent with
popular mathematical models of the human cortex (Tomita et al., 1999; Betti & Gori, 2019; Kubilius
et al., 2018; Larkum, 2013), where neurons operate asynchronously. Inspired by this, several attempts
have been made to parallelize neural networks, aiming to maximize processing resource utilization
and reduce latency. Carreira et al. (2018) introduced parallel video networks that employ parallel
layer computations and temporal skip connections, significantly boosting throughput (or frame rate)
during inference. Similarly, Iuzzolino et al. (2021) explored this approach for still images, enabling
fast “anytime predictions” that improve over time. Additionally, Fischer et al. (2018) provided a
theoretical framework for these ideas, and Kugele et al. (2020) applied them for Spiking Neural
Networks on image and video domains. Unlike these approaches, we apply these ideas in RL.
Several studies have proposed techniques to handle parallel computations of layers not only during
the forward pass but also during the backward pass (by modifying or replacing backpropagation) in
both training and inference. Sideways (Malinowski et al., 2020; 2021) achieved this with approximate
backpropagation in the video domain. Asynchronous Coagent Networks (Kostas et al., 2020)
and Chung (2022) introduced methods where each neural network unit operates independently to
maximize its own reward, enabling asynchronous inference and training of neurons. However,
Sideways focuses on video data, and both Coagent Networks and Chung (2022) are limited to a small
number of neurons, making scalability to larger networks challenging compared to our approach.
Delay in RL. Early works on handling delays in traditional RL settings include (Walsh et al., 2007;
Bander & White, 1999; Katsikopoulos & Engelbrecht, 2003; Altman & Nain, 1992). Notably,
(Katsikopoulos & Engelbrecht, 2003) was the first to introduce the notion of a Delayed Markov
Decision Process (DMDP). However, their results have not been fully translated into Deep RL.
Recent efforts have addressed delays in Deep RL. Firoiu et al. (2018) tackled delay by predicting
future observations, while Wang et al. (2023) trained the critic without delay, augmented state
information with historical data, and used self-supervised losses to improve performance on DMDPs.
The RLRD method (Bouteiller et al., 2021) further enhanced the critic by augmenting its input with
future on-policy actions available due to delay, resulting in more accurate value estimations.
These approaches consider delay as an external factor to the agent. However, our agent inherently
introduces delays due to parallel computations, resulting in additional interplay between the agent’s
architecture and these inherent delays. This allows us to introduce more inductive biases, such as
temporal skip connections, into the neural network architecture to effectively mitigate such delays.

3    P ROBLEM S ETTING AND N OTATION
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 1994; Sutton & Barto, 2018) is defined as a tuple
(S, A, P0 , P, γ), where S and A are the state and action spaces, respectively. P0 specifies the initial
state distribution such that P0 (s) is the probability of a state s ∈ S being an initial state. P specifies
the state transition probability such that P(s′ , r|s, a) is the probability of reaching to a new state
s′ ∈ S with an immediate reward r ∈ R after taking an action a ∈ A at a state s ∈ S. γ ∈ [0, 1) is
the discount factor, which weights the importance of rewards at future steps. It is typically assumed
that MDPs are ”pausable” i.e. that the agent and environment proceed in a turn-based interaction
framework where each waits for each other before proceeding. In realtime environments, however,
the agent and environment each proceed at their own pace (Travnik et al., 2018).
Then we define an asynchronous delayed MDP as a tuple (S, A, P0 , P d , γ, β, d), which extends the
standard notion of an MDP by defining β – the default behavior policy of the system between actions
taken by the agent, d ∈ N is amount of delay, and fixed interaction frequency, indicating the number of


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


environment steps between the agent’s actions at the same time. P d is the delayed transition probabil-
ity function, which we will define to model the environment’s
                                                     hQ         dynamics under the influence of both thei
                                 d ′                     d
agent and the default policy. P (s , R | s, a) = Eβ      k=1 P(sk , rk | sk−1 , ak−1 ) | s0 = s, a0 = a
                               ′
                                          Pd
where s0 = s, a0 = a, sd = s and R = k=1 rk is the cumulative reward over d steps. The delayed
transition probability function P d captures the probability of transitioning from state s to state s′ over
d steps, starting with the agent’s action a and followed by the default policy β.
We extend asynchronous delayed MDP further to asynchronous delayed observation MDP (asyn-
chronous DOMDP) to define that agent observes history of past states (st−dN , st−d(N −1) , . . . , st−d )
where N will define number of layers in neural network later.

3.1   F ORMALIZING THE PARALLEL C OMPUTATION F RAMEWORK

We execute layers of our neural network in parallel to speed-up inference in realtime settings. Thus,
we need to incorporate computational constraints related to the parallel computations. We define δ as
neural execution time i.e. the number of environment steps that pass during the computation of a
single neural network layer. If δ > 1, a default policy β takes control for δ steps. For δ < 1, we either
accelerate the environment or group ⌈1/δ⌉ layers together to form a new macro layer. The agent’s
policy, π, represented with N -layer neural network,
                                                        observes a history of past states, hδ , at intervals of
δ: π(hδ ) = π st−⌈N δ⌉ , . . . , st−⌈2δ⌉ , st−⌈δ⌉ . The policy must respect the computational constraint
that it cannot process past state st−k through more than ⌊k/δ⌋ layers before producing action at .
As such, our goal is to find a policy π(hδ ) that maximizes cumulative rewards in a asynchronous
DOMDP with delay of ⌈δ⌉, subject to the constraint that L(st−k , a) ≤ ⌊k/δ⌋ ∀k ∈ {⌈δ⌉, . . . , ⌈N δ⌉}
where L(st−k , a) is number of layers between st−k and a. We can view a neural network as a directed
acyclic graph (DAG), where the nodes represent input data or intermediate computational results,
and the edges represent the computational operations. L(s, a) is the path in this graph from s to a.
We define a neural network that only consists of the longest paths in π(hδ ) as a vanilla feed-forward
neural network. All other paths will be referred to as temporal skip connections.

3.2   S OURCES OF R EALTIME R EGRET

We define a delay regret as the difference in performance of the optimal policy in the original MDP
and the optimal policy in asynchronous DOMDP. Similarly, an inaction regret is defined as the
difference in performance of the optimal policy in the original MDP and performance of default
policy β in asynchronous DOMDP. We give the formal definitions in Appendix F.

4     M ETHOD
We show benefits of temporal skip connections for minimization delay regret bound ∆delay in
Proposition 1 and benefits of temporal skip connections combined with the state augmented with
recent actions in Proposition 2.

4.1   A DDRESSING D ELAY

In a vanilla feedforward neural network deployed to address realtime RL, actions at are based on
states st−N δ delayed by N δ steps. Temporal skip connections directly alleviate this issue as actions
at are now based on a set of N states {st−N δ , ..., st−δ }. As a result, skip connections lead to a tighter
lower bound on delay regret, ∆delay (t) in a worst case environment.

Proposition 1 (Tighter Delay Regret Bound): For any vanilla N layer neural network without tem-
poral skip connections in parallel computation framework, the regret resulting from delay ∆vanilla
                                                                                           delay (t)
after t steps in a worst case environment can be lower bounded by:
                                                                   ⌈N δ⌉
                                  ∆vanilla
                                   delay (t) ∈ Ω(t(1 − (pminimax )       ))                                (1)

where pminimax := mins∈S,a∈A maxs′ ∈S p(s′ |s, a) is a measure of environment stochasticity. How-
ever, a network with temporal skip connections achieves a tighter bound on delay regret ∆skip
                                                                                         delay (t):


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                    ∆skip
                                     delay (t) ∈ Ω(t(1 − (pminimax )
                                                                    ⌈δ⌉
                                                                        ))                                  (2)

which is less sensitive to the environment stochasticity measured by pminimax .

Following the lower bound on delay regret established in (Riemer et al., 2024), the delay regret
depends on the number of stochastic environment steps between an action and the input used to
produce it. Temporal skip connections enable the policy to incorporate the state from ⌈δ⌉ steps ago,
whereas a vanilla feedforward network can only condition on steps ⌈N δ⌉ in the past. This can lead to
an exponential reduction in the policy’s inaccuracy caused by the stochasticity in the environment,
which becomes especially prominent for environments that are highly stochastic or neural networks
with a large number of layers.

4.2   A DDRESSING T RAINING S TABILITY

Another difficulty with vanilla feedforward neural networks, even with parallel inference, is that
the effective delayed decision process where actions at are taken based on the delayed state st−N δ
is non-Markovian. This fact will lead to unstable learning in many environments as typical RL
algorithms are not expected to converge in this regime. Meanwhile, this is another key issue that can
be addressed with temporal skip connections and augmenting state with recent actions. With this
architecture, we have access to all previous actions when computing at and thus can consider a stable
augmented state space s̃t = (st−N δ , at−N δ:t−1 ) that the decision process is Markovian with respect
to as p(rt , s̃t+1 |s̃t , at ) is stationary and stable over time.

Proposition 2 (Markovian Property): A vanilla N layer neural network without skip connections
in parallel computation framework bases its actions on the delayed state st−N δ and experiences
non-Markovian environment transitions p(rt , st+1 |st−N δ , at ) without having access to at−N δ:t−1 =
at−N δ , ..., at−1 . These actions are available when using temporal skip connections, making environ-
ment Markovian based on the augmented delayed state space s̃t = (st−N δ , at−N δ:t−1 ).

The vanilla network is non-Markovian as it depends on past actions from a changing policy. Skip con-
nections and past actions remove this non-stationary dependency. This property can be illustrated with
the following example: If the action at at time t is based on the state st−1 , the transition probability
function becomes P (s′ |st−1 , at ) = P (s′ |st , at )P (st |st−1 , at−1 )π(at−1 |st−2 ). While P (s′ |st , at )
is stationary, the term π(at−1 |st−2 ) is non-stationary because the policy changes throughout learning.
However, by augmenting the state with at−1 , the policy term disappears, and the transition function
becomes stationary. Proposition 2 is an important point to emphasize as it extends Proposition 1
to explain optimization issues related to delay that may be present even when the environment is
deterministic within the parallel computation framework. When using an earlier state to generate a
policy, the effect of the actions of that policy also depend on the actions taken between action com-
putations because of the non-Markovian nature of that input representation. As such, the transition
dynamics appear nonstationary as the policy itself changes and appear stochastic when the policy is
stochastic. This serves to slow down learning and leads to instability that hurts sample efficiency as
we demonstrate in our experiments.
When using temporal skip connections, our policy conditions on N previous states and actions
while only the most recent one st−δ and at−δ are needed in our derivations of Propositions 1 and
2. However, utilizing these previous states is still helpful within the framework of parallel layer
computation because we are able to consider more neural network layers for states that are more
outdated. This way the policy can be more expressive with respect to previous states than it is to the
most recent state. This is a useful feature in environments that are relatively stable and predictable
across each step while requiring complex high-level reasoning. For example, in a maze environment
the overall structure of the maze may stay constant across steps, so even distant steps can be useful in
processing a higher level plan of action with more recent steps being used to encode the representation
of the agent’s current location. Indeed, our experiments validate the value of adding more layers even
with outdated states in delayed variants of popular environments within the deep RL community.
Performance gap. Propositions 1, 2 highlight the performance gap between agents with and without
skip connections and last-action augmentation, in terms of delay regret. Besides, Propositions 1 and
3 (Appendix G) provide insights into the performance gap between the instantaneous and real-time


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


actors in a parallel computation framework under worst-case environments. Notably, even with skip
connections, the delay δ remains. In contrast, the instantaneous actor does not experience any delay
or inaction regrets. The closer the environment is to a worst-case scenario, the more pronounced the
performance gap becomes.
However, when using skip connections, state-augmentation with last actions, deterministic environ-
ment, and neural execution time less than 1, Propositions 1, 3 falls short to differentiate between
instantaneous and real-time actors. In this case, the real-time actor also exhibits zero delay and
inaction regrets. Nevertheless, we anticipate the real-time actor to perform worse than the instanta-
neous actor. Skip connections may lack the expressivity needed to efficiently differentiate between
distinct environment states, effectively perceiving the environment as stochastic. This limitation
makes Proposition 1 relevant again.

4.3        A LGORITHM

We apply Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) for continuous action-space environments or
PPO for discrete 1 . We train a critic without delay following suggestions from (Wang et al., 2023) and
an actor with appropriate delay and restriction following Subsection 3.1 with vanilla backpropagation.
We employ last action repetition as default policy, β, if δ > 1.
The basic structure of our SAC algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. To begin collecting experience,
we initialize the first observation from the environment and set initial hidden activations, depicted
in Fig. 2, to zero 2 . While the critic is trained online without delay, our actor is trained within
the parallel computation framework by unrolling on sub-trajectories sampled from the buffer (with
hidden activation set to zero at the first state of a sub-trajectory), allowing all weights to be available
for backpropagation. For details on the PPO variant of the algorithm, refer to Appendix A.

Algorithm 1 Soft Actor-Critic Algorithm with parallel neuron computation.
 1: Init an actor and a critic with random parameters.
                                                        j
 2: Set initial state to be s0 , h00 , ..., hN
                                             0 , where h0 is activations for layer j at a time step 0.
 3: Wrap the environment with sticky actions or repeating observations wrapper if needed based on
          neural execution time.
 4: for t ∈ 0, . . . , L do
 5:   at , h0t+1 , ..., hN                 0         N
                         t+1 = Actor(st , ht , ..., ht ) (Query current policy for the next action and next
      Actor’s hidden activations given current observation and hidden activations)
 6:   Take the action at and receive {rt , st+1 } from the environment.
 7:   Put {st , at , rt , st+1 } to the buffer.
 8:   Sample transition {si , ai , ri , si+1 } from the buffer and update the critic on it.
 9:   Sample sub-trajectory from the buffer {si , ai , ri , si+1 , ..., ri+k , si+k }
10:   Init h00 , ..., hN
                       0 and simulate the actor dynamic forward on given sub-trajectory.
11:   Update the actor on the last transition of the sub-trajectory (via back-propagation through time
      if needed)
12: end for



5         E XPERIMENTS

We perform our main experiments on Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012), MiniAtar (Young & Tian, 2019)
and MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023) environments. Mujoco has a continuous action space,
while MiniAtar and MiniGrid have discrete action spaces. We train our agents using SAC for Mujoco
and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for MiniGrid and MinAtar. We report mean and standard error (SE)
in all our plots and experiments unless stated otherwise. We normalize return for every environment
and neuron execution time with respect to vanilla SAC or PPO performance without delay. Additional
architectural and training details can be found in Appendix E.
      1
     Full code is available at https://github.com/avecplezir/realtime-agent.
      2
     Since we initialize the hidden activations to zero, the first delayed actions can be ineffective. We also tried
to initialize them by performing an instantaneous forward pass on the first observation, but saw no improvement.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


5.1                       M AIN R ESULTS

We aim to validate our theoretical predictions that architectures with skip connections outperform
those without, and that history-augmented observations will further enhance the performance of
agents using skip connections according to Propositions 1 and 2.
We explore the following architectures within the parallel computation framework:

                          1. Default architectures: three-layer MLP or five-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN);
                          2. Augmenting observations with historical states and/or actions in the default architectures
                             (see Appendix C for details);
                          3. Replacing the second last fully connected layer with an LSTM in the default architectures;
                          4. Adding skip connections to the default architectures;
                          5. Augmenting observations with historical states and/or actions in the architectures with skip
                             connections.
                          6. The RLRD (Bouteiller et al., 2021) with neural execution time of one in Mujoco3 .

We tested these architectures on four Mujoco environments (HalfCheetah-v4, Walker2d-v4, Ant-
v4, and Hopper-v4) and across four different neuron execution times (ranging from one to four).
Additionally, we also tested these architectures on all six MinAtar environments and two toy MiniGrid
environments – Random-5x5-v0 and DoorKey-5x5-v0 – where a neuron execution time of one is
applied to both MinAtar and MiniGrid. A summary of results across Mujoco, MinAtar and minigrid
is presented in Fig. 1b and detailed quantitative results can be found in Appendix I.
Our findings show that adding skip connections to default MLP/CNN architectures significantly
enhances performance. Additionally, augmenting observations with historical states and/or actions
further improves performance, aligning with Propositions 1 and 2. Fig. 3 presents more detailed
results for the Mujoco environments with varying neuron execution times. It demonstrates that the
agents with skip connections and state augmentation consistently match or exceed the performance
of agents without skip connections and RLRD across nearly all tested environments and neuron
execution times.
Moreover, as expected, in Fig. 1b we observe that neither LSTMs nor history-augmented observations
offer much benefit to the default architecture without skip connections in the Mujoco or MinAtar
environments. In contrast, history augmentation and LSTMs significantly improve performance
in the MiniGrid environments, likely due to their underlying POMDP structure, where historical
information is essential for better decision-making. We conjecture that temporal skip connection is
also helpful for POMDP, as it allows agents to integrate historical data from different time steps.

                                HalfCheetah-v4                           Walker2d-v4                            Ant-v4                               Hopper-v4
Normalized Return


                    0.6                                     1.0                                   1.0
                                                                                                  0.8                                  1.0
                    0.4                                     0.8
                                                                                                  0.6
                    0.2                                                                                                                0.5
                                                            0.6                                   0.4
                          1        2         3        4           1         2         3     4       1         2         3        4           1        2         3      4
                              Neuron Execution Time                   Neuron Execution Time             Neuron Execution Time                    Neuron Execution Time
                                        two layers w/ aug             three layers w/ aug     three layers w/ skip connections & aug             RLRD


Figure 3: The performance of different agents and RLRD method on Mujoco. The agent with skip
connections performs as well as, or better than, other agents in general. SAC without delay, which
has a normalized performance of one, is omitted from the plots. The shaded area indicates SE across
3 seeds.

Performance drop. We aim to quantify the performance gap between an agent in a standard MDP
without delay and our best agent in the parallel computation framework. Additionally, we are
   3
     RLRD addresses DOMDP rather than policy-constrained DOMDP, making it not directly comparable to
other choices. We use the publicly available RLRD code to obtain the results.


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


interested in identifying scenarios where it may be possible to close this gap between the agent in
these two settings.
Fig. 3 indicates that, in many cases, there is no drop in performance when compared to the vanilla
SAC without any delay. For example, this holds true for Hopper across all neuron execution times, as
well as for Walker and Ant with neuron execution times of one and two.
HalfCheetah is the only Mujoco environment where a significant performance drop occurs compared
to the agent without delay. To address this, we accelerated the environment making time between
consecutive observation twice shorter. This adjustment resulted in a normalized performance of
0.87 ± 0.06 for the agent with skip connections, bringing it closer to the performance of the vanilla
SAC with instantaneous actions.
In MiniGrid, the performance drop caused by parallel computations is relatively minor, whereas
in MinAtar, the drop is more pronounced (refer to Appendix Tables 10 and 11). We conjecture
that rendering skip connections alone insufficient to close the performance gap in MinAtar with
considered neural execution time.
One potential solution could involve increasing the neural network’s expressivity or reducing the
neural execution time. However, if the architecture and its associated delay are fixed, the optimal
solution achievable with this architecture may be strictly worse compared to an instantaneous actor,
as discussed in Section 4.2.
Overall, the results show that in most environments, an agent with skip connections operating in the
parallel regime can achieve performance comparable to an agent without delay, while significantly
improving inference time. However, in more complex cases, skip connections alone may not be
sufficient to match the performance of an agent without delay.

5.2         A BLATION S TUDY

To identify the most effective type of skip connection, we conducted an ablation study comparing
three options: projection to action, projection from observations, and a combination of projection
to action with residual connections, as shown in Fig. 4. For simplicity, we refer to these sometimes
as proj-to-action, proj-from-obs, and proj-to-action & res, respectively. Additionally we tested all
possible forward skip connections between layers in Mujoco, denoting this option as All Skips. The
results of the ablation study are summarized in Table 1. The findings help guide our selection of the
default skip connection type for each environment. Based on the results, we adopt proj-from-obs
for Mujoco environments and proj-to-action & res for MinAtar and MiniGrid, referring to these
configurations as “skip connections” throughout the rest of the paper.
A detailed ablation study on other architectural choices, including the number of layers and augmen-
tation strategies, is provided in AppendixC.

                      Residual Connections                               Projections to Action                           Projections From Observation



  action                                                                                                  action
                                                      action
Depth


        2                                                2                                                    2



        1                                                1                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                    Action
    obs                                                 obs                                                 obs
                                                                                                                                                    Hidden

                                                                                                                                                        Observation

            t−δ   t     t + δ t + 2δ         t + 5δ            t−δ   t     t + δ t + 2δ          t + 5δ            t−δ    t   t+δ   t + 2δ              t + 5δ
                                                                                                                                                        Computations

                               Time                                               Time


        Figure 4: Illustration of different skip connections. δ represents execution time of each neuron.


Disentangling architectural benefits of skip connections. To disentangle the architectural ben-
efits of temporal skip connections from their impact on reducing delays in parallel computation
framework, we report the performance of a vanilla SAC pipeline, both with and without traditional
skip connections and without any computational delay, in Table 2. The results show a significant


                                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 1: Comparison between different skip-connection. Normalized averaged performance and
standard error of agents are reported. For each task mean and SE is computed based on three seeds.

                                                   MuJoCo           MinAtar                      MiniGrid
            Projections from Observation         0.79 ± 0.04    0.45 ± 0.05                     0.91 ± .006
            Projections to Action                0.78 ± 0.04    0.46 ± 0.04                     0.95 ± .002
            Projections to Action & Residual     0.77 ± 0.05    0.52 ± 0.06                     0.96 ± .002
            All Skips                            0.75 ± 0.05             −                               −


performance improvement from traditional skip connections only in the Ant environment. Therefore,
we believe that the performance gain from temporal skip connections may be due to factors beyond
just reducing computational delay in only the Ant environment in parallel computation framework.

              Table 2: Vanilla (without delay) SAC with and without skip connections.

                                 Halfcheetah-v4        Walker2d-v4                    Ant-v4             Hopper-v4
      SAC                           11739 ± 283         4415 ± 227       3595 ± 1027                     2672 ± 463
      SAC w/ skip connections        11250 ± 32         4597 ± 100        5719 ± 176                      2451 ± 52


5.3     A NALYSIS

Distillation. We aimed to determine whether performance limitations were due to the RL algorithm
or the expressivity of our architecture. To investigate this, we used a distillation approach (employing
DAgger (Ross et al., 2011)) to transfer a highly-performing vanilla SAC HalfCheetah policy (return
of 11, 000) into our agent with skip connections and a neuron execution time of one. However, the
distilled agent achieved a return of only 7590 ± 93, which was comparable to training the same
architecture directly with SAC (7892 ± 378). This suggests that the performance bottleneck is not
algorithm-specific but rather a consequence of the reduced expressivity of the agent’s architecture in
capturing the true state.
Analyzing skip connections. We hypothesize that skip con-
                                                                               3000
nections enable the generation of fast & effective actions, while
subsequent layers refine these actions. To validate this, we                   2000
                                                                      Return


removed various projection and connection pathways in a three-                 1000
layer proj-to-action agent in Ant-v4 environment with a neuron                   0
                                                                                      default      obs   first layer second layer
execution time of four (Fig. 5). Specifically, we removed
projections from observations, projections from the first-layer
representations, and connections from the second-layer repre-       Figure 5: Removing different con-
sentations to the action space. The agent performed poorly with-    nections in the proj-to-action agent.
out the first two projections, but still achieved some non-zero     Mean and one SD across 100
return when the connections from the last layer were removed,       episodes are reported.
supporting our hypothesis.

5.4     I NFERENCE T IME S PEED -U P

We evaluated the speed-up caused by parallel computations of neurons on various hardware platforms,
observing significant improvements in inference time when utilizing a GPU. Fig. 1a illustrates
the percentage improvement in inference speed as the number of layers increases across different
hardware configurations.
GPU. For GPU setting we measured performance speed-up on a single A100SXM4 GPU with 40
GB memory. The tests were conducted on a deep Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with a batch size of
one and a hidden layer size of 256 for all layers. For parallel computation on the GPU, we naively
concatenated all inputs to the layers and combined all layer weights into one large sparse matrix. For
agents without skip connections, this matrix has a block-diagonal form. We then used either regular


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


or sparse matrix multiplication to compute the output for each layer. In Fig. 1a, these approaches
are labeled as GPU and GPU (sparse weights), respectively. The MLP was implemented in PyTorch,
utilizing PyTorch’s sparse tensor representations and sparse matrix multiplication for the GPU (sparse
weights) approach.
Fig. 1a shows that the parallel computations on the GPU accelerate inference time considerably for
deep neural networks. Regular matrix multiplication reached its peak performance speed-up around
30 layers, after which the speed-up started to decline; sparse matrix multiplication surpassed regular
matrix multiplication at around 30 layers and continued to increase almost linearly with the number
of layers achieving 350% speed-up for 100-layers MLP in our test setting.
CPU. We evaluated the benefits of parallelizing layers using C++ multi-threading on a CPU with 32
cores and 32 GB of RAM. Our tests showed a 6% speed-up for a 10-layer network, but gains dropped
to 0.1-1% for networks with over 20 layers due to thread synchronization overhead. We used a batch
size of 10,000 and hidden dimensions of 10,000 in MLP, with similar trends observed across other
configurations. The limited speed-up can be attributed to the Eigen C++ library, which optimizes
matrix multiplications through multi-threading, reducing the impact of further parallelization. In
contrast, parallelizing naive matrix multiplications (without Eigen’s optimizations) scales linearly
with the number of layers, doubling for 2 layers, tripling for 3, and so on, until performance plateaus
around 40 layers.

6   L IMITATIONS
One important assumption we make in our experiments is that we have a fixed neuron execution
time (δ) which is not the case in real world environments where δ can be stochastic. We propose
this as a future line of work where methods can explore handling stochastic δ. Additionally, we
limit our experiments to at most a 5-layer neural network, as scaling vanilla RL methods to deeper
architectures is non-trivial and often requires additional losses or training tricks (see Obando-Ceron
et al. (2024)). Finally, we believe neuromorphic computing will benefit from our approach the most
due to parallel nature of our approach. However, since neuromorphic chips are not widely available
our immediate impact on the field may be limited.

7   C ONCLUSION
Our work addresses the challenge of delays in reinforcement learning caused by parallel computations
of neurons. We theoretically and experimentally show the advantages of architectures with temporal
skip connections and history augmentation. These architectures demonstrate robust performance
across various environments and neuron execution times. Furthermore, we demonstrate that when
neuron execution time is sufficiently small, agents in the parallel regime can achieve similar perfor-
mance to agents in the instantaneous regime, while significantly accelerating inference time on GPUs.
This property is particularly beneficial in dynamic settings requiring rapid decision-making. However,
when neuron execution times are bigger, or environments are more complex (e.g., MinAtar), the
performance gap between the instantaneous and parallel regimes widens. Further research is needed
to either mitigate this gap or identify cases where it may be unavoidable. Future studies could also
explore asynchronous neuron computation and leverage hardware optimizations to further enhance
speed-up.

8   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the support from the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program and from the Canada
Excellence Research Chairs Program. The research was enabled in part by computational resources
provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada and Mila Quebec AI Institute. IA thanks
Nishanth Anand and Arsenii Kuznetsov for helpful discussions and comments, and Serge Zakharov
for his consultation on Eigen C++.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Eitan Altman and Philippe Nain. Closed-loop control with delayed information. ACM sigmetrics
  performance evaluation review, 20(1):193–204, 1992.
James L Bander and CC White. Markov decision processes with noise-corrupted and delayed state
  observations. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 50:660–668, 1999.
Alessandro Betti and Marco Gori. Backprop diffusion is biologically plausible. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.04635, 2019.
Yann Bouteiller, Simon Ramstedt, Giovanni Beltrame, Christopher Pal, and Jonathan Binas. Rein-
  forcement learning with random delays. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=QFYnKlBJYR.
João Carreira, Viorica Pătrăucean, Laurent Mazare, Andrew Zisserman, and Simon Osindero. Mas-
  sively parallel video networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). DeepMind
  and Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, 2018.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Bolun Dai, Mark Towers, Rodrigo de Lazcano, Lucas Willems, Salem
 Lahlou, Suman Pal, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Jordan Terry. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular &
 customizable reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented tasks. CoRR, abs/2306.13831,
 2023.
Stephen Chung. Learning by competition of self-interested reinforcement learning agents. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 6384–6393, 2022.
Vlad Firoiu, Tina Ju, and Josh Tenenbaum. At human speed: Deep reinforcement learning with
  action delay, 2018.
Volker Fischer, Jan Köhler, and Thomas Pfeil. The streaming rollout of deep networks-towards fully
  model-parallel execution. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Michael L. Iuzzolino, Michael C. Mozer, and Samy Bengio. Improving anytime prediction with
 parallel cascaded networks and a temporal-difference loss. In Proceedings of the 35th Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). NeurIPS, 2021.
K.V. Katsikopoulos and S.E. Engelbrecht. Markov decision processes with delays and asynchronous
  cost collection. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 48(4):568–574, 2003. doi: 10.1109/
  TAC.2003.809799.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time.
 Machine learning, 49(2), 2002.
James Kostas, Chris Nota, and Philip Thomas. Asynchronous coagent networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5426–5435. PMLR, 2020.
Jonas Kubilius, Martin Schrimpf, Aran Nayebi, Daniel Bear, Daniel LK Yamins, and James J DiCarlo.
  Cornet: Modeling the neural mechanisms of core object recognition. BioRxiv, pp. 408385, 2018.
A Kugele, T Pfeil, M Pfeiffer, and E Chicca. Efficient processing of spatio-temporal data streams
  with spiking neural networks front, 2020.
Matthew Larkum. A cellular mechanism for cortical associations: an organizing principle for the
 cerebral cortex. Trends in neurosciences, 36(3):141–151, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Mateusz Malinowski, Grzegorz Swirszcz, Joao Carreira, and Viorica Patraucean. Sideways: Depth-
 parallel training of video models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
Mateusz Malinowski, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, Grzegorz Swirszcz, Viorica Patraucean, and Joao Carreira.
 Gradient forward-propagation for large-scale temporal video modelling. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9249–9259, 2021.
Johan Obando-Ceron, Ghada Sokar, Timon Willi, Clare Lyle, Jesse Farebrother, Jakob Foerster,
  Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Doina Precup, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Mixtures of experts unlock
  parameter scaling for deep rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08609, 2024.
ML Puterman. Markov decision processes. 1994. Jhon Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, 1994.
Matthew Riemer, Gopeshh Subbaraj, Glen Berseth, and Irina Rish. Enabling realtime reinforcement
 learning at scale with staggered asynchronous inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14355, 2024.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention (MICCAI), pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
   prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
   on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
   2011.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: an introduction, 2nd edn. adaptive
  computation and machine learning, 2018.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based
 control. In IROS, pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. ISBN 978-1-4673-1737-5. URL http:
 //dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iros/iros2012.html#TodorovET12.
Hyoe Tomita, Machiko Ohbayashi, Kiyoshi Nakahara, Isao Hasegawa, and Yasushi Miyashita. Top-
  down signal from prefrontal cortex in executive control of memory retrieval. Nature, 401(6754):
  699–703, 1999.
Jaden B Travnik, Kory W Mathewson, Richard S Sutton, and Patrick M Pilarski. Reactive reinforce-
  ment learning in asynchronous environments. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5:79, 2018.
Thomas J. Walsh, Ali Nouri, Lihong Li, and Michael L. Littman. Planning and learning in environ-
  ments with delayed feedback. In Joost N. Kok, Jacek Koronacki, Raomon Lopez de Mantaras,
  Stan Matwin, Dunja Mladenič, and Andrzej Skowron (eds.), Machine Learning: ECML 2007, pp.
  442–453, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-74958-5.
W. Wang, D. Han, X. Luo, and D. Li. Addressing signal delay in deep reinforcement learning. In
 The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, Virtual Event, October 2023.
  ICLR.
Kenny Young and Tian Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for more efficient reinforcement
  learning experiments. CoRR, abs/1903.03176, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.
  03176.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      PPO ALGORITHM WITH PARALLEL NEURON COMPUTATION

The basic structure of the PPO algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. To begin collecting experience,
we initialize the first observation from the environment and set initial hidden activations, depicted in
Fig. 2, by performing an instantaneous forward pass on the first observation. While the critic is trained
online without delay, our actor is trained within the in-parallel computation framework by unrolling it
on recent sub-trajectories stored in the buffer (with hidden activation reset with instantaneous forward
pass), allowing all weights to be available for backpropagation.
Typically, in PPO, the critic and actor share a common backbone. However, to enable online training
of the critic without delay, we employ separate neural networks for the critic and actor.

Algorithm 2 PPO with parallel neuron computation.
 1: Init an actor and a critic with random parameters.
                                                        j
 2: Set initial state to be s0 , h00 , ..., hN
                                             0 , where h0 is activations for layer j at a time step 0.
 3: Wrap the environment with sticky actions or repeating observations wrapper if needed based on
      neural execution time.
 4: for t ∈ 0, . . . , L do
 5:   at , h0t+1 , ..., hN                 0         N
                         t+1 = Actor(st , ht , ..., ht ) (Query current policy for the next action and next
      Actor’s hidden activations given current observation and hidden activations)
 6:   Take the action at and receive {rt , st+1 } from the environment and put {st , at , rt } to the
      buffer.
 7:   if buffer is full then
 8:      Compute gae return on the buffer.
 9:      for t ∈ 0, . . . , n epochs do
10:         Init h00 , ..., hN
                             0 and simulate the actor dynamic forward and get critic output without delay
            on the collected buffer.
11:         Compute the PPO loss
12:         Update the actor and the critic (via back-propagation through time if needed)
13:      end for
14:      Empty the buffer
15:   end if
16: end for



B     S UPPLEMENTARY E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Atari games. We present preliminary results on a small subset of Atari environment in Table 3. We
use the same architectures and hyper-parameters as we used for MiniGrid experiments. As standard
choice in Atari we augment the state with 4 past observations, grayscaled observations, for all actors
and bin reward to be +1, 0, −1 by its sign, and repeat each action four times for all agents.

Table 3: Subset of Atari games average returns after training on 1 mln observations. The results are
averaged across three seeds, mean and standard deviation are reported. PPO denotes vanilla PPO
without inference delay. CNN and CNN with skip connections denote architecture executed withing
parallel computation framework with neural execution time of one.

                                            PPO      CNN w/ aug        CNN w/ skip & aug
             Boxing-v5                21.4 ± 4.4        2.8 ± 1.4                 2.6 ± 3.6
             Breakout-v5              15.6 ± 7.6        6.3 ± 0.7                 6.9 ± 5.5
             BattleZone-v5           3683 ± 375      5336 ± 1366                4943 ± 984
             SpaceInvaders-v5           386 ± 27          412 ± 8                  456 ± 31
             Assault-v5               887 ± 186           660 ± 9                  712 ± 37
             Bowling-v5               37.2 ± 2.4       37.9 ± 4.9                40.9 ± 9.6
             Freeway-v5             22.18 ± 0.34     22.18 ± 0.34              22.18 ± 0.34



                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Stochastic environments. We also conducted experiments in stochastic environments by introduc-
ing ”sticky actions” in MinAtar, where the agent’s last action was repeated with a probability of 0.25
(Table 4). This modification led to a decline in performance across all agents; however, the relative
trends remained consistent.

Table 4: Results after training on 10 million samples in MinAtar games with a sticky action probability
of 0.25. The mean and standard error across three seeds are reported. The neuron execution time is 1.
PPO refers to the standard implementation of PPO without inference delay.


                          Breakout-v0       Seaquest-v0       Freeway-v0        Asterix-v0       SpaceInv-v0
 PPO                       8.29 ± 1.16     21.48 ± 8.55      60.15 ± 1.53     25.38 ± 2.40      91.38 ± 12.33
 CNN w/ aug                3.38 ± 0.32      2.72 ± 1.15      27.59 ± 2.49      4.25 ± 1.86       25.08 ± 0.43
 CNN w/ skip & aug         6.29 ± 0.18      5.38 ± 0.83      53.51 ± 0.84      9.94 ± 2.03       40.47 ± 1.04



Sequential baseline. Throughout the paper, we use an agent with pipelining (parallel computation
of layers) but without skip connections as our simplest baseline. In Table 5, we also present a
baseline for an agent that computes layers sequentially (see the leftmost graph in Fig. 2). To
construct this baseline, we needed to estimate how much slower an agent would be without parallel
computations. To highlight the potential benefits of pipelining, we assumed an ideal speed-up
scenario for parallelization, representing the performance gain at its theoretical limit. Specifically, for
a three-layer neural network, we assumed a threefold slowdown when abandoning parallelization.
It is important to note that Table 5 reinterprets the information available in Fig. 3. We report the
sequential agent for MinAtar in Table 10.

Table 5: Mujoco average normilized returns after 1mln states of training for the four selected
environments. Neural execution time is one.

                                       Halfcheetah-v4       Walker2d-v4       Ant-v4     Hopper-v4
    sequential three layers w/ aug                 0.246             0.651      0.516           0.456
    three layers w/ aug                            0.574             0.888      0.974           0.998
    three layers w/ skip & aug                     0.685             0.807      0.828           1.309



C    S UPPLEMENTARY A BLATION R ESULTS

Varying number of layers. We are interested in how the number of layers impacts the performance
of the agents. Our hypothesis is that performance will be highly sensitive to the number of layers in a
default MLP, as it directly influences the amount of delay. In contrast, we expect the sensitivity to be
lower for MLPs with skip connections. Additionally, we aim to investigate whether an architecture
with a well-tuned number of layers, but without skip connections, could outperform one that includes
skip connections.
Figure 6 shows that the optimal number of layers without skip connections for Mujoco environments
in the parallel pipeline is two. However, this configuration does not outperform the MLP with skip
connections. In fact, the results are even stronger: as shown in Figure 3, the three-layer MLP with
skip connections consistently outperforms both two- and three-layer MLPs without skip connections
across nearly all environments and neural execution times.
Additionally, we varied the number of layers in the augmented agent with skip connections (having
a neuron execution time of four) across three Mujoco environments, as illustrated in Figure 10.
We found that increasing the number of layers from two to three improved performance in all
environments, a trend also supported by the last two bars in Figure 6. However, beyond three layers,
the performance trends diverged and stopped being statistically significant, leading us to adopt three
layers as the default choice for skip-connected MLPs. Notably, performance does not significantly


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


drop when exceeding three layers, suggesting that the architecture with skip connections adapts the
effective number of layers to manage the delay.

                                                                      MuJoCo                                                                                                                                                MinAtar
                         0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CNN w/ LSTM & skip & aug
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
Normalized performance


                                                                                                                      2 layers w/ skip & aug
                                                                                                                                               3 layers w/ skip & aug
                         0.6                                                                                                                                                      0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CNN w/ LSTM & skip
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CNN w/ LSTM & aug



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CNN w/ skip & aug
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                      2 layers w/ aug


                                                                                                    3 layers w/ aug
                         0.4
                                         1 layer w/ aug


                                                                                                                                                                                        CNN w/ LSTM



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CNN w/ skip
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                           2 layers


                         0.2                                                             3 layers
                               1 layer


                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1

                         0.0                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                          w/o                           w/ skip connections                                                                                                                 w/                 w/o LSTM

Figure 6: Ablating number of layers in Mujoco.                                                                                                                                  Figure 7: Recurrence with skip connections.


Combining recurrent and skip connections. One way to make agents more expressive without
increasing delay is to add recurrent connections. We investigated whether this result in better perfor-
mance. We experimented with combining recurrent (LSTM) and skip connections. However, this
combination degraded performance on MinAtar (see Fig. 7) or failed to provide notable improvements
on MiniGrid (see Table 11). We believe that combination of LSTM and skip connection may require
additional tuning of hyperparameters.

Action repetition. We included SAC-repeat-2 and SAC-repeat-3, which are variants of the vanilla
instantaneous SAC algorithm with action repetition, as part of our ablation study (Table 6). In these
versions, the same action is repeated in the environment two or three times, respectively. This can
improve overall performance in MuJoCo environments by simplifying the credit assignment problem.
Our findings show that action repetition significantly enhance performance on the Ant and Hopper
tasks with two repetitions, and on Hopper with three repetitions. We believe this makes action
repetition particularly responsible for the good results in a parallel computations setting, when the
neural execution time is set to two for Ant and Hopper, and three for Hopper.

Table 6: Average returns after 1mln states of training in the four selected environments for SAC
and SAC with sticky actions. The results are averaged across 3 seeds. Mean and standard error are
reported.

                                                                                          Halfcheetah-v4                                                                Walker2d-v4                             Ant-v4                                Hopper-v4
                                SAC                                                            11739 ± 283                                                               4415 ± 227      3595 ± 1027                                          2672 ± 463
                                SAC-repeat-2                                                     8626 ± 523                                                             4670 ± 221      4102 ± 1228                                          3520 ± 140
                                SAC-repeat-3                                                     8168 ± 618                                                              3763 ± 582       2625 ± 796                                           3517 ± 94



Ablating observation augmentation strategies. Following common practices, we augment obser-
vations with four past frames in MiniGrid to account for its original partial observability, two recent
actions in Mujoco, and one recent action in MinAtar, based on Proposition 2 and the ablation study
results presented here.
We conducted an ablation study to investigate different observation augmentation strategies by varying
the number of recent available actions included in state augmentation for Mujoco, ranging number
of actions from one to three. Fig. 8 presents the results for two architectures: three-layer MLP and
three-layer MLP with skip connections. While there is no significant difference in performance for the
standard three-layer MLP, the MLP with skip connections shows a slight performance improvement
when augmenting the state with the two most recent available actions. Based on these findings, we
use state augmentation with two actions as the default choice for Mujoco environments.


                                                                                                                                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Similarly, Fig. 9 shows the results for MinAtar. We experimented with three augmentation strategies:
using the four most recent available states, adding the most recent available action to the hidden
representations of the last two fully connected layers, and a combination of both. Interestingly, all
these strategies resulted in approximately the same performance improvement for the CNN with skip
connections. Therefore, we chose the simpler and theoretically supported approach of augmenting
with the last available action as the default strategy in MinAtar environments.


                                                                                         MuJoCo                                                                                                                                                                             MinAtar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                         0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CNN w/ skip & 4 obs & last action
Normalized performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5

                                                                                                                                           3 layers w/ skip & 2 actions

                                                                                                                                                                          3 layers w/ skip & 3 actions
                         0.6
                                                                                                             3 layers w/ skip & 1 action


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CNN w/ skip & last action
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                       3 layers w/ 2 actions

                                                                                   3 layers w/ 3 actions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CNN w/ skip & 4 obs
                                3 layers w/ 1 action


                         0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CNN w/ skip
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1


                         0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0

                                                               w/o                                         w/ skip connections                                                                                                                           w/o                         w/ state augmentation


Figure 8: Ablating augmentation choices in Mu-                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 9: Ablating augmentation choices in Mi-
joco.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nAtar.


 D                             A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS
Noisy computations. In our simulations, while we model parallel neuron computations during both
inference and training, the processes were globally synchronized, meaning that all neurons completed
and initiated new computations simultaneously. As a step towards introducing asynchronous neuron
computations, we tested a noisier version of parallel computation by applying dropout in every hidden
layer during the training and inference stages in our agent with skip connections. In Fig. 11 one
can see that the agent is quite robust to a large amount of dropout, and the performance starts to
deteriorate if dropout probability becomes more than 40%. The motivation behind this approach
comes from the fact that when each neuron updates asynchronously, we can track the time elapsed
since the last update and if this time exceeds a predefined threshold, we can zero out the activation,
mimicking the effect of dropout to some extent.


                         4000                                                                                                                                                                                              5000

                         3000                                                                                                                                                                                              4000
  Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Return


                                                                                                                                                                          HalfCheetah-v4
                         2000                                                                                                                                             Walker2d-v4                                      3000
                                                                                                                                                                          Hopper-v4
                                       2                                       3                         4                                                                  5                            6                         0.0                 0.1           0.2         0.3                                        0.4                            0.5
                                                                                                   Number of layers                                                                                                                                              Probability of dropout

Figure 10: Varying number of layers in the agent Figure 11: Average return with SE across 3 seeds
with skip connections having neuron execution vs different amounts of dropout for the agent with
time of four. The shaded area indicates the stan- skip connections in HalfCheetah with neuron exe-
dard error.                                       cution time of two.

Qualitative analysis. Trajectories rollouts of the CNN agent with skip connections and the CNN
agent (without skip connections and with history augmentation) is presented in Fig. 12 for MiniGrid-


                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


DoorKey-5x5-v0. The objective in the game is to find the key, toggle the door and reach the
destination. The trajectories show the agent with skip connections demonstrates less “roaming
around” behaviour compared to the agent without skip connections. inal location while the agent
without skip connections is fairly indecisive. Notably, it took the agent without skip connections 2x
more steps on an average to reach the goal compared to the one with skip connections. We present
multiple trajectory samples in Appendix J.
    7              8            9                10   11         12        13              14      15                 16           17        18


    11             12           13               14   15         16        17              18      19              20             21        22


Figure 12: Behaviour of agents with (top row) and without (bottom row) skip connections on
MiniGrid-DoorKey-5x5. For comparison, we pick a sub-trajectory from the full episode for each
agent. The arrows in each figure indicate the observations that influence the decision-making process.
For the sake of brevity, we have shown only one set of temporal connection in both the cases.
However, they exist throughout. The heatmap below each figure denotes the action probabilities,
the actions in this case are (in the same sequence in the heatmap): l:turn left,r:turn
right,f:move forward, p:pickup an object, t: toggle an object. The
agent with skip connections show less “wandering” behaviour. For instance, the agent with no
skip connections reaches the door and continues to take random actions while the agent with skip
connections toggles the door much earlier. Interestingly, the agent without skip connection is quite
confident in its decisions. We hypothesize that because an agent’s own policy makes the environment
appear non-stationary, high confidence may help it cope with this.


E        I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS U SED IN
         E XPERIMENTS

                                Logits


                                                                                                             Logits
                                    FC
                                                           ℎ!&                                                FC
         Flatten                    FC
                                                                                                                                             ℎ!&
                                                           ℎ!%                   Concat                       FC
                        Conv(32, 64, kernel=3,                                                                                              ℎ!%
                             stride=1)                                                              Conv(32, 64, kernel=3,
                                                           ℎ!$                   Flatten
                                                                                                         stride=1)
                        Conv(16, 32, kernel=3,                                                                                              ℎ!$
                             stride=2)                                                               Conv(16, 32, kernel=3,
                                                                                Max Pool
                                                           ℎ#!                                            stride=2)
                                                                                                                                            ℎ#!
                   Conv(3, 16, kernel=3, stride=4)
                                                                                                Conv(3, 16, kernel=3, stride=4)


                                ℎ#!"#     $
                                         ℎ!"#  %
                                              ℎ!"#  &
                                                   ℎ!"#                                                      ℎ#!"#          $
                                                                                                                           ℎ!"#  %
                                                                                                                                ℎ!"#  &
                                                                                                                                     ℎ!"#



Figure 13: Minigrid agent without skip connec-                             Figure 14: Minigrid agent with skip connec-
tions                                                                      tions. Residual connections are emitted from
                                                                           the figure for simplicity.

We use ReLu activation function. Our SAC actor employees three-layer MLP if not stated otherwise
with hidden dimensions of 256.


                                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Our PPO actor employs a 3-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) followed by two fully
connected layer with hidden dimension of 512. All CNN layers have a kernel size of 3 and C =
{32, 64, 64} channels, maintaining the same resolution throughout the CNN for MinAtar and using
strides {4, 2, 1} for MiniGrid. The feature volume is then flattened and fed into the fully connected
layer for action prediction. For architectures with skip connections, the feature volumes from previous
layers are maxpooled, concatenated and then flattened and subsequently fed to the fully connected
layers. Our Q-network shares the same architecture as the actor.
Notably, when working with networks incorporating skip connections, we observed a performance
drop when attempting to combine all convolutional features by flattening and concatenating them
into a single feature volume. To address this, we experimented with various methods for feature com-
bination and found that max-pooling all features to a fixed size before flattening and concatenating
yielded the best results.
We present the architecture with skip connections used for the MiniGrid experiments in Figure 14; a
similar architecture was also employed for MinAtar. Specifically, given an input xt at time step t and
a set of hidden activations (h1t−1 , h2t−1 , . . . ), if these are convolutional features, they are max-pooled
using the formula:

                                                    current spatial size
                                         size =
                                                      last spatial size
Here, current spatial size refers to the spatial size of the current convolutional feature, and
last spatial size refers to the spatial size of the final convolutional feature in the network (the
third convolutional block in Fig. 14). After max-pooling, the features are flattened, concatenated, and
passed through linear layers for further processing.
The hyperparameters used in the main experiments on SAC Mujoco and PPO MinAtar/MiniGrid can
be found in Table 7. For training LSTM in Mujoco, we used a learning rate of 1e-4 instead of the
default value specified in the table, as we observed a slight improvement in performance with this
adjustment.

F    D EFINING R EGRETS
We define regret with respect to cumulative undiscounted rewards:
                                                                             
                                                               X
                                    Gπ (t, π ′ ) = E                     ri π 
                                                         i<t, i∈D(π ′ )


where i ∈ D(π ′ ) indicates the time steps where the policy π ′ is used. The expectation is over
trajectories generated by following policy π, but rewards are accumulated only at times i ∈ D(π ′ ).
We denote π ∗ as an optimal policy in original MDP and πparallel
                                                             ∗
                                                                    as an optimal policy in parallel
computation framework. Then delay regret, ∆delay (t), and inaction regret, ∆inaction (t), are defined as:

                                                ∗                     ∗
                                                  ∗                            ∗
                            ∆delay (t) := Gπ (t, πparallel ) − Gπparallel (t, πparallel )                 (3)

                                                           ∗
                                   ∆inaction (t) := Gπ (t, β) − Gβ (t, β)                                 (4)

where β is default policy we employ during inaction period.


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Table 7: Hyperparameters used in experiments.

                    Parameter                                 Value

                    SAC Mujoco
                    Discount rate γ                           0.99
                    Policy frequency                          2
                    Target network frequency                  1
                    Target smoothing coefficient              0.005
                    Policy learning rate                      3e-4
                    Q-function learning rate                  1e-3
                    Optimizer                                 Adam
                    Adam beta                                 (0.9, 0.999)
                    Adam epsilon                              1e-8
                    Replay buffer size                        1,000,000
                    Batch size                                256
                    Learning starts                           10,000
                    Entropy regularization                    Auto-tuned
                    Target entropy scale                      1

                    PPO MinAtar and MiniGrid
                    Discount rate γ                           0.99
                    Lambda for general advantage estimation   0.95
                    Entropy coefficient                       0.01
                    Value function coefficient                0.5
                    Normalize advantages                      True
                    Number of steps to unroll a policy        32
                    Number of environments                    32
                    Update epochs                             4
                    Learning rate                             2.5e-4
                    Anneal lr                                 True
                    Optimizer                                 Adam
                    Adam beta                                 (0.9, 0.999)
                    Adam epsilon                              1e-5
                    Maximum gradient norm for clipping        0.5


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


G    D ISCUSSION OF R EALTIME S ETTING AND I NACTION R EGRET
In realtime RL settings agents and environments interact asynchronously at their own pace. As
discussed by Travnik et al. (2018), this setting is more realistic of real world deployment than the
typical sequential interaction paradigm of RL where the agent and environment are both assumed
to wait for each other in a turn-based manner. Sources of regret as a function of time were recently
analyzed for this setting by Riemer et al. (2024) where it was concluded that the total accumulated
realtime regret ∆realtime can be decomposed into three different sources such that ∆realtime = ∆inaction +
∆delay + ∆learn . Here ∆learn is the typical kind of regret analyzed in RL (Kearns & Singh, 2002) that
arises from the need for the algorithm to explore and learn from its environment. This kind of regret
is present even in standard turn-based environments that can pause. However, ∆inaction and ∆delay
are new notions of regret specific to the realtime setting. ∆inaction is regret incurred when an agent
does not act frequently enough in the environment. Meanwhile, ∆delay is the regret incurred because
actions are produced based on delayed observations.

Proposition 3 (Inaction Regret): In parallel computation framework for any N layer neural network
constrained such that δ ≤ 1, inaction regret is zero. Otherwise, if δ ≥ 1 the regret from inaction is
independent of N and bounded by:

                                       ∆inaction (t) ∈ Θ(t(δ − 1))                                    (5)

This proposition follows from the fact that inference time speedups within the parallel computation
framework allow a network of length N to achieved an N times increased action throughput. This
result then follows when considering the worst case environment from (Riemer et al., 2024) Theorem
1 where the default behavior is always sub-optimal when the agent does not act with its own policy.
This bound with the parallel computation framework is significantly better for large networks than
the bound of ∆inaction (t) ∈ Θ(t(N δ − 1) with a single standard sequential layer inference process.

H    T RAINING & H ARDWARE
We used A100SXM4 GPU for training all our methods. We use the same GPU for testing our methods
as well. It took us approximately 2 hours per seed to train a MinAtar experiment for 10 million steps,
4 hours per seed – MiniGrid experiment, and it took 7 hours per seed to train one MuJoCo experiment
for 1 million steps.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


I     D ETAILED U NNORMALIZED R ESULTS
Detailed unnormalized results for all main and ablation study experiments are provided in Tables 8,
10 and 11 for Mujoco, MinAtar, and MiniGrid, respectively.
For MinAtar, we additionally include results for a neural execution time of 0.4 and 2. For MiniGrid,
we also provide results with a neural execution time of 4. The neural execution time of 0.4 for the
MinAtar five-layer CNN agent is achieved by treating the computation of 2.5 layers as a new basic
block within the parallel computation pipeline.

Table 8: Mujoco average returns after 1mln states of training for the four selected environments. The
results are averaged across ten seeds for two layers, three layers and w/ projections from observation
agents without augmentations, across 5 seeds for RLRD and the rest of results use 3 seeds. Mean and
standard error are reported. We take mean action as a policy during evaluation stage as we notice it
may significantly boost the performance of the delayed actor. RLRD (Bouteiller et al., 2021) is a
baseline that addresses DOMDP rather than a parallel computations.


                                           Halfcheetah-v4    Walker2d-v4            Ant-v4     Hopper-v4
    SAC                                      11739 ± 283       4415 ± 227     3595 ± 1027      2672 ± 463
                                                            neuron execution time of 1
    RLRD for delay of 1                      3147 ± 1044       3714 ± 547       2924 ± 568     3314 ± 157
    one layer                                 5086 ± 662       1209 ± 652       1043 ± 526       759 ± 65
    two layers                                6660 ± 360       4271 ± 164       1938 ± 274     3001 ± 293
    three layers                              7814 ± 130       4459 ± 176       2792 ± 620     3115 ± 173
    LSTM                                      7096 ± 138       3764 ± 410       2847 ± 587     2462 ± 162
    three layers w/ proj-to-action & res      8295 ± 522       4567 ± 123       4425 ± 424     3019 ± 432
    three layers w/ proj-to-action            7690 ± 480       4048 ± 681       4599 ± 111     2871 ± 552
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs             7892 ± 379       4497 ± 140       3728 ± 355     3187 ± 195
    three layers w/ all skips                 8102 ± 285        4934 ± 57       4270 ± 410     3381 ± 114
    two layers w/ aug                         6881 ± 467       3516 ± 681       3347 ± 532      3454 ± 76
    three layers w/ aug                       6735 ± 387        3920 ± 33       3502 ± 252     2666 ± 422
    LSTM w/ aug                               7980 ± 168       3289 ± 207       2167 ± 335     2948 ± 317
    two layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug         7082 ± 266       4596 ± 376        2969 ± 48     3389 ± 148
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug       8037 ± 201       3561 ± 682       2976 ± 972      3499 ± 30
    three layers w/ all skips & aug           8165 ± 196       4490 ± 174       4729 ± 267     3253 ± 229
                                                            neuron execution time of 2
    one layer                                 1846 ± 440       1535 ± 329       1783 ± 243     1980 ± 439
    two layers                                3173 ± 399       3791 ± 368       2061 ± 108      3317 ± 31
    three layers                              3027 ± 329       3277 ± 180       1780 ± 276     2538 ± 281
    LSTM                                      2413 ± 363        3084 ± 92        2078 ± 92     2764 ± 150
    three layers w/ proj-to-action & res      3330 ± 751       4226 ± 258       2049 ± 101      3531 ± 61
    three layers w/ proj-to-action            4729 ± 145       3197 ± 396        2685 ± 19      3597 ± 14
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs             4715 ± 392       4137 ± 291       2669 ± 224      3569 ± 63
    three layers w/ all skips                  1682 ± 80       3068 ± 415       1472 ± 900      3607 ± 17
    two layers w/ aug                         2142 ± 598        2656 ± 69       2467 ± 214      3544 ± 94
    three layers w/ aug                        1298 ± 67       3499 ± 209       2231 ± 224     2297 ± 345
    LSTM w/ aug                               3027 ± 636       2724 ± 217       1459 ± 278     1794 ± 467
    two layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug         4156 ± 116       2774 ± 114       2255 ± 145      3628 ± 30
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug       4937 ± 351       4362 ± 194        3180 ± 51       3665 ± 9
    three layers w/ all skips & aug           3649 ± 416       4419 ± 152       3172 ± 168      3580 ± 22


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Table 9: Continuation of the Table 8.


                                           Halfcheetah-v4    Walker2d-v4          Ant-v4    Hopper-v4
                                                            neuron execution time of 3
    one layer                                 1293 ± 481       2157 ± 189    1597 ± 110     1150 ± 347
    two layers                                2299 ± 350       3037 ± 180    1884 ± 125      2098 ± 97
    three layers                              3145 ± 158       3054 ± 106     1865 ± 79      1171 ± 79
    LSTM                                      2816 ± 254       2843 ± 324     987 ± 690     1144 ± 293
    three layers w/ proj-to-action & res      2897 ± 679       2711 ± 245    1205 ± 380      3647 ± 15
    three layers w/ proj-to-action            2886 ± 147         2391 ± 6     2160 ± 66      3633 ± 33
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs             3224 ± 424       3043 ± 182     2097 ± 84      3505 ± 43
    three layers w/ all skips                 2745 ± 733         2583 ± 8    2182 ± 208     3290 ± 153
    two layers w/ aug                         2286 ± 511       3074 ± 261    1842 ± 162      3294 ± 42
    three layers w/ aug                       2886 ± 204       2874 ± 133     1856 ± 59      1218 ± 80
    LSTM w/ aug                               2212 ± 509       2700 ± 299    1085 ± 261      1291 ± 35
    two layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug         1729 ± 616       3006 ± 133     566 ± 699      3603 ± 24
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug       3214 ± 417       4415 ± 174     2139 ± 14      3504 ± 90
    three layers w/ all skips & aug           3459 ± 440       3237 ± 179    1927 ± 191       3647 ± 7
                                                            neuron execution time of 4
    one layer                                 1284 ± 251       1975 ± 159    1132 ± 561     1372 ± 151
    two layers                                1681 ± 281       2355 ± 291    1427 ± 467      1263 ± 91
    three layers                              2421 ± 133       2532 ± 109     735 ± 756      1041 ± 21
    LSTM                                      2496 ± 303        2353 ± 58     617 ± 747      724 ± 176
    three layers w/ proj-to-action & res      1748 ± 414       2886 ± 186    1909 ± 178      3472 ± 78
    three layers w/ proj-to-action            2330 ± 594       3079 ± 319     1642 ± 29      3310 ± 35
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs             2674 ± 288       2898 ± 134     1959 ± 78     2990 ± 209
    three layers w/ all skips                 1733 ± 408        3031 ± 86    1898 ± 159     3016 ± 128
    two layers w/ aug                         2378 ± 177        2762 ± 69     1785 ± 36     1190 ± 136
    three layers w/ aug                       2813 ± 206       2716 ± 139     1512 ± 56      1005 ± 11
    LSTM w/ aug                               2206 ± 168       2792 ± 212     1702 ± 62       892 ± 55
    two layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug         1738 ± 393       2726 ± 147    1862 ± 126      3215 ± 26
    three layers w/ proj-from-obs & aug       3375 ± 193       3206 ± 197     1911 ± 66      3369 ± 53
    three layers w/ all skips & aug           2879 ± 437       3074 ± 134     1906 ± 53     2711 ± 293



J     F ULL TRAJECTORY ROLLOUTS FOR M INIGRID
We present a few full trajectories of agents with and without skip-connections on Fig. J.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 10: Full results for PPO MinAtar. Average returns after training on 10 million samples on
MinAtar games. Results are averaged across three seeds and standard error is reported. Sequential
CNN w/ aug represents an agent that computes layers sequentially and we assume the speed of the
inference of this five-layers neural network is five times slower.


                                Breakout-v0        Seaquest-v0       Freeway-v0        Asterix-v0        SpaceInv-v0
 PPO                            20.81 ± 0.15     25.94 ± 14.52      64.68 ± 0.93     42.01 ± 0.52    297.49 ± 69.86
                                                  neuron execution time of 0.4
 CNN                            16.88 ± 0.81      25.75 ± 3.65    57.28 ± 0.51        9.89 ± 3.82        78.55 ± 2.24
                                                    neuron execution time of 1
 Sequential CNN w/ aug           0.79 ± 0.06       1.51 ± 0.32      28.68 ± 0.18      2.24 ± 0.20        14.29 ± 0.93
 CNN                             7.92 ± 0.84       8.41 ± 0.05     28.865 ± 4.31      7.81 ± 2.27        35.39 ± 1.52
 CNN w/ aug                      6.67 ± 0.27       7.10 ± 1.75      28.31 ± 2.61     10.41 ± 0.50        41.95 ± 1.51
 LSTM                            6.49 ± 0.43       5.63 ± 1.01      28.85 ± 0.46      7.35 ± 1.34        34.31 ± 1.26
 LSTM w/ aug                     4.20 ± 1.31       4.45 ± 1.48      29.50 ± 0.77      7.68 ± 2.06        37.26 ± 0.37
 CNN w/ skip                    14.46 ± 1.81      15.59 ± 4.26      52.11 ± 2.43     11.74 ± 1.20        69.80 ± 1.42
 CNN w/ skip & aug              16.96 ± 0.58      16.01 ± 3.34      50.79 ± 2.06     13.24 ± 1.09        73.58 ± 3.72
 CNN w/ skip & aug & lstm       11.69 ± 0.56       4.16 ± 2.61      16.80 ± 0.72      1.23 ± 0.54        52.37 ± 1.41
                                                    neuron execution time of 2
 CNN                              2.53 ± 0.18       3.22 ± 1.10     31.29 ± 0.30      8.61 ± 0.55        29.35 ± 2.23
 LSTM                             2.68 ± 0.04       4.14 ± 1.50     29.74 ± 1.22      5.25 ± 1.96        34.84 ± 2.20
 CNN w/ skip                      5.41 ± 0.27       9.65 ± 1.09     40.84 ± 1.70      9.28 ± 1.01        53.50 ± 3.67


Table 11: MiniGrid average returns after training on 10 mln states for the two toy environments. The
agent receives a reward of one only when reaching the target location. The results are averaged across
three seeds, mean and standard error are reported. PPO denotes vanilla PPO without inference delay.

                                           Empty-Random-5x5-v0          DoorKey-5x5-v0
           PPO                                  0.963 ± 0.0013           0.961 ± 0.0015
                                                    neuron execution time of 1
           CNN                                  0.812 ± 0.0137         0.613 ± 0.0053
           CNN w/ aug                           0.894 ± 0.0036         0.859 ± 0.0064
           LSTM                                 0.922 ± 0.0038         0.904 ± 0.0074
           LSTM w/ aug                          0.855 ± 0.0343         0.895 ± 0.0134
           CNN w/ skip                          0.924 ± 0.0025         0.930 ± 0.0020
           CNN w/ skip & aug                    0.932 ± 0.0031         0.922 ± 0.0047
           CNN w/ skip & lstm                   0.926 ± 0.0055         0.920 ± 0.0097
           CNN w/ skip & aug & lstm             0.933 ± 0.0024         0.932 ± 0.0018
                                                    neuron execution time of 4
           CNN                                  0.810 ± 0.0043         0.607 ± 0.0118
           CNN w/ aug                           0.894 ± 0.0075         0.872 ± 0.0019
           LSTM                                 0.919 ± 0.0027         0.899 ± 0.0085
           LSTM w/ aug                          0.916 ± 0.0059         0.788 ± 0.1088
           CNN w/ skip                          0.923 ± 0.0044         0.933 ± 0.0010
           CNN w/ skip & aug                    0.921 ± 0.0025         0.919 ± 0.0026
           CNN w/ skip & lstm                   0.933 ± 0.0011         0.567 ± 0.2333
           CNN w/ skip & aug & lstm             0.923 ± 0.0074         0.927 ± 0.0033


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                       (a) Rollout 1: Doorkey, Agent without skip connections.


                         (b) Rollout 1: Doorkey, Agent with skip connections.


                       (c) Rollout 2: Doorkey, Agent without skip connections.


                         (d) Rollout 2: Doorkey, Agent with skip connections.

Figure 15: Trajectory rollouts (best viewed in a zig-zag fashion starting from top left) comparing
agents with and without skip connections in the Doorkey environment. Each sequence shows one full
trajectory.


                                                 24
