Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


T OWARD E FFICIENT M ULTI -AGENT E XPLORATION
W ITH T RAJECTORY E NTROPY M AXIMIZATION
 Tianxu Li1,2 Kun Zhu1,2,∗
 1
   College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
 2
   Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
 {tianxuli, zhukun}@nuaa.edu.cn



                                               A BSTRACT

             Recent works have increasingly focused on learning decentralized policies for
             agents as a solution to the scalability challenges in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
             Learning (MARL), where agents typically share the parameters of a policy network
             to make action decisions. However, this parameter sharing can impede efficient
             exploration, as it may lead to similar behaviors among agents. Different from
             previous mutual information-based methods that promote multi-agent diversity,
             we introduce a novel multi-agent exploration method called Trajectory Entropy
             Exploration (TEE). Our method employs a particle-based entropy estimator to
             maximize the entropy of different agents’ trajectories in a contrastive trajectory
             representation space, encouraging visitations of diverse trajectories and efficient
             exploration. This entropy estimator avoids challenging density modeling and scales
             effectively in high-dimensional multi-agent settings. We integrate our method with
             MARL algorithms by deploying an intrinsic reward for each agent to encourage
             entropy maximization. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we test our
             method in challenging multi-agent tasks from several MARL benchmarks. The
             results demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-
             art methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has gained considerable attention in recent years for
its potential to solve multi-agent tasks, such as multiplayer video games (Vinyals et al., 2019) and
traffic light control (Wu et al., 2020). MARL facilitates effective cooperation by training multiple
agents together to maximize overall team performance. However, developing efficient cooperative
policies for challenging multi-agent tasks remains difficult due to the constraints of partial observation
and the need for scalability. A widely adopted solution to these challenges is the Centralized Training
with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) framework (Lowe et al., 2017), in which each agent takes
actions based on local observations while being trained with access to global information to ensure
robust and stable performance.
In the CTDE framework, each agent learns its own decentralized policy. Training numerous policy
networks can be inefficient. To address this, the parameter sharing technique is typically employed,
allowing all agents to use the same policy network parameters to make action decisions. This
approach significantly reduces the number of required parameters, thereby lowering computational
complexity and speeding up the training process. Additionally, parameter sharing facilitates the
experience sharing among agents during centralized training, which not only helps in learning a
robust and stable policy but also increases overall learning efficiency (Wang et al., 2020b).
Taking advantage of these benefits, many MARL algorithms have integrated the parameter sharing
technique, including value-based methods (Iqbal et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020a;
Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018) and policy gradients (Ma et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020d;
Ndousse et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022; Kuba et al., 2021). However, when agents
share the same policy network parameters, they often learn homogeneous behaviors, as they tend
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


to exhibit similar behaviors when faced with similar observations (Hu et al., 2022). This limits the
emergence of multi-agent diversity and hinders efficient exploration. Complex multi-agent tasks
typically require extensive exploration and varied policies among agents. For example, in a football
game, where agents must work together to score, uniform policies might lead to competition for the
ball, resulting in ineffective play. To succeed, agents need to learn diverse strategies and assume
different roles to effectively pass the ball and score.
To solve the problem, previous works (Jiang and Lu, 2021; Li et al., 2021; Charakorn et al., 2023;
Jo et al., 2024) typically promote multi-agent diversity based on identity-aware trajectories in a
fully-supervised manner. They maximize the mutual information between trajectories and agent
identities to differentiate the trajectories of different agents based on their identities. However, despite
their success, these methods are prone to overfitting and falling into local optima, as agents tend to
revisit familiar trajectories rich in identity information, hindering efficient exploration. Consequently,
the agents’ trajectories may become overly focused on aligning with their identities.
In this paper, we introduce a novel exploration method called Trajectory Entropy Exploration (TEE)
designed to enhance multi-agent diversity while ensuring efficient exploration. Unlike previous
methods, our method does not rely on mutual information or trajectory discriminators. The intuition
is that agents must thoroughly explore the environment to visit states where they might obtain rewards.
To achieve this, our method focuses on maximizing the entropy of different agents’ trajectories.
Since directly maximizing entropy in the high-dimensional trajectory space is intractable due to the
unknown trajectory density model, we employ a nonparametric particle-based entropy estimator
(Singh et al., 2003; Beirlant et al., 1997). This estimator is asymptotically unbiased for entropy by
calculating the mean Euclidean distance between a particle and its neighbors. In multi-agent settings,
to make these distances meaningful, we build a trajectory representation space through encoding
the trajectory space into a low-dimensional representation using contrastive learning (Chen et al.,
2020). Contrastive learning is a commonly used method to learn useful representations, encoding
similarities and dissimilarities among sample instances (Chen et al., 2020).
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows: First, we efficiently distinguish trajectory
representations of different agents using contrastive learning. Since agents adopting parameter sharing
may induce similar trajectory samples, it is intractable to directly use the vanilla contrastive learning.
We further introduce an identity representation for each agent to distinguish trajectory representations
of different agents. The identity representations serve as medium variables to contrast different
trajectory samples. Unlike fixed agent identities used in previous works, identity representations are
vectors, consisting of learnable parameters, to linearly classify trajectory representations for minimal
contrastive learning loss. Second, to encourage multi-agent diversity, we maximize the trajectory
entropy using a nonparametric particle-based entropy estimator in the learned trajectory representation
space. We adapt the entropy estimator to multi-agent settings by calculating the average distance
between a particle and its k nearest neighbors, achieving more stable and robust empirical results.
Third, we integrate our method into MARL algorithms by deploying an intrinsic reward, based on the
entropy estimator, encouraging agents to maximize entropy. Fourth, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method through experiments on various challenging multi-agent tasks, where TEE significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art MARL algorithms.



2    BACKGROUNDS

We model fully cooperative multi-agent tasks as a Decentralized Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek and Amato, 2015), defined by the tuple
hA, S, U, P, R, O, Ω, γi. Here, A = {1, . . . , |A|} represents a set of |A| agents, s ∈ S denotes
the environment state, and U is the set of possible actions. At every time step, agent a receives an
observation oa ∈ Ω based on the observation function O(s, a) and choose an action ua ∈ U . The
actions of all agents combine to form a joint action u. The environment then transitions to a new
state s0 according to the transition function P (s0 | s, u). At the same time, agents receive a shared
reward r = R(s, u) from the environment. The reward discount factor is represented by γ ∈ [0, 1).
Each agent’s trajectory, composed of its observation-action history, is denoted as τ a ∈ T . Each
agent learns a decentralized policy π a (ua | τ a ), which together form
                                                                       P∞a joint policy π. The goal is to
maximize the joint action-value function Qπ (s, u) = Es0:∞ ,u0:∞ [ t=0 γ t rt | s0 = s, u0 = u, π].


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                            Qtot
                                                      (
                                            Qaentropy cta , Qa ( ota , uta )   ) ct1 , ct2 ,..., ct| A|
                                                                                                                      Contrastive
                        Mixing                                                                                       learning loss
                        Network                   Q entropy
                                                    a



                       Qa ( o , u )
                                a
                                t
                                        a
                                        t                           rena tro p y                          Autoregressive           Identity
                                                                                                              model             representation


                                                                                                                                      ...
                        Agent a                           Particle-based                                     Encoder

                                                             entropy
                                                            estimator                                            a
                                                                                                               o t

                                                                        k nearest neighbors
                      (u , o )
                         a
                         t -1
                                    a
                                    t
                                                                                                             Trajectory representation
                         QMIX                                                                                        learning


Figure 1: Diagram of our proposed TEE. Our method trains the encoder and the autoregressive
model by minimizing the contrastive loss to learn an abstract trajectory representation space from
trajectories of different agents. We deploy an intrinsic reward function based on a particle-based
entropy estimator in the MARL algorithm such that we can train the policies of agents towards
maximizing the trajectory entropy, encouraging multi-agent diversity.


3     T RAJECTORY E NTROPY E XPLORATION

One of the common approaches to encourage multi-agent diversity is to maximize the mutual
information between trajectories and agent identities (Jiang and Lu, 2021; Li et al., 2021). However,
these works share a limitation that the agents are likely to prefer known trajectories, containing more
identity information, than novel trajectories, resulting in inefficient exploration. Consider a variational
reward r (τ, i) = log qθ (i | τ ) − log p (i) that maximizes the mutual information objective. qθ (i | τ )
is a variational distribution, parameterized by θ, which approximates the true posterior probability
of the agent identity i conditioned on the trajectory τ . p(i) is assumed to be a uniform distribution,
so − log p (i) = log |A| is a constant, where |A| is the number of agents. When agents visit known
trajectories that have been successfully discriminated by qθ (i | τ ), i.e., qθ (i | τ ) → 1, the variational
reward is rknown = log 1 + log |A| = log |A|. However, when agents visit new trajectories, the
variational reward is rnew = limqθ (i|τ )→0 log qθ (i | τ ) + log |A| = −∞. We note that when agents
visit known trajectories, they can achieve more rewards. We provide a more detailed theoretical
analysis of this limitation in Appendix B. To resolve this limitation, in this paper, our aim is to
encourage multi-agent diversity by maximizing the entropy of trajectories of different agents in an
abstract representation space, unlike the previous mutual information maximization method. First,
we map the trajectory space to a latent contrastive representation space with a contrastive learning
method. Then, we propose a novel nonparametric method to maximize the trajectory entropy by
introducing per-agent intrinsic rewards.

3.1   L EARNING C ONTRASTIVE T RAJECTORY R EPRESENTATIONS

We first construct a trajectory representation space to enable the proper functioning of the nonpara-
metric particle-based entropy estimator. To achieve this goal, we resort to contrastive learning, which
has shown great promise in learning meaningful representations in RL, as demonstrated in recent
works (Laskin et al., 2020; Stooke et al., 2021). However, the vanilla contrastive learning may
not be immediately applicable in our multi-agent setting, as the policy network parameter sharing
may lead to similar trajectories. By contrasting these similar trajectory samples against each other,
the vanilla contrastive learning may fail to distinguish trajectory representations of different agents
based on distance between them, which is necessary for entropy maximization to work. To solve
this issue, we introduce a learnable identity representation for each agent and instead contrast the
trajectory samples with the identity representations to pull the trajectory samples with the same
identity representations together while pushing apart those with different identity representations in
the trajectory representation space.
Concretely, we encode trajectories into the trajectory representations cat by encoding observations
into latent embeddings zta = gθe (oat ) with a non-linear encoder gθe . These embeddings are then
summarized with an autoregressive model gθg , i.e., cat = gθg (z≤t
                                                                a
                                                                   ), which alleviates the non-stationary


                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


issue caused by partial observations. We further denote the trajectory encoder as gθ = {gθe , gθg }.
               n 0 o|A|
Let the set C = cat        represents the trajectory representations of all agents at time step t, and
                        a0 =1
let da ∈ RH denote the identity representation for agent a. To train the trajectory encoder gθ in order
to learn distinguishable trajectory representations, we minimize a contrastive learning loss, or an
InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018),
                                                     "                             #
                                                             f (cat , da )
                                LN = −      E         log P            a0  a
                                                                                                       (1)
                                                           ca ∈C f ct , d
                                         (da ,C)∼D           0
                                                              t

where f (ct , d) = exp ct T d ∈ R. We use the dot product similarity ct T d to measure the distance
between the identity representation and the trajectory representation. The goal of the contrastive
learning loss is to guarantee that the identity representation da remains close with its corresponding
trajectory representations cat while being far away from the trajectory representations of other agents
in C \ {cat }. As a result, the identity representations of all agents are uniformly distributed on the
trajectory representation hypersphere with their corresponding trajectory representations scattered
around them, leading to distinguishability among trajectory representations. Note that the identity
representations introduced in our method linearly classify the trajectory representations of different
agents for the minimal contrastive learning loss.

3.2   N ONPARAMETRIC E NTROPY M AXIMIZATION

Prior work (Hazan et al., 2019) typically uses density estimation to maximize entropy. However,
in high-dimensional multi-agent settings, it is intractable and non-trivial to estimate the density. In
practice, a nonparametric particle-based entropy estimator (Singh et al., 2003; Beirlant et al., 1997),
which has been extensively studied in statistics (Jiao et al., 2018), is employed in our method to
achieve entropy maximization of trajectory representations across different agents. This estimator
quantifies the sparsity of data distribution by measuring the distance between a data point and its k-th
nearest neighbor.
We next describe the details of the particle-based entropy estimator within our method. In multi-agent
settings, each trajectory representation learned by gθ is considered as a particle. Specifically, for a
                                                |A|
collection of trajectory representations {cat }a=1 induced by all agents, the particle-based entropy
estimator is formulated as:
                                          |A|                     |A|
                                       1 X          k             X
                         H(ct ) = −           log        + b(k) ∝     log vak ,                        (2)
                                      |A| a=1     |A|vak          a=1

where b(k) acts as a bias correction based on the hyperparameter k, and vak represents the volume of
a hypersphere with a radius equal to cat − (cat )(k) ,
                                                               |A|
                                              cat − (cat )(k)  · π |A|/2
                                    vak =                                                              (3)
                                                   Γ (|A|/2 + 1)
                                                                                 |A|
where (cat )(k) denotes the k-th nearest neighbor of cat in the set {cat }a=1 , k·k refers to the Euclidean
distance, and Γ is the gamma function. Essentially, vak indicates the sparsity around each agent’s
trajectory representation. The entropy estimator H(ct ) thus measures the average of the sparsity
surrounding the trajectory representations of all agents.
Based on the definition of vak , the particle-based entropy estimator in Equation 2 can be rewritten as

                                              |A|
                                              X                            |A|
                                   H(ct ) ∝          log cat − (cat )(k)                               (4)
                                              a=1
where the entropy H(ct ) is proportional to the sum of the logarithms of the distances between
each trajectory representation and its k-th nearest neighbor. However, in multi-agent settings, we
empirically found that the entropy estimator in Equation 4 based on the k-th nearest neighbor
typically result in learning unstable policies. To address this, we introduce a novel entropy estimator


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


for multi-agent settings, which averages the distances over all k nearest neighbors for each trajectory
representation:
                                                                                                
                                |A|
                                X          1                  X                            |A|
                    H(ct ) :=     log d +                               cat − (cat )(j)         ,                    (5)
                              a=1
                                           k
                                                     (ca
                                                       t)
                                                          (j) ∈N (ca )
                                                                k t

In this formula, Nk (cat ) denotes the set of k nearest neighbors surrounding a trajectory representation
cat . We also incorporate a constant d, set to 1 in all experiments, to enhance numerical stability.
To promote diversity among multiple agents by maximizing the entropy H(ct ), we can use the
                                a
entropy as an intrinsic reward rentropy , where the representation of oat+1 is considered as a particle
contributing to the entropy. Specifically, given a transition (oat , uat , oat+1 ) for agent a, we define the
intrinsic reward function for agent a as follows:
                                                                                                                 
                              1                   X                                                         |A|
           a
          rentropy = log d +                                          gθ (oat+1 ) − gθ (oat+1 )(j)               .   (6)
                                                                                                                 
                              k
                                      gθ (oa          k (gθ (ot+1 ))
                                                (j) ∈N        a
                                           t+1 )


Intuitively, this intrinsic reward encourages agents to explore diverse trajectories with larger distances
in the trajectory representation space. For the PyTorch-style pseudocode of TEE, please refer to
Appendix E. The source code of our method can be found in the supplemental material.
Differences to mutual information-based methods It is important to note that our objective differs
significantly from previous methods (Jiang and Lu, 2021; Li et al., 2021; Charakorn et al., 2023;
Jo et al., 2024), which leverage the maximization of mutual information between trajectories τ and
agent identities i by introducing an intrinsic reward:

                                 rM I (τ, i) = log qθ (i | τ ) − log p (i)                               (7)
where qθ (i | τ ) represents a variational distribution trained to maximize the likelihood of (i, τ )-tuples
stored in the replay buffer. p (i) is a fixed uniform distribution. The mutual information-based intrinsic
reward rM I motivates agents to visit trajectories that carry more identity-specific information. In
                                                              a
contrast, our trajectory entropy-based intrinsic reward rentropy      in Equation 6, incentivizes agents to
explore a variety of trajectories with greater distances in the trajectory representation space, thereby
resulting in entropy maximization.

3.3   L EARNING A LGORITHM

In this section, we present how to integrate our algorithm with existing MARL methods. As our
method introduces a trajectory entropy-based intrinsic reward for each agent, the agent needs to
learn its own decentralized policy independently towards maximizing the intrinsic rewards. We first
show how to integrate our method with QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), a value-decomposition-based
MARL method. QMIX co-trains the policies of all agents by optimizing an approximation, Qtot ,
for the joint action-value function Qπ . QMIX uses a mixing network to monotonically combine the
utility functions of all agents (from which the agents’ policies are derived) to calculate Qtot . Since
the policies of all agents are co-trained by QMIX to maximize the shared team rewards, we cannot
simply add the individual intrinsic rewards to the shared team rewards to maximize the individual
intrinsic rewards for each agent. To solve this limitation, we additionally learn a shared intrinsic
utility network, Qentropy
                        a      , for each agent. The intrinsic utility network Qentropy
                                                                                    a       uses the agent’s
utility Qa (oat , uat ) as well as the current trajectory representation cat as inputs. To train the intrinsic
utility network Qentropy
                      a      , we minimize the TD loss using the intrinsic rewards:
                                                     h                                            2 i
                  Lentropy
                   TD      = E(oat ,uat ,oat+1 )∼D       Qentropy
                                                          a       (cat , Qa (oat , uat )) − y           ,
                                                                                                                       (8)
                                      a
                                              + γ Q̄entropy cat+1 , Q̄a oat+1 , uat+1

                       where     y = rentropy       a                                                   .
where Q̄entropy
        a       and Q̄a are target networks used to stabilize training. For each training iteration, we
randomly sample a mini-batch of trajectory data from the replay buffer D. As the intrinsic utility


                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                Agent
                Dot                                          Agent 1              ÊÊ   Agent 1
                                                             Agent 2                   Agent 2
                                                             Agent 3                   Agent 3
                                                             Agent 4                   Agent 4


(a) Illustration of Pac- (b) Learning curves (c) Visitation heatmap(d) Visitation heatmap(e) Normalized average
Men                                          of QMIX               of TEE                intrinsic rewards

      Figure 2: Performance comparison between our proposed TEE and baselines in Pac-Men.


network takes the agent’s utility Qa (oat , uat ) as an input, the loss function Lentropy
                                                                                      TD     provides an
auxiliary gradient to help train the agent’s utility network, leading to trajectory entropy maximization.
Since the agent utility in QMIX has no inherent meaning or constraints, our method can be safely
integrated with QMIX. Thus, the overall loss function for learning optimal agent policies is:


                                   Ltotal = LQM
                                             TD
                                                IX
                                                   + βLentropy
                                                       TD      ,                                      (9)
where LQM
        TD
            IX
                is the TD loss function in QMIX that is used to learn the optimal Qtot and to update
the parameters of the agent utility networks with the goal of maximizing team returns. The coefficient
β adjusts the weight of Lentropy
                          TD       in comparison to LQMTD
                                                          IX
                                                              .
During training, we alternately train the trajectory encoder and policies of agents. We first sample
trajectories from the replay buffer to train the encoder to learn distinguishable trajectory represen-
tations by minimizing the contrastive learning loss. Then we calculate the particle-based trajectory
entropy estimator based on the learned trajectory representations for policy learning. The policies
of agents are trained end-to-end in a centralized manner by minimizing Ltotal , allowing each agent
to learn a policy that maximizes both the team returns and the trajectory entropy across different
agents. Therefore, our method fosters diversity among agents, effectively solving the limitation of
parameter-sharing for efficient exploration. Additionally, our method can be integrated with policy
gradient methods. For details on implementing our method with policy gradient methods, please refer
to Appendix D.


4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we examine the performance of our proposed TEE method using challenging multi-
agent tasks from Pac-Men, SMAC, and SMACv2 benchmarks, demonstrating its superior effective-
ness. We compare TEE against state-of-the-art methods, including value-decomposition methods
like QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) and QTRAN (Son et al., 2019), as well as mutual information-based
exploration strategies such as MAVEN (Mahajan et al., 2019), EOI (Jiang and Lu, 2021), SCDS
(a variant of CDS (Li et al., 2021) with shared policy network parameters), PMIC (Li et al., 2022),
LIPO (Charakorn et al., 2023), and FoX (Jo et al., 2024). Without loss of generality, we present both
the mean and standard deviation of performance for our method and the baseline methods, tested
with five random seeds. To ensure fairness, consistent hyperparameters and policy network structures
are applied across different methods for each multi-agent task, with detailed experimental settings
provided in Appendix H.

4.1    PAC -M EN

To highlight the effectiveness of our method in fostering multi-agent diversity, we adopt a grid world
environment called Pac-Men, depicted in Figure 2a, to evaluate our method against baseline methods.
In this environment, four agents start in the central room of a maze, each with limited visibility. Dots
are randomly placed in the edge rooms, and the agents must navigate along various paths to collect
them. To increase the difficulty, each path to the edge rooms has a different length. Importantly, only
the downward path falls within the agents’ observable area, making efficient exploration essential.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                 (a) 3s5z (easy)           (b) 2c_vs_64zg (hard)             (c)7sz (hard)


       (d) 6h_vs_8z (super hard)       (e) corridor (super hard)      (f)3s5z_vs_3s6z (super hard)
Figure 3: Performance comparison between our proposed TEE and baselines in the SMAC scenarios.


As depicted in Figure 2b, our method demonstrates significant superiority over QMIX and substan-
tially outperforms the other baselines. QMIX fails to learn optimal policies in Pac-Men. For the agents
to maximize team returns, they need to disperse to the four edge rooms to collect dots. However, the
visitation heatmap for QMIX, shown in Figure 2c, reveals that some agents adopt similar behaviors,
converging in the same bottom room. This overlap leads to competition for the same dots, resulting
in inefficient cooperation. In contrast, our method, as illustrated in Figure 2d, enables the agents
to efficiently learn diverse policies, allowing them to respectively move to different edge rooms.
This outcome indicates that entropy maximization effectively encourages the development of diverse
strategies. Baseline methods like EOI and SCDS, which aim to maximize the mutual information
between trajectories and agent identities, perform similarly but fall short of achieving satisfactory
results. We believe this is due to their inadequate exploration, as agents may fail to discover the
upward room with the longest path. Figure 2e further compares the intrinsic rewards generated by
mutual information-based methods and our entropy maximization method. The results indicate that
mutual information-based rewards offer limited incentives, while our entropy maximization-based
rewards consistently motivate the agents to explore and learn optimal cooperative policies.

4.2   SMAC

After assessing our method in a basic grid world environment, we move on to a more challenging
multi-agent benchmark, namely StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019).
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we examine our method across six SMAC scenarios
with increasing difficulty levels: 3s5z (easy), 2c_vs_64zg (hard), 7sz (hard), 6h_vs_8z (super hard),
corridor (super hard), and 3s5z_vs_3s6z (super hard). It is important to note that performance
comparisons are not valid across different SMAC versions. For our experiments, we use SMAC
version SC2.4.10.
The comparisons of performance between our method and the baseline methods in the SMAC scenar-
ios are presented in Figure 3. In the super hard scenarios (6h_vs_8z, corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z),
where the enemies are significantly stronger than the agents, our method considerably outperforms the
baselines. This suggests that TEE is more effective at exploring cooperative policies by maximizing
trajectory entropy. Challenging scenarios impose a high demand on policy diversity to distribute
enemies’ attacks. Our method successfully learns diverse policies. To demonstrate this, we provide
visualization examples of the diverse policies learned by our method in Appendix M. While QMIX
performs well in the 3s5z and 2c_vs_64zg scenarios, it struggles to learn effective policies in the
more challenging scenarios that demand complex cooperation strategies, whereas our method excels.


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                      (a) terran_5_vs_5     (b) protoss_5_vs_5      (c)zerg_5_vs_5
     Figure 4: Performance comparison between TEE and baselines in the SMACv2 scenarios.


         (a) MAVEN           (b) EOI       (c)SCDS         (d) LIPO        (e) FoX       (f) TEE
        Figure 5: Visitation heatmaps of different algorithms in the terran_5_vs_5 scenario.


MAVEN proves less effective at exploring cooperative policies, highlighting that the trajectory entropy
maximization objective leads to more efficient exploration compared to the strategy of encouraging
diverse joint behaviors by MAVEN. While EOI and SCDS deliver promising results in the 3s5z and
2c_vs_64zg scenarios, they fall short in more challenging scenarios. We believe this is due to the
strong mutual dependence between trajectories and agent identities, which hinders the exploration of
complex cooperative strategies. Similarly, the formation diversity based on mutual information in
FoX also encounters this issue.
Homogeneous behaviors Our method also shows superior performance in the easy 3s5z scenario,
where agents sometimes need to act similarly to master the ’focus fire’ trick. This indicates that
our method efficiently trades off exploration and exploitation, and does not hinder the learning of
homogeneous behaviors that are beneficial for maximizing environmental rewards. For additional
evaluations of our method in scenarios that require homogeneous behaviors, please refer to Appendix
J.
Stochasticity and Exploration Despite the challenging settings in the SMAC scenarios, a notable
limitation is the insufficient stochasticity in combat scenarios due to the fixed initial positions of units
and team compositions. This limits the ability to fully test the exploration capabilities of MARL
algorithms. To overcome this, we adopt the more demanding SMACv2 benchmark (Ellis et al., 2022),
which introduces stochastic elements by randomizing start positions and team compositions in each
episode.
We examine our method in three SMACv2 scenarios including terran_5_vs_5, protoss_5_vs_5, and
zerg_5_vs_5. The experimental results, shown in Figure 4, indicate that our method significantly
outperforms the baselines across all scenarios. Notably, QMIX struggles to learn optimal cooperative
policies and lacks the necessary exploration to adapt to the stochasticity present in the SMACv2
scenarios. However, when combined with our method, QMIX shows marked improvement in
performance, learning more exploratory and diverse policies. Similarly, mutual information-based
baselines like MAVEN, EOI, and SCDS tend to get stuck in local optima. We believe this occurs
because the mutual dependence between agent identities and trajectories in these methods restricts
agents to known trajectories rather than encouraging the discovery of new ones. In contrast, our
method consistently explores new trajectories and seeks out exploratory policies. Additionally, we
provide agent’s visitation heatmaps in Figure 5. The results clearly show that agents trained with the
baselines confine their movements to only partial areas, whereas our method motivates the agents
to explore all possible states that offer environmental rewards, ensuring thorough exploration of the
entire environment.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                         (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 6: (a) Performance comparisons of our method against different variants in the scenarios of
SMAC. (b) Different kinds of intrinsic rewards in the corridor scenario.


4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

We perform several ablation studies to examine the contribution of each component in our method.
To evaluate the contribution of the autoregressive model used for learning trajectory representations,
we create a variant that omits the autoregressive model, relying solely on the observation encoder. To
evaluate the importance of contrastive representation learning, we develop a variant where trajectories
are encoded by an encoder with fixed randomly initialized parameters. To test the effectiveness of
the identity representations introduced in our method, we design two variants: the first employs the
vanilla contrastive learning that directly contrasts trajectory samples against each other rather than
using identity representations as medium variables to contrast different trajectory samples; the second
replaces the learnable identity representations with fixed agent identities, such as one-hot vectors, in
the contrastive learning loss. Additionally, we introduce a variant that learns trajectory representations
through predicting the agent identities from trajectories in a supervised manner. Finally, to test the
trajectory entropy, we develop two variants that respectively utilize randomly selected neighbors and
the k-th nearest neighbor in the trajectory entropy.
We test these variants in three SMAC scenarios: 3s5z (easy), 2c_vs_64zg (hard), and corridor (super
hard). The performance results are presented in Figure 6a. Employing the k-th nearest neighbor in
the trajectory entropy damages performance and introduces significant variance. We also observe a
noticeable decline in performance when using randomly selected neighbors. However, both variants
still receive higher win rates than QMIX, demonstrating the robustness of our representation learning
method. As shown in Figure 6b, employing k nearest neighbors in the trajectory entropy provides
more efficient intrinsic rewards compared to the other two methods, promoting thorough exploration.
Employing a fixed encoder for trajectory encoding results in suboptimal performance, demonstrat-
ing the importance of contrastive representation learning. This performance degradation occurs
because the representations encoded by a fixed encoder provide inefficient intrinsic rewards for
agent exploration. Compared to contrastive representation learning, the representations learned via
predicting agent identities from trajectories lead to a significant performance decline. This decline
occurs because representations guided by fixed agent identities result in strong mutual dependence,
hindering efficient exploration. Using fixed agent identities in contrastive learning loss also leads
to poor performance. Simply using the vanilla contrastive learning without identity representations
results in significant performance drop. These variants demonstrate the importance of our contrastive
learning loss using identity representations to learn distinguishable trajectory representations. We
further provide the trajectory representations learned by different variants in Figure 7. We note
that these variants do not necessarily learn distinguishable trajectory representations for the entropy
maximization to work.
Furthermore, removing the autoregressive model results in performance comparable to our method
in the 3s5z and 2c_vs_64zg scenarios, but it causes a significant performance decline in the super
hard corridor scenario. This suggests that utilizing the autoregressive model for learning trajectory
representations enhances robustness, particularly in more challenging multi-agent tasks.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                (a)          (b)           (c)          (d)           (e)           (f)
Figure 7: T-SNE plots for different agents’ trajectory representations learned by different variants
of TEE ((a) QMIX (b) TEE w/ fixed encoder (c) TEE w/ identity prediction (d) TEE w/ fixed agent
identity (e) TEE w/ vanilla contrastive learning (f) TEE), in the corridor scenario of SMAC.


5   R ELATED W ORKS

In MARL settings, fostering diversity aims to encourage agents to visit diverse trajectories, resulting
to varied policies among agents. SVO (McKee et al., 2020) uses social value orientation to address
multi-agent social dilemmas by introducing intrinsic rewards that incentivize diverse policy learning.
RODE (Wang et al., 2020c) enhances diversity by assigning agents to specific roles with distinct
actions, though it may struggle in scenarios with continuous or large action spaces. MAVEN
(Mahajan et al., 2019) adopts a value-based approach, conditioning agents’ joint behaviors on a
shared latent variable, controlled by a hierarchical policy, through maximizing mutual information.
EOI (Jiang and Lu, 2021) trains a probabilistic classifier to predict the agent identities’ probability
distribution based on their observations, using the correct predictions as intrinsic rewards for policy
training. CDS (Li et al., 2021) encourages diversity by optimizing mutual information through lower
bounds based on the Boltzmann softmax distribution and variational inference. PMIC (Li et al.,
2022) aims to foster the learning of superior policies by maximizing mutual information related to
effective cooperative behaviors while minimizing it for less effective ones. LIPO (Charakorn et al.,
2023) uses policy compatibility to develop diverse policies and further introduces variations in each
agent’s policy by maximizing mutual information. FoX (Jo et al., 2024) promotes formation-based
exploration, fostering agents’ understanding of their formations by encouraging them to explore
diverse formations. Despite their achievements, these methods often overemphasize the dependence
between agent identity and trajectories or formations, leading agents to repeatedly visit similar
observations, which can limit their exploration of new possibilities. We refer the reader to extensive
related works about entropy maximization in Appendix.


6   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE WORKS

In this work, we simply use the distances between trajectory representations of different agents to
measure the policy differences among agents. It could be an interesting direction to develop a more
efficient policy difference measurement that could be used in the trajectory entropy estimator to
significantly improve the performance of our method.


7   C ONCLUSION

We propose a novel multi-agent exploration method to solve the limitation of homogeneous behaviors
of agents caused by parameter sharing. Our method introduces an intrinsic reward based on a
particle-based entropy estimator to maximize trajectory entropy in a contrastive representation space,
which promotes efficient exploration. We test our method in a variety of challenging multi-agent
tasks. The experimental results demonstrate the outperformance of our method compared to existing
state-of-the-art methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(Grant No. NS2024055), in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 62061146002),
and in part by Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20222012 ).


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
J. Beirlant, E. J. Dudewicz, L. Györfi, E. C. Van der Meulen, et al. Nonparametric entropy estimation:
   An overview. International Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, 6(1):17–39, 1997.
R. Charakorn, P. Manoonpong, and N. Dilokthanakul. Generating diverse cooperative agents by learn-
  ing incompatible policies. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=UkU05GOH7_6.
T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of
   visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1597–1607. PMLR,
   2020.
B. Ellis, S. Moalla, M. Samvelyan, M. Sun, A. Mahajan, J. N. Foerster, and S. Whiteson. Smacv2:
  An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.07489, 2022.
E. Hazan, S. Kakade, K. Singh, and A. Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum entropy exploration.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2681–2691. PMLR, 2019.
S. Hu, C. Xie, X. Liang, and X. Chang. Policy diagnosis via measuring role diversity in cooperative
   multi-agent rl. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9041–9071. PMLR, 2022.
S. Iqbal, C. A. S. De Witt, B. Peng, W. Böhmer, S. Whiteson, and F. Sha. Randomized entity-wise
   factorization for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pages 4596–4606. PMLR, 2021.
J. Jiang and Z. Lu. The emergence of individuality. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pages 4992–5001. PMLR, 2021.
J. Jiao, W. Gao, and Y. Han. The nearest neighbor information estimator is adaptively near minimax
   rate-optimal. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Y. Jo, S. Lee, J. Yeom, and S. Han. Fox: Formation-aware exploration in multi-agent reinforcement
   learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pages
  12985–12994, 2024.
J. G. Kuba, R. Chen, M. Wen, Y. Wen, F. Sun, J. Wang, and Y. Yang. Trust region policy optimisation
   in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11251, 2021.
M. Laskin, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations for rein-
 forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5639–5650. PMLR,
 2020.
C. Li, T. Wang, C. Wu, Q. Zhao, J. Yang, and C. Zhang. Celebrating diversity in shared multi-agent
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:3991–4002, 2021.
P. Li, H. Tang, T. Yang, X. Hao, T. Sang, Y. Zheng, J. Hao, M. E. Taylor, W. Tao, Z. Wang, et al. Pmic:
   improving multi-agent reinforcement learning with progressive mutual information collaboration.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08553, 2022.
H. Liu and P. Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:18459–18473, 2021.
R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-critic for
  mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.
X. Ma, Y. Yang, C. Li, Y. Lu, Q. Zhao, and J. Yang. Modeling the interaction between agents
  in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International
  Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 853–861, 2021.
A. Mahajan, T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, and S. Whiteson. Maven: Multi-agent variational exploration.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


K. R. McKee, I. Gemp, B. McWilliams, E. A. Duéñez-Guzmán, E. Hughes, and J. Z. Leibo. So-
  cial diversity and social preferences in mixed-motive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.02325, 2020.
K. K. Ndousse, D. Eck, S. Levine, and N. Jaques. Emergent social learning via multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 7991–8004. PMLR,
  2021.
F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized pomdps, 2015.
A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
T. Rashid, C. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, S. Whiteson, and M. Samvelyan. Qmix: Monotonic
   value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 35th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, pages 6846–6859, 2018.
M. Samvelyan, T. Rashid, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, N. Nardelli, T. G. Rudner, C.-M. Hung,
 P. H. Torr, J. Foerster, and S. Whiteson. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1902.04043, 2019.
Y. Seo, L. Chen, J. Shin, H. Lee, P. Abbeel, and K. Lee. State entropy maximization with random
   encoders for efficient exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
   9443–9454. PMLR, 2021.
H. Singh, N. Misra, V. Hnizdo, A. Fedorowicz, and E. Demchuk. Nearest neighbor estimates of
  entropy. American journal of mathematical and management sciences, 23(3-4):301–321, 2003.
K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi. Qtran: Learning to factorize with
  transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on
  machine learning, pages 5887–5896. PMLR, 2019.
A. Stooke, K. Lee, P. Abbeel, and M. Laskin. Decoupling representation learning from reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9870–9879. PMLR, 2021.
P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi, M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Son-
   nerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent
   learning based on team reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous
   Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 2085–2087, 2018.
O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik, J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell,
  T. Ewalds, P. Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
J. Wang, Z. Ren, T. Liu, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang. Qplex: Duplex dueling multi-agent q-learning. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2008.01062, 2020a.
T. Wang, H. Dong, V. Lesser, and C. Zhang. Roma: Multi-agent reinforcement learning with emergent
   roles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08039, 2020b.
T. Wang, T. Gupta, A. Mahajan, B. Peng, S. Whiteson, and C. Zhang. Rode: Learning roles to
   decompose multi-agent tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01523, 2020c.
Y. Wang, B. Han, T. Wang, H. Dong, and C. Zhang. Dop: Off-policy multi-agent decomposed policy
   gradients. In International conference on learning representations, 2020d.
T. Wu, P. Zhou, K. Liu, Y. Yuan, X. Wang, H. Huang, and D. O. Wu. Multi-agent deep reinforcement
   learning for urban traffic light control in vehicular networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
   Technology, 69(8):8243–8256, 2020.
Y. Yang, X. Ma, C. Li, Z. Zheng, Q. Zhang, G. Huang, J. Yang, and Q. Zhao. Believe what you see:
   Implicit constraint approach for offline multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:10299–10312, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D. Yarats, R. Fergus, A. Lazaric, and L. Pinto. Reinforcement learning with prototypical rep-
  resentations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 11920–11931. PMLR,
  2021.
C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu. The surprising effectiveness of
  ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  24611–24624, 2022.
T. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Wang, G. Xie, and Z. Lu. Fop: Factorizing optimal joint policy of maximum-
   entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
   pages 12491–12500. PMLR, 2021.


A    R ELATED WORKS ABOUT ENTROPY MAXIMIZATION
Entropy Maximization: Entropy maximization has been adopted in various RL works to effectively
promote state exploration. RE3 Seo et al. (2021) aims to improve sample efficiency by facilitating
exploration. It achieves this by transforming high-dimensional observations into a compact, low-
dimensional representation space using a fixed encoder, then employing an entropy estimator to
assess state entropy within the representation space. Unlike RE3, we use contrastive learning to
create a contrastive representation space, which includes more relevant information. APT Liu
and Abbeel (2021) introduces a pre-training method that maximizes state entropy for sufficient
exploration in unknown areas in the task-agnostic environment, utilizing an entropy-based intrinsic
reward to train the agent’s policy in a reward-free setting. ProtoRL Yarats et al. (2021) learns
representations via prototypes that summarize the agent’s exploration experience, which not only
generalize across tasks but also accelerate exploration efficiently. Drawing inspiration from these
approaches, our method in multi-agent settings promotes the diversity among agents by maximizing
trajectory entropy in a contrastive representation space, thereby fostering both efficient exploration
and effective collaboration.

B    L IMITATION OF MUTUAL INFORMATION - BASED MULTI - AGENT
     EXPLORATION

In this section, we analyze the limitations of existing mutual information-based exploration methods
from a theoretical perspective, particularly focusing on how agents tend to revisit familiar trajectories
rather than exploring new ones. We present the reward functions associated with exploring both
familiar and new trajectories. The theoretical results indicate that agents receive higher rewards when
revisiting known trajectories compared to when they explore new ones.
The mutual information between the trajectory τ and agent identity i is defined as:

                              I(i; τ ) = Ei,τ [log p(i | τ )] − Ei [log p(i)]
                                                                                                     (10)
                                        ≥ Ei,τ [log qθ (i | τ )] − Ei [log p(i)]
where the unknown posterior distribution p(i | τ ) is approximated by a variational distribution
qθ (i | τ ). We parameterize qθ (i | τ ) with θ and update θ to maximize the likelihood of (i, τ )-tuples
stored in the replay buffer. Prior works maximize mutual information by using the variational lower
bound as an intrinsic reward:

                                 r (τ, i0 ) = log qθ (i0 | τ ) − log p (i0 )
                                                                                                   (11)
                                        = log qθ (i0 | τ ) + log |A|
where p(i) is assumed to be a uniform distribution, so − log p (i0 ) = log |A|, where |A| is the number
                                                                                 P|A|
of agents. We assume access to a perfect distribution qθ (i | τ ), ensuring that a=1 qθ (ia | τ ) = 1.
Intrinsic reward for familiar trajectories The intrinsic reward function encourages agents to visit
familiar trajectories τ where qθ (i0 | τ ) → 1. As a result:

                                  rknown = log 1 + log |A| = log |A|.                               (12)


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Intrinsic reward for new trajectories When agents visit new trajectories, where qθ (i0 | τ ) is
unknown, we assign a null probability to unseen trajectories by adding a ’background’ class to the
model. The penalty agents receive when visiting these unseen trajectories is:

                          rnew =       lim         log qθ (i0 | τ ) + log |A| = −∞                   (13)
                                   qθ (i0 |τ )→0


This analysis shows that as the distribution qθ (i0 | τ ) converges, agents are incentivized to revisit
known trajectories, where they can achieve much higher rewards compared to exploring new, unfa-
miliar trajectories.

C    T HE TD LOSS OF QMIX
QMIX trains the policies of agents jointly by optimizing Qtot using the TD loss, defined as:

                             b
                               "                                                      2 #
                             X
                 LQM
                  TD
                     IX
                        =            r + γ max Q̄tot (st+1 , ut+1 ) − Qtot (st , ut )                (14)
                                              ut+1
                             i=1

where Q̄tot represents the target network, b is the batch size of transition samples, and D is the replay
buffer storing trajectory samples. r denotes the global reward shared by all agents. Notably, since
the policies of all agents are trained jointly by minimizing the TD loss, it is not possible to directly
                                               a
incorporate each agent’s intrinsic reward rentropy     into the global reward r to independently train
each agent’s policy. This limitation necessitates the addition of an intrinsic utility network, Qentropy
                                                                                                 a       ,
                                                                    a
which is specifically designed to optimize the intrinsic reward rentropy    .

D    T HE IMPLEMENTATION OF TEE WITH POLICY GRADIENT METHODS
In our paper, we integrated our method with the value-based method QMIX. Here, we demonstrate
how to integrate our proposed TEE with policy gradient methods. Specifically, we integrate TEE with
MAPPO, a state-of-the-art policy-based MARL algorithm measured by SMAC. MAPPO involves
training an actor network and a critic network shared among all agents. Because each agent trains its
                                                          a
own critic, we can thus adopt a shaped reward, renv + αrentropy  (where renv is the environmental re-
            a
ward and rentropy is the intrinsic reward generated by our method), when computing the reward-to-go
R̂ to train each agent’s critic network. The other components of MAPPO remain unchanged. We con-
duct experiments on Pac-Men, SMAC, and SMACv2 to evaluate the performance of TEE+MAPPO.
The results, presented in Table 1, show that TEE+MAPPO outperforms the baselines significantly.

E    P YTORCH - STYLE PSEUDOCODE FOR TEE
The pytorch-style pseudocode for TEE is provided in Algorithm 1.

F    E NVIRONMENTAL DETAILS AND A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In Pac-Men, we initialize four agents positioned in the central room of a maze. Each agent can only
observe a 4×4 grid around them. There are some randomly initialized dots distributed in each edge
room. The goal of the agent is to collect as many dots as possible in each edge room. We set different
lengths for the paths to investigate the exploration of different MARL algorithms. Specifically, for
the downward, left, right, and upward paths, the path lengths are 3, 6, 6, and 10, respectively. Only
one path is within the agent’s observation scope. The dots in each room will refresh when all of them
are eaten by agents. The environmental reward received by the agent equals the total number of dots
eaten in each time step.
SMAC benchmark is a set of cooperative tasks built on StarCraft II, aimed at evaluating the ef-
fectiveness of various Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) algorithms. The agent-level
control in SMAC is achieved through the Machine Learning APIs provided by both StarCraft II and


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1: PyTorch-style pseudocode for TEE
# batch: collected trajectories
# |A|: number of agents
# H: dimension of the identity representation
identity_representations = nn.Parameter(th.randn(|A|, H))
def TEE(batch):
   ctr_out = []
   for t in range(batch.seq_length):
       z_embedding = encoder(batch["obs"][:, t])
       c_embedding, hidden_states =
        autoregressive_model(z_embedding, hidden_states)
       ctr_out.append(c_embedding)
   ctr_out = th.stack(ctr_out, dim=1) # Concat trajectory
    representations over time
   trajectory_representation_loss =
    contrastive_loss(identity_representations, c_embedding)
   optimizer.zero_grad()
   trajectory_representation_loss.backward()
   optimizer.step()
   for t in range(batch.seq_length-1):
       z_embedding = encoder(batch["obs"][:, t+1])
       c_embedding, hidden_states =
        autoregressive_model(z_embedding, hidden_states)
       intrinsic_reward = entropy_estimator(c_embedding)
       intrinsic_rewards.append(intrinsic_reward)
   intrinsic_rewards = torch.stack(intrinsic_rewards, dim=1) #
    Concat intrinsic rewards over time
   return intrinsic_rewards


DeepMind’s PySC2. Each task features a combat scenario with two armies: one controlled by allied
RL agents and the other by a non-learning game AI. The game is over when all units of any army
die or a predefined time limit is reached. The objective for the allied agents is to learn a policy that
maximizes the game’s win rate. To achieve this, agents must learn a sequence of actions to collaborate
with allies in defeating enemy forces. An illustrative example of such collaboration is the mastery of
kiting skills, where agents form formations based on their armor types, compelling enemy units to
pursue while maintaining a safe distance to minimize damage. The SC2.4.10 version of StarCraft II
is used, and it’s important to note that performance comparisons between different versions are not
applicable. We conduct experiments on six scenarios including 3s5z, 2c_vs_64zg, 7sz, 6h_vs_8z,
corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z with various difficulty levels.
SMAC has notable drawbacks due to the lack of stochasticity, and to address this issue, SMACv2
proposes some changes: introducing random team compositions, and random start positions. These
adjustments aim to increase stochasticity to efficiently test the exploration of MARL algorithms. We
conduct experiments on three scenarios of SMACv2 including terran_5_vs_5, protoss_5_vs_5, and
zerg_5_vs_5. SMACv2 employs three unit types for each race. Units are algorithmically generated
in teams, with each unit type having a fixed probability, consistent at both test and train times. The
unit types of allied agents in these scenarios are identical to those of enemies. At the beginning of
each episode, the allied agents are randomly spawned in the map with reflect or surround style.
We show the average returns of all algorithms in Pac-Men, SMAC, and SMACv2 with standard
deviation over five random seeds in Table 1. The results demonstrate the significant outperformance
of our method compared to baselines.


G    E NVIRONMENTAL DETAILS AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In Pac-Men, four agents are initialized in the central room of a maze. Each agent has a limited
observation range, confined to a 4×4 grid around them. Dots are randomly distributed in the edge


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


rooms of the maze, and the agents’ goal is to collect as many dots as possible from these rooms. To
examine the exploration capabilities of different MARL algorithms, we set varying path lengths: 3, 6,
6, and 10 steps for the downward, left, right, and upward paths, respectively. Only the downward
path falls within the agents’ observation range. The dots in each room respawn after all have been
collected by the agents. The environmental reward each agent receives corresponds to the number of
dots collected in each time step.
The SMAC benchmark consists of a set of cooperative tasks built on StarCraft II, designed to evaluate
the effectiveness of various MARL algorithms. In SMAC, agent-level control is facilitated through
the Machine Learning APIs provided by both StarCraft II and DeepMind’s PySC2. Each task
presents a combat scenario involving two armies: one controlled by allied RL agents and the other
by a non-learning game AI. The game ends when all units of one army are eliminated or when a
predefined time limit is reached. The allied agents aim to learn policies that maximize the win rate by
collaborating effectively to defeat enemy forces. An example of such collaboration is mastering kiting
skills, where agents form formations based on their armor types, forcing enemy units to pursue them
while maintaining a safe distance to minimize damage. The experiments utilize version SC2.4.10
of StarCraft II, and it’s important to note that performance comparisons across different versions
are not applicable. We conduct experiments on six scenarios with varying difficulty levels: 3s5z,
2c_vs_64zg, 7sz, 6h_vs_8z, corridor, 3s5z_vs_3s6z, MMM2, 10m_vs_11m, and 27m_vs_30m.
SMAC has some limitations due to its lack of stochasticity. To address this, SMACv2 introduces
modifications such as random team compositions and random start positions. These changes aim to
enhance stochasticity, making it a more effective benchmark for evaluating the exploration capabil-
ities of MARL algorithms. We conduct experiments on three SMACv2 scenarios: terran_5_vs_5,
protoss_5_vs_5, and zerg_5_vs_5. SMACv2 sets three unit types for each race, with teams being
algorithmically generated based on a fixed probability for each unit type, consistent during both
testing and training phases. The allied agents’ unit types are identical to those of the enemies. At
the start of each episode, the allied agents are randomly spawned on the map in either a reflective or
surround formation.
We also test our method in two scenarios of Google Research Football (GRF). GRF provides a
challenging, physics-based environment that simulates a football game where agents need to learn
strategic planning, coordination, and precise timing to succeed. The left side players (except the
goalkeeper) as agents are trained to learn cooperative policies. The right side palyers are controlled by
the game engine. The agents operate within a discrete action space of 19 options, including moving
in eight directions, sliding, shooting, and passing. Agent observations include the positions and
movement directions of the controlled agent, other agents, and the ball.
We present the average returns of all algorithms in Pac-Men, SMAC, SMACv2, and GRF along with
the standard deviation over five random seeds, in Table 1. The results demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms baseline methods.

Table 1: Average returns of all algorithms in Pac-Men, SMAC, SMACv2, and GRF. ± denotes the
standard deviation over five random seeds.
                                                                             SMAC                                                                          SMACv2                                                                GRF
  Method    Pac-Men
                          3s5z      2c_vs_64zg      7sz      6h_vs_8z    corridor    3s5z_vs_3s6z   MMM2        10m_vs_11m   27m_vs_30m   terran_5_vs_5   protoss_5_vs_5   zerg_5_vs_5   academy_3_vs_1_with_keeper   academy_4_vs_2_with_keeper   academy_counter_attack_hard
  QMIX      0.21±0.04   0.72±0.13   0.85±0.08    0.17±0.02   0.23±0.03   0.57±0.07    0.36±0.12     0.27±0.06    0.57±0.04    0.43±0.07    0.68±0.03        0.53±0.05      0.41±0.04             0.23±0.05                    0.13±0.09                     0.17±0.03
  MAPPO     0.49±0.03   0.81±0.05   0.83±0.04    0.52±0.06   0.53±0.03   0.62±0.05    0.57±0.08     0.46±0.03    0.39±0.05    0.43±0.05    0.52±0.04        0.47±0.03      0.37±0.03             0.31±0.09                    0.18±0.09                     0.23±0.07
  MAVEN     0.32±0.06   0.51±0.21   0.72±0.06    0.00±0.00   0.42±0.04   0.36±0.08    0.18±0.15     0.43±0.11    0.62±0.08    0.53±0.09    0.58±0.04        0.31±0.05      0.29±0.03             0.18±0.06                    0.08±0.06                     0.13±0.09
    EOI     0.41±0.05   0.87±0.07   0.83±0.02    0.37±0.03   0.08±0.03   0.25±0.11    0.42±0.13     0.39±0.08    0.72±0.03    0.64±0.06    0.65±0.05        0.42±0.03      0.47±0.04             0.17±0.05                    0.05±0.03                     0.07±0.03
  QTRAN     0.28±0.08   0.21±0.19   0.75±0.05    0.00±0.00   0.02±0.02   0.08±0.07    0.02±0.01     0.13±0.05    0.43±0.03    0.21±0.07    0.42±0.02        0.40±0.04      0.25±0.02             0.25±0.03                    0.13±0.08                     0.11±0.05
   SCDS     0.37±0.05   0.76±0.07   0.57±0.09    0.21±0.03   0.03±0.01   0.56±0.06    0.00±0.00     0.32±0.08    0.62±0.03    0.57±0.09    0.52±0.03        0.47±0.05      0.38±0.04             0.42±0.13                    0.25±0.11                     0.47±0.06
   PMIC     0.34±0.03   0.82±0.03   0.79±0.05    0.58±0.02   0.51±0.05   0.37±0.03    0.18±0.06     0.19±0.05    0.43±0.07    0.62±0.06    0.47±0.03        0.36±0.02      0.42±0.02             0.23±0.08                    0.11±0.07                     0.16±0.07
   LIPO     0.43±0.02   0.71±0.03   0.76±0.02    0.39±0.04   0.36±0.06   0.27±0.03    0.21±0.03     0.27±0.13    0.52±0.04    0.37±0.04    0.43±0.02        0.46±0.03      0.37±0.03             0.19±0.05                    0.07±0.03                     0.12±0.05
    FoX     0.39±0.03   0.74±0.02   0.64±0.05    0.56±0.03   0.45±0.05   0.52±0.04    0.43±0.04     0.32±0.13    0.67±0.05    0.61±0.09    0.54±0.03        0.56±0.02      0.49±0.02             0.57±0.05                    0.41±0.13                     0.33±0.08
 TEE+QMIX   0.83±0.03   0.95±0.02   0.96±0.03    0.83±0.04   0.85±0.03   0.90±0.03    0.87±0.04     0.85±0.03    0.93±0.05    0.89±0.05    0.96±0.02        0.95±0.03      0.87±0.03             0.79±0.13                    0.63±0.16                     0.71±0.09
TEE+MAPPO   0.80±0.04   0.97±0.02   0.94±0.04    0.90±0.03   0.87±0.04   0.85±0.03    0.94±0.03     0.76±0.13    0.90±0.06    0.94±0.06    0.87±0.02        0.89±0.02      0.84±0.05             0.68±0.08                    0.61±0.12                     0.57±0.06


H          T RAINING D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS
The overall trajectory encoder used in our method is composed of an encoder and an autoregressive
model. For the encoder, we utilize two MLP layers with a hidden size of 64, followed by batch
normalization. The autoregressive model is implemented using a GRU unit. We use randomly
initialized learnable vectors as identity representations, which have the same dimensions as the
trajectory representations. We integrate TEE with QMIX by adding an intrinsic utility network, which


                                                                                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is composed of a two-layer MLP with a hidden size of 64, optimized to maximize the total intrinsic
rewards. All other components remain identical to the standard QMIX.
To ensure a fair comparison, the policy networks for all agents are constructed using Deep Recurrent
Q-Networks. At each time step, an agent’s policy network processes a local observation as well as
the last step action through a fully connected hidden layer, a GRU unit, and a final fully connected
layer that generates |U | outputs, corresponding to the available actions. We set the evaluation interval
to 10K steps followed by 32 test episodes. We run all methods for 5 million steps. In SMAC and
SMACv2, target networks are updated using hard updates every 200 episodes, whereas in Pac-Men,
soft updates with a momentum of 0.01 are employed. The hyperparameters for TEE and baseline
methods in Pac-Men, SMAC, and SMACv2 are detailed in Table 2. Parameter sharing is applied
across all methods to enable agents to make action decisions. For generality, we report both the
mean and standard deviation of performance results, averaged over five random seeds. To ensure a
fair comparison, consistent hyperparameters are used across different methods. The replay buffer
size is set to 5K. We implemented our method using NumPy and PyTorch, and all experiments are
conducted on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.

                                                                        Table 2: Hyperparameters
                       Pac-Men                                             SMAC                                                                           SMACv2
    hidden dimension      64                                                                                   128
       learning rate    0.0003                                                                                0.005
         optimizer                                                                                           Adam
      target update    0.01(soft)                                                                               200(hard)
         batch size       32                                                                                       64
                                             0.05 for 3s5z, 2c_vs_64zg, 8m, 5m_vs_6m, 8m_vs_9m, and 10m_vs_11m,
           β             0.05                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                         0.02 for 7sz, 6h_vs_8z, corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z
                                             0.01 for 3s5z, 2c_vs_64zg, 8m, 5m_vs_6m, 8m_vs_9m, and 10m_vs_11m,
           α             0.02                                                                                                                                0.01
                                                         0.02 for 7sz, 6h_vs_8z, corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z
                                    8 for 10m_vs_11m, 5 for 3s5z, 7sz, corridor, 3s5z_vs_3s6z, 8m, 5m_vs_6m, and 8m_vs_9m,            4 for terran_5_vs_5, protoss_5_vs_5, and zerg_5_vs_5,
           k               3
                                                                  1 for 2c_vs_64zg, 4 for 6h_vs_8z                           7 for terran_10_vs_10, 12 for terran_15_vs_15, 18 for terran_20_vs_20
                                           200,000 for 3s5z, 2c_vs_64zg, 8m, 5m_vs_6m, 8m_vs_9m, and 10m_vs_11m,
epsilon anneal time    200,000                                                                                                                             500,000
                                                       500,000 for 7sz, 6h_vs_8z, corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z


I        E VALUATIONS OF TEE WITH DIFFERENT VALUES OF k

The values of k used in different experimental environments are listed in Table 2. To investigate
whether the performance of our method is strongly sensitive to k, we show the performance of our
method with different values of k in the terran_5_vs_5 (including 5 agents) and terran_20_vs_20
(including 20 agents) scenarios in Table 3. We note that different values of k only lead to small
differences in performance in both scenarios. The performance of our method remains robust across
different values of k.


J         E VALUATION OF TEE IN S CENARIOS R EQUIRING H OMOGENEOUS
          B EHAVIOR

While our proposed TEE succeeds in promoting diversity among agents to encourage exploration,
there are situations where agents may benefit from behaving uniformly, especially in simpler scenarios.
For instance, allied agents might employ the same tactic, such as simultaneously firing at a single
enemy to quickly eliminate it. To demonstrate our method’s ability to learn such behaviors, we test it
in four homogeneous SMAC scenarios where the focus fire tactic is advantageous. The results, shown
in Table 4, indicate that our method consistently outperforms QMIX in all scenarios, confirming that
it can support uniform behaviors when they lead to higher environmental rewards. This phenomenon
demonstrates that our method can efficiently balance exploration and exploitation, leading to optimal
cooperative behaviors.


                                     Table 3: Performance of our method with different values of k
                                                    terran_5_vs_5                                                                                   terran_20_vs_20
      Methods
                             k=1                  k=2          k=3                          k=4                 k=1                   k=4                 k=10       k=15                               k=18
    TEE+QMIX              0.92 ±0.03           0.90 ±0.03 0.93 ±0.04                     0.96 ±0.02          0.85 ±0.03            0.86 ±0.04          0.83 ±0.04 0.88 ±0.05                         0.89 ±0.03



                                                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Table 4: Performance of our method and QMIX in homogeneous scenarios.

                     Method          8m      5m_vs_6m     8m_vs_9m     10m_vs_11m
                   TEE+QMIX      0.95±0.03   0.92±0.04    0.94±0.03     0.91± 0.06
                     QMIX        0.87±0.03   0.65±0.04    0.58±0.05     0.43±0.04

    Table 5: Performance comparisons of our method against QMIX with different values of

                                Methods                     corridor     3s5z_vs_3s6z
                Trajectory entropy maximization (Ours)    0.90 ±0.03      0.87 ±0.04
                                  = 0.05                  0.57 ±0.07      0.36 ±0.12
                                  = 0.08                  0.61 ±0.04      0.39 ±0.09
                                  = 0.12                  0.65 ±0.06      0.45 ±0.14


K    C OMPARISON WITH  - GREEDY

 -greedy is a widely used exploration technique in many RL approaches. Increasing the value of
generally promotes better exploration. In this section, we compare our entropy maximization method
with  -greedy to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in promoting exploration in the domain
of MARL. To achieve this, we set the   values to 0.05, 0.08, and 0.12 for QMIX, respectively. We test
different values of   in the super hard scenarios corridor and 3s5z_vs_3s6z. The results are shown
in Table 5. Our entropy maximization method is more efficient than increasing the values of   to
encourage effective exploration in multi-agent environments. We note that increasing the values of
does not improve the performance significantly. In multi-agent settings, larger   values only increase
the stochasticity in action selections of a single agent and ignore the diversity or distinguishability
among agents as they do not consider the trajectories of other agents, thus leading to inefficient
exploration.

L    S CALABILITY

Many MARL methods suffer from poor scalability, i.e., the agent performance decreases significantly
as the number of agents increases. This occurs because the state-action space expands exponentially
as the number of agents increases, making efficient exploration crucial. In this section, we evaluate
the scalability of our method across four SMACv2 scenarios with increasing numbers of agents:
terran_5_vs_5, terran_10_vs_10, terran_15_vs_15, and terran_20_vs_20. The results, presented
in Table 6, show that our method substantially outperforms QMIX across all scenarios. QMIX
faces challenges in scalability and struggles to achieve satisfactory performance due to insufficient
exploration. In contrast, our method shows strong scalability, demonstrating that maximizing
trajectory entropy enables efficient exploration.

M     V ISUALIZATIONS

We present some visualization examples of the diverse policies learned by our method, as shown in Fig-
ure 8, which emerge in the extremely challenging scenarios (6h_vs_8z, corridor, and 3s5z_vs_3s6z).
For instance, in the 6h_vs_8z scenario, one agent moves in the opposite direction of the team to cover
other agents. Most of the enemies are then drawn to the agent’s movements. The agent continues
kiting the pursuing enemies, drawing the majority of their fire. Meanwhile, the remaining enemies
are surrounded by the other agents. This strategy allows agents to cooperatively distribute enemies’
attacks. In contrast, if all agents behaved similarly and rushed toward the enemies, they would be


Table 6: Performance of our method and QMIX in scenarios of SMACv2 with different number of
agents

          Method       terran_5_vs_5    terran_10_vs_10    terran_15_vs_15    terran_20_vs_20
        TEE+QMIX         0.96±0.02         0.95 ±0.03         0.92 ±0.04         0.89 ±0.03
          QMIX           0.68±0.03         0.39±0.04          0.24 ±0.06         0.11±0.05


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  6h_vs_8z


                   corridor


                3s5z_vs_3s6z


Figure 8: Visualization examples of diverse policies emerging in 6h_vs_8z (top), corridor (medium),
and 3s5z_vs_3s6z (bottom) from initial (left) to final (right). Green and red shadows represent agents
and enemies, respectively. Green and red arrows represent the moving directions of agents and
enemies, respectively.


quickly defeated by the stronger opponents. Similar diverse policies are observed in the other two
scenarios. These results highlight the effectiveness of our method in learning diverse policies, helping
agents cooperatively defeat enemies.
We also provide additional visitation heatmaps for TEE+QMIX and the baseline methods in SMACv2
scenarios, as shown in Figures 9 and 10. These heatmaps illustrate that our proposed TEE achieves
more efficient exploration compared to the baselines. The mutual information-based baselines such
as MAVEN, EOI, and SCDS do not sufficiently explore the environment, making them less effective
at defeating enemies that appear randomly on the map. While the mutual information objective
encourages multi-agent diversity, it can also impede effective exploration. In contrast, our proposed
TEE leverages the trajectory entropy maximization objective, which drives agents to adopt exploratory
policies without being constrained by mutual dependence.


      (a) MAVEN          (b) EOI       (c)SCDS         (d) LIPO       (e) FoX      (f) TEE+QMIX
       Figure 9: Visitation heatmaps of different algorithms in the protoss_5_vs_5 scenario.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      (a) MAVEN        (b) EOI      (c)SCDS         (d) LIPO     (e) FoX      (f) TEE+QMIX
       Figure 10: Visitation heatmaps of different algorithms in the zerg_5_vs_5 scenario.


                                               20
