Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


N ESTEROV ACCELERATION IN BENIGNLY NON - CONVEX
LANDSCAPES

 Kanan Gupta, Stephan Wojtowytsh
 Department of Mathematics, University of Pittsburgh
 kanan.g@pitt.edu, s.woj@pitt.edu



                                              A BSTRACT
         While momentum-based optimization algorithms are commonly used in the no-
         toriously non-convex optimization problems of deep learning, their analysis has
         historically been restricted to the convex and strongly convex setting. In this article,
         we partially close this gap between theory and practice and demonstrate that virtu-
         ally identical guarantees can be obtained in optimization problems with a ‘benign’
         non-convexity. We show that these weaker geometric assumptions are well justified
         in overparametrized deep learning, at least locally. Variations of this result are
         obtained for a continuous time model of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent
         algorithm (NAG), the classical discrete time version of NAG, and versions of NAG
         with stochastic gradient estimates with purely additive noise and with noise that
         exhibits both additive and multiplicative scaling.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Accelerated first order methods of optimization are the backbone of modern deep learning. So far,
theoretical guarantees that momentum-based methods accelerate over memory-less gradient-based
methods have been limited to the setting of convex objective functions. Indeed, recent work of Yue
et al. (2023) shows that the assumption of convexity cannot be weakened as far as, for instance, the
Polyak-Lojasiewicz (PL) condition ∥∇f ∥2 ≥ 2µ (f − inf f ), which has been used to great success
in the study of gradient descent algorithms without momentum for instance by Karimi et al. (2016).
Optimization problems in deep learning are notoriously non-convex. Initial theoretical efforts focused
on approximating the training of very wide neural networks by the parameter optimization in a related
linear model: The neural tangent kernel (NTK). Jacot et al. (2018); E et al. (2019) show that for
randomly initialized parameters, gradient flow and gradient descent trajectories remain uniformly
close to those which are optimized by the linearization of the neural network around the law of its
initialization. This analysis was extended to momentum-based optimization by Liu et al. (2022).
Recall that a C 2 -smooth function f is convex if and only if its Hessian, D2 f , is positive semi-definite,
i.e. has only non-negative eigenvalues. Strictly negative (but small) eigenvalues of the Hessian of the
loss function have been observed close to the set of global minimizers experimentally by Sagun et al.
(2017; 2018); Alain et al. (2018) and their presence has been explained theoretically by Wojtowytsch
(2023). This poses questions about the use of momentum-based optimizers such as SGD with (heavy
ball or Nesterov) momentum or Adam in the training of deep neural networks. In this work, we
show that acceleration can be guaranteed for Nesterov’s method under much weaker geometric
assumptions than (strong) convexity, in particular for certain objective functions that have non-unique
and non-isolated minimizers and whose Hessian may have negative eigenvalues up to a certain size.
In the remainder of this section, we briefly review how our work fits into the literature. In Section
2, we precisely state the assumptions under which we prove convergence at an accelerated rate and
discuss how our work connects to optimization in deep learning. Our main results are presented in
Section 3, both in discrete and continuous time. Some technical details are postponed to the appendix.

1.1   P REVIOUS WORK

Gradient-based optimization was first proposed by Cauchy et al. (1847) in form of the gradient
descent algorithm. Over a century later, momentum-based ‘accelerated’ algorithms were introduced


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


by Hestenes & Stiefel (1952) for convex quadratic functions and by Nesterov (1983) for general
smooth and convex objective functions. Nesterov’s work was generalized to non-smooth convex
optimization by Beck & Teboulle (2009) and to stochastic smooth convex optimization among others
by Nemirovski et al. (2009); Shamir & Zhang (2013); Jain et al. (2019); Laborde & Oberman (2020)
for additive noise and by Liu & Belkin (2018); Even et al. (2021); Vaswani et al. (2019); Gupta et al.
(2024) for multiplicatively scaling noise. See also (Ghadimi & Lan, 2012; 2013) for more information
on accelerated stochastic gradient methods. While the heavy ball method is used extensively in
deep learning, Lessard et al. (2016); Goujaud et al. (2023) prove that it does not generally achieve
accelerated convergence for smooth strongly convex functions and may even diverge – see however
(Kassing & Weissmann, 2024) for positive results under stronger smoothness assumptions
Accelerated gradient methods have been studied e.g. by Josz et al. (2023) under much weaker
regularity conditions and weaker geometric conditions than (strong) convexity, namely the Kurdyka-
Lojasiewicz (KL) condition. Under those weaker assumptions, it is at best possible to prove con-
vergence to a local minimizer at a non-acclerated rate: Under the (comparatively weak) Polyak-
Lojasiewicz (PL) condition, a special case of the KL condition, Yue et al. (2023) show that it is
not possible to obtain an accelerated rate of convergence. A slower linear rate of convergence
is established by Apidopoulos et al. (2022) in continuous time under the assumption that the ob-
                f satisfies has an L-Lipschitz continuous gradient and satisfies the PL-inequality
jective function
2µ f − inf f ≤ ∥∇f ∥2 . The rate of convergence is
             √  p           p            √             r
                                                              µ

                                                                      √      µ      µ
               µ    L/µ − L/µ − 1 = L 1 − 1 −                      ≈ L·         = √ .
                                                              L             2L    2 L
                                                                                  √
A stable time-discretization can generally be attained with effective step-size 1/ L for momentum
methods (see Su et al., 2016, Section 2), suggesting convergence at the non-accelerated linear rate
(1 − µ/2L)k in discrete time. To the best of our knowledge, no proof has been given yet.
There have been several efforts to find a reasonable relaxation of convexity for which accelerated
convergence can still be achieved. Hinder et al. (2020); Fu et al. (2023); Wang & Wibisono (2023);
Guminov et al. (2023) consider acceleration under the weaker condition that the objective function is
γ-quasar or (γ, µ)-strongly quasar-convex, i.e. the inequality
                                                                 µ
                       ⟨∇f (x), x − x∗ ⟩ ≥ γ f (x) − f (x∗ ) + ∥x − x∗ ∥2
                                                                 2
holds for any x ∈ Rd and any minimizer x∗ of f . Compared to (strong) convexity, it relaxes the
condition in two ways: It only considers pairs (x, x∗ ) rather than general pairs of points x, y ∈ Rd ,
and it introduces a factor γ into the inequality which may be strictly smaller than one. Still, it has
geometric implications which may be too strong in the context of deep learning: In the strongly
quasar-convex case, minimizers are unique, and in the quasar-convex case, sub-level sets are star-
shaped with respect to any minimizer x∗ since f (tx + (1 − t)x∗ ) is monotone increasing on [0, 1]
(see Lemma 24, Appendix C).
Accelerated rates of convergence were obtained by Necoara et al. (2019) in discrete time and by
Aujol et al. (2022) in continuous time under the assumption that the objective function is both convex
and quasi-strongly convex, and that it has a unique minimizer. Their results are generalized by
Hermant et al. (2024) who allow for non-smooth composite optimization and consider γ ∈ (0, 1]
rather than just γ = 1. Unlike the present work, Hermant et al. (2024) require the uniqueness of
minimizers and only study deterministic optimization. Curiously, despite the difference in settings,
they independently find the same lower bound on Hessian eigenvalues that we require (compare e.g.
Theorem 11 and (Hermant et al., 2024, Theorem 2)). See also (Aujol et al., 2024, Table 1) for an
overview of theoretical guarantees of acceleration without strong convexity.
In overparametrized deep learning, the set of minimizers of the loss function is a (generally curved)
manifold, and tangential motion to the manifold can have important implications on the implicit
bias of an algorithm (Li et al., 2021; Damian et al., 2021). Any notion that takes into account all
minimizers is quite rigid for such tasks. A more realistic assumption is the ‘aiming condition’ of Liu
et al. (2024) that
                               ⟨∇f (x), x − π(x)⟩ ≥ γ f (x) − min f
where π(x) is the closest minimizer to the point x. This notion enjoys much greater flexibility in
terms of the global geometry of f . Liu et al. (2024) investigate the convergence of gradient flows
under the aiming condition, but not that of momentum methods.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1.2   O UR CONTRIBUTION

Our study can be seen as combining geometric ideas pertaining to (1, µ)-quasar convexity and the
aiming condition. Our assumption in (1) is equivalent to quasi-strong convexity (Necoara et al.,
2019), but notably we do not make any additional assumptions about the convexity of the objective
function or uniqueness of minimizers unlike prior works. Since we focus on the closest minimizer at
any point in the trajectory, this presents a unique challenge compared to analyzing the distance from a
fixed minimizer. As the current iterate xt moves, its projection onto the set of minimizers, π(xt ), also
moves. This requires a modification of the usual Lyapunov function to account for the movement
of π(xt ) (or the tangential movement of xt parallel to the set of minimizers) as well as the ‘drift’ in
directions where the objective function is negatively curved. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study which takes into account this tangential movement and obtains accelerated convergence.
In overparametrized learning, the set of minimizers of a loss function is a submanifold of high
dimension in a usually much higher-dimensional space. Unless the manifold of minimizers is a linear
space, the Hessian of the loss function is geometrically required to have negative eigenvalues in any
neighborhood of the set of a minimizer where the manifold is curved. Still, accelerated methods
in first order optimization have been found to be highly successful in deep learning. A common
heuristic has been that as long as the objective function is convex in the direction towards the set
of minimizers, small negative eigenvalues in directions parallel to the set of minimizers can safely
be ignored: Tangential drift along the set of minimizers should not affect the decay of the objective
function significantly. We prove that this intuition indeed applies in a continuous time model for
gradient descent with momentum (Theorems 6 and 8) and for Nesterov’s time-stepping scheme
(Theorems 11, 13 and 14) in deterministic optimization and stochastic optimization with bounded
noise. With ‘multiplicative (state-dependent) noise’ motivated by overparametrized deep learning,
we prove an analogous statement for a modified version of Nesterov’s algorithm (Theorem 15).

2     S ETTING
2.1   A SSUMPTIONS

We always make the following assumptions on the regularity and geometry of the function f and its
set of minimizers.

      1. The objective function f : Rd → R is bounded from below, C 1 -smooth and its gradient
         ∇f : Rd → Rd is locally Lipschitz continuous.
      2. The set M = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) = inf z∈Rd f (z)} of minimizers of f is a (non-empty)
         k-dimensional C 2 -submanifold of Rd for k < d.
      3. There exists an open sub-level set Uα = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) < α} for some α > 0 such that
         for every x ∈ Uα there exists a unique z ∈ M which is closest to x. We denote z as π(x)
         and assume that the closest point projection map π : Uα → M is C 1 -smooth.
      4. f satisfies the µ-strong aiming condition (with respect to the closest minimizer) in Uα , i.e.
                                                           µ
                  ∇f (x) · x − π(x) ≥ f (x) − f π(x) + ∥x − π(x)∥2

                                                                                   ∀ x ∈ Uα .       (1)
                                                              2
These assumptions are significantly weaker than the assumption of strong convexity, but for instance
strong enough to imply a PL inequality with constant µ (see Appendix C). As illustrated in Section
2.3, they match many geometric features of overparametrized deep learning. For an analysis in
discrete time, we will make stronger quantitative assumptions.

2.2   S IMPLE E XAMPLES

We give a number of examples which are covered by these assumptions where f is not merely a
µ-strongly convex function. The first example illustrates how subtle the interplay between geometric
conditions is, even in one dimension.
                                                            2
Example 1. For ε, R > 0, consider the function f (x) = x2 + 2ε x2 sin(2R log(|x|). The function
f has a unique global minimizer at x∗ = 0 and its derivative f ′ is a Lipschitz-continuous function


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 1: We visualize f from Example 1 in the top row and its derivative in the bottom row with
R = 2 and ε = 0.2 (left), ε = 0.1 (middle) and ε = 0.05 (right). Left: f has many local minimizers
as the derivative crosses 0 an infinite number of times. Middle: f satisfies the PL condition, but not
the strong aiming condition. Right: f is strongly aiming (with respect to the unique global minimizer,
which implies the PL condition). In all plots, f is non-convex since f ′ is non-monotone.

                             √
with Lipschitz-constant
               √        1 + ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4 . Furthermore, f has an infinite number of strict local
minimizers if ε 1 + R2 > 1, but satisfies favorable geometric properties under stronger assumptions:

                           PL condition                µ-strongly aiming             µ-strongly convex
                             √                             √                          √
     Must be < 1            ε 1 + R2                      ε 1 + 4R2                  ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4
                           √                                 √                          √
        Constant     (1 − ε 1 + R2 )2 /(1 + ε)          1 − ε 1 + 4R2              1 − ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4

Evidently, the geometric conditions and associated constants are quite different if R ≫ 1. See Figure
1 for an illustration of f . Further details for the example and a comparison to less common notions
such as quasar-convexity are given in Appendix C.2. We note that the example exploits the fact
that f is C 1,1 - but not C 2 -smooth: For C 2 -functions, Rebjock & Boumal (2023) prove that the PL
condition locally implies strong aiming condition.
The next example is trivial, but useful to illustrate why tangential movement should not matter.
Example 2. Let f˜1 : Rd−k → [0, ∞) be a non-negative µ-strongly convex function such that
f˜1 (0) = 0 and let f˜2 : Rk → [a, ∞) be a continuous function for a > 0. Define
                   f : Rd → R,        f (x) = f˜2 (x1 , . . . , xk ) · f˜1 (xk+1 , . . . , xd ).
Then f is aµ-strongly aiming π(x) = (x1 , . . . , xk , 0, . . . , 0), but not strongly convex since the
minimizer is non-unique. Similarly, if A : Rk → R(d−k)×(d−k) is a function which takes values in
the set of symmetric matrices with eigenvalues larger than µ, then
                                         1
             f : Rd → R,        f (x) =    (xk+1 , . . . , xd ) A(x1 ,...,xk ) · (xk+1 , . . . , xd )T
                                         2
is µ-strongly aiming, but generally non-convex.
Example 3. Let M be a compact C k -submanifold of Rd , k ≥ 2 and d(x) := dist(x, M). Then there
exists a ‘tubular neighborhood’ Uε = {x ∈ Rd : d(x) < ε} on which d is C k -smooth and the unique
closest point projection π is well-defined and C k−1 -smooth – see Appendix A.
Assume that f : Uε → R is given by f (x) = µ2 d(x)2 (and extended arbitrarily to Rd \ Uε ). Recall
that ∇d(x) is the unit vector pointing towards the closest point in M at all points x where the distance
function is smooth, so in particular ∥∇d(x)∥ = 1. Thus π(x) = x − d(x)∇d(x) and
        ∇f (x) · (x − π(x)) = µ d(x)∇d(x) · x − (x − d(x)∇d(x)) = µ d2 (x) ∥∇d(x)∥2

                                 µ          µ                                µ
                              = d2 (x) + d2 (x) = f (x) − f (π(x)) + ∥x − π(x)∥2
                                  2         2                                2
for x ∈ Uε , i.e. f is µ-strongly aiming. On the other hand, f is not convex unless M is. Otherwise,
take x1 , x2 ∈ M and t ∈ (0, 1) such that tx1 +(1−t)x2 ∈  / M. Then the map t 7→ d2 tx1 +(1−t)x2
attains a maximum inside the interval (0, 1), meaning that d2 cannot be convex.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 2: Left: The dashed red line connects two minimizers of the function f . Along the line, f
must achieve an interior local maximum. At this point, the Hessian D2 f cannot be positive definite.
Middle, Right: Optimization trajectories for Nesterov’s method (top) and its associated energy curve
(bottom). The selection of limit point may depend crucially on optimization parameters: In the middle
plot, we take 800 steps with stepsize 10−2 while on the right, we take 8,000 steps with stepsize 10−3
from the same initial point. The decay of f (xt ) is similar for both trajectories, but the limit points on
the manifold of minimizers are far apart. The objective function is f (x, y) = (x2 /2 + 3y 2 − 1)2 .


This consideration more generally shows that if the manifold of minimizers M of a function f is not
perfectly straight, then the objective function cannot be convex – see also Figure 2. More precisely:
Lemma 4. (Wojtowytsch, 2023, based on Appendix B) Let f : Rd → R be a C 2 -function and
M = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) = inf f }. Assume that M is a k-dimensional C 1 -submanifold of Rd , z ∈ M,
Tz M the tangent space at z, r > 0. If M ∩ Br (z) is not the same set as (z + Tz M) ∩ Br (z), then
there exists x ∈ Br (z) such that D2 f (x) has a strictly negative eigenvalue.

2.3     C ONNECTION TO D EEP L EARNING

An important class of objective functions are those which combine the geometric features of Examples
2 and 3. Such functions can be seen as geometric prototypes for loss functions in overparametrized
regression problems, such as in deep learning. Namely, consider a parametrized function class
h : Rp × Rd → R of weights w ∈ Rp and data x ∈ Rd (e.g. a neural network) and the mean squared
error (MSE) loss function
                                              n
                                          1 X                  2
      Ly : Rp → [0, ∞),       Ly (w) =          h(w, xi ) − yi ,          y = (y1 , . . . , yn ) ∈ Rn .   (2)
                                         2n i=1

If h is sufficiently smooth in w and for every vector y ∈ Rn , there exists wy ∈ Rp such that
Ly (wy ) = 0, then Cooper (2021) showed that for Lebesgue-almost all y ∈ Rn , the set My = {w ∈
Rp : Ly (w) = 0} is a p − n-dimensional submanifold of Rp . Essentially, the solution set of n
equations h(w, xi ) = yi in p variables is p − n-dimensional, much like when h is linear in w.
Cooper (2021) demonstrates that the expressivity and smoothness assumptions provably apply to
parametrized function classes h(w, x) of sufficiently wide neural networks with analytic activation
function such as tanh or sigmoid. Cooper (2021)’s proof involves the regular value theorem and
Sard’s theorem to show that all gradients ∇hw (w, xi ) are linearly independent on almost every level
set My . As a byproduct, this implies that the Hessian of the loss function
                        n
                     1X
         D2 L(w) =
                                               2
                               h(w, xi ) − yi Dw  h(w, xi ) + ∇w h(w, xi ) ⊗ ∇w h(w, xi )
                     n i=1 |         {z      }
                                      =0

has full rank n at every x ∈ My (for almost every y). Thus, all n eigenvalues in direction orthogonal
to M are non-zero. We prove the following in Appendix A. The same connection has been made e.g.
by Rebjock & Boumal (2023) for C 2 -functions and overparametrized regression problems.
Lemma 5. Assume that f : Rd → R is C 2 -smooth and that M = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) = inf f } is a
closed k-dimensional C 2 -submanifold of Rd (i.e. compact and without boundary). If D2 f (x) has
rank d − k everywhere on M, then there exist µ, α > 0 such that there exists a C 1 -smooth closest
point projection π : Uα → R with Uα = {x : f (x) < α} and f is µ-strongly aiming with π.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 3: Convexity analysis of ϕ(t) = L(w + tg) for w near global minimizers of a loss function L
and g = ∇L(w)/∥∇L(w)∥. Left: ϕ(t), middle: second derivative of ϕ, right: estimated strong aim-
ing parameter µ for t ∈ [−1, 1]. Evidently, ϕ is strongly convex in a neighborhood of the minimizers.
Strong aiming condition yields consistently larger constants than the strong convexity parameter
obtained from second derivatives. Different colors correspond to different random initializations.


In particular, f, M meet all conditions in Section 2.1. Note that by Lemma 4, the loss function f
cannot be convex since a compact manifold cannot be perfectly straight everywhere. Lemma 5 does
not apply to networks with the non-smooth ReLU activation σ(z) = max{z, 0}, also here minimizers
cannot be isolated due to the continuous scaling symmetry σ(z) = λ−1 σ(λz) for λ > 0.
Wojtowytsch (2023, Theorem 2.6) shows that the assumption that M is compact is a simplification
and generally does not apply in deep learning. Local versions of Lemma 5 could be proved with
µ, α which are positive functions on the manifold, but not necessarily bounded away from zero.
Naturally, this suffices in all cases where we provably remain in a local neighborhood in the course
of optimization. We eschew this greater generality for the sake of geometric clarity and commit the
pervasive sin of optimization theory for deep learning: We make global assumptions which can only
be guaranteed locally. For a further comparison of geometric conditions in optimization and deep
learning, see also Appendix C.
We illustrate in Figure 3 that our assumptions are locally reasonable in deep learning. We trained
a fully connected neural network (with 10 layers, width 35, tanh activation) to fit labels yi at
100 randomly generated datapoints xi ∈ R12 . The small dataset size allowed us to use the exact
gradient and loss function instead of stochastic approximations, for a better exploration of the loss
landscape. Since the closest minimizer is generally unknown, we use the gradient as a proxy and
examine the convexity of ϕ(t) = L(w + tg) for w very close to the set of global minimizers of
the loss function L as in (2) and g = ∇L(w)/∥∇L(w)∥. Labels were generated using a randomly
initialized teacher network (with 7 layers and width 20). Student networks were trained for 10,000
epochs using stochastic gradient descent with Nesterov momentum, with learning rate η = 0.005 and
momentum ρ = 0.99. Final training loss ranged between 10−12 and 10−9 across the five runs. Second
derivatives were approximated using second order difference quotients ϕ′′ (t) ≈ ϕ(t+h)−2ϕ(t)+ϕ(t−h)
                                                                                         h2
for h = 0.01. Similarly, the strong aiming parameter with respect to the global minimizer was
                 ′
estimated by 2 ϕ (t)t−ϕ(t)+inf
                       t2
                               ϕ
                                 where ϕ′ (t) was estimated as ϕ(t+h)−ϕ(t−h)
                                                                     2h       .
Due to the inherent randomness of training, geometric behaviors varied. Generally, the loss function
was convex along the gradient direction near minimizers, but neighborhood size, magnitude of the
second derivative, and steepness of the loss function varied. Some runs exhibited convex but not
strongly convex behavior, while others failed to reach zero loss along the line w + tg/∥g∥. The
gradient is an imperfect approximation of the minimizer’s direction, and rounding errors may occur
when it is so small near the set of minimizers.

3     M AIN C ONTRIBUTIONS
3.1   O PTIMIZATION IN CONTINUOUS TIME

In this section, we study a continuous time version of gradient descent with (heavy ball or Nesterov)
momentum derived by Su et al. (2016). Namely, we study solutions of the heavy ball ODE
                       ẍ + γ ẋ = −∇f (x),       x(0) = x0 ,      ẋ(0) = 0.                     (3)


                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


This is a popular model for the study of accelerated methods in optimization which avoids some
of the technicalities of discrete time stepping algorithms while relying on the same core geometric
concepts. Our main result is the following.
Theorem 6. [Continuous
                  √        time convergence guarantee] Assume that f satisfies the assumptions of
Section 2.1, γ = 2 µ and that x0 satisfies f (x0 ) < α where α is as in Section 2.1. Then there exists
a unique solution x(t) = xt of (3) and f (xt ) < α for all t > 0. Furthermore, x is C 2 -smooth and
                                         √                        µ
                f (xt ) − inf f (z) ≤ e− µ t f (x0 ) − inf f + dist(x0 , M)2 .
                         z∈Rd                                     2

The proof can be found in Appendix B. There, we prove that the Lyapunov function
                                                        1      √                2
                        L(t) = f (xt ) − f (π(xt )) +     ẋt + µ xt − π(xt )
                                                        2
                    √
satisfies L(t) ≤ e− µt L(0). The function L can be considered as a modified energy with potential
energy f − inf f + µ2 ∥x − π(x)∥2 and kinetic energy 12 ∥ẋ∥2 , but with a more complex quadratic
term in which velocity and position interact. Going back to (Su et al., 2016), this strategy of proof is
common in convex optimization. The main difficulty in our more general geometric setting is that the
time derivative of π(xt ) (i.e. tangential velocity) is not zero in general, unless the minimizer is unique
in Uα . Thus, we have to additionally control for the interaction of the tangential velocity with the
other terms in the Lyapunov sequence. One key observation that helps us is that the connecting line
xt − π(xt ) is orthogonal to the velocity of π(xt ). The other technical tool is the following lemma.
Lemma 7. Let M be a C 2 -submanifold of Rd and U an open set containing M such that there
exists a unique closest point projection π : U → M. Let x : (−ε, ε) → U be a C 1 -curve and
z(t) := π ◦ x(t). Then ⟨ẋ, ż⟩ ≥ 0 on (−ε, ε).

Geometrically, Lemma 7 states that the closest point projection z of a point x does not move in the
opposite direction when we move x. Despite its geometric simplicity, Lemma 7 is non-trivial and a
crucial ingredient in our proofs. Its proof is given in Appendix A.
Venturi et al. (2019) show that loss functions in overparametrized deep learning do not have strict local
minimizers outside the set of global minimizers (under suitable assumptions). Under a quantitative
version of this geometric assumption, we obtain a global version of Theorem 6, albeit with less
precise quantitative guarantees.
Theorem 8. In addition to the assumptions of Section 2.1, assume that

      1. for every R > inf f , there exists LR > 0 such that ∇f is Lipschitz-continuous with Lipschitz
         constant LR on UR = {x : f (x) < R} and
      2. there exists a value δ > 0 such that ∥∇f (x)∥2 < δ implies that f (x) − inf f < α2 .

Then, for any x0 ∈ Rd , there exists T ≥  0√ such that x(t) ∈ Uα for all t ≥ T and such that
f (x(t)) − inf f ≤ 3α/2 + dist(xT , M)2 e µ(T −t) for all t > T .
                              √
The rate of decay here is e− µ t , as compared to e−µt for gradient flow. We see more clearly why we
speak of acceleration in discrete time (see the discussion below Theorem 11).
Remark 9. We conjecture that Theorem 6 remains valid if the set M is convex rather than a smooth
manifold. Then π is defined globally, but generally only Lipschitz-continuous and not smooth.

3.2   D ETERMINISTIC OPTIMIZATION IN DISCRETE TIME

We can equivalently write the heavy ball ODE (3) as a system of two first order ODEs:

                     ẋ = v √
                                                     x(0) = x0 ,      v(0) = 0.                             (4)
                     v̇ = −2 µ v − ∇f (x),
We choose a time-stepping scheme
             √                                                                                √
 x′n = xn + ηvn ,       gn = ∇f (x′n ),           xn+1 = x′n − ηgn ,

                                                                            vn+1 = ρ vn −         ηgn       (5)


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



            √
          1− µη          √
for ρ = 1+√µη = 1 − 2 µη + O(η). In particular, we have
                       √                                  √ √
         xn+1 = xn + η vn + O(η),           vn+1 = vn − η 2 µ vn + ∇f (xn ) + O(η),
                                                                                         √
i.e. the scheme is a time discretization of the heavy ball system (4) with time-step size η. The
square root is chosen for consistency with the literature. This scheme is a geometrically intuitive
reparametrization of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent algorithm, except for the fact that
Nesterov’s scheme typically begins with the gradient descent step rather than the momentum step
(see Gupta et al., 2024, Appendix B, for a proof of equivalence).
In discrete time, we need to make additional quantitative regularity assumptions on both f and
the projection map π in order to ensure that the time step size is sufficiently small to recover the
continuous time behavior. Note that the Hessian of the objective function f is positive semi-definite
on the set of global minimizers M, i.e. it stands to reason that any negative eigenvalues of D2 f
should be small, at least close to M. We note the following.
Lemma 10. Assume that D2 f (x) ≥ −ε in a ball Br (x0 ). Then
                                                   ε
                ⟨∇f (x), x − z⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (z) − ∥x − z∥2         ∀ x, z ∈ Br (x0 ).
                                                   2
This lemma informs our geometric assumptions on the objective function f . For the closest point
projection π, we assume that π(x) = P x + x∗ for some (linear) orthogonal projection P onto a
subspace V ⊆ Rd and a fixed vector x∗ which is the unique element with the smallest Euclidean
norm in the affine space Ṽ = x∗ + V . The assumption that the derivative Dπ ≡ P is constant is a
(very restrictive) geometric linearization, and relaxing it is an important subject of future research.
Still, it applies to many functions which are not convex, such as those with a unique minimizer (i.e.
P ≡ 0) or those in Example 2. With an eye towards stochastic optimization, we opt for the simpler
global geometric assumptions, see also Remark 16.
Theorem 11. Assume that f is L-smooth and the sequences xn ,√       x′n , vn are generated
                                                                                  √        according to
the Nesterov scheme (5) with parameters η ≤ 1/L and ρ = (1 − µη)/(1 + µη). Assume further
that there exists an affine linear projection map π(x) = P x + x∗ such that
                                                                  µ
                       ⟨∇f (x), x − π(x)⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (π(x)) + ∥x − π(x)∥2 .                        (6)
                                                                  2
Finally, assume that for arbitrary x, v ∈ Rd we have
                                                                     ε
                            ⟨∇f (x + v), v⟩ ≥ f (x + v) − f (x) −      ∥v∥2                          (7)
                                                                     2
                p
with some ε ≤    µ/η. Then
                                         √       h                 µ              i
                f (xn ) − inf f ≤ (1 −       µη)n f (x0 ) − inf f + ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥2 .
                                                                   2
The proof, given in Appendix B.2, builds on similar ideas as Theorem 6, with additional complications
introduced by the discrete-time setting. We have to modify the usual Lyapunov sequence used for
strongly convex functions. We treat the tangential and normal components of the velocity (i.e. P vn
and P ⊥ vn = (I − P )vn ) separately, and carefully choose coefficients to ensure that the following
Lyapunov sequence decays at each step,
                                                                            √
                                1             √                       (1 + µη)2
         Ln = f (xn ) − inf f + ∥ P ⊥ vn + µ(x′n − π(x′n ))∥2 +              √      ∥P vn ∥2 .
                                2                                     2(1 − µη)
In Theorem 11, we see more clearly than in Theorem 6 why we talk of acceleration: While gradient
descent would achieve a decay rate of (1 − µ/L)n with the commonly proposed step size       p η = 1/L in
discrete time based on our assumptions, Nesterov’s method achieves decay like (1 − µ/L)n with
η = 1/L. Since µ/L ≤ 1, Nesterov’s method converges much faster than gradient descent.
                                                                                        p
Remark 12. Note that the negative eigenvalues of the Hessian may be as large as µ/η in √         Theorem
11. If η is chosen as large as 1/L, this is a real restriction of the eigenvalues to the range [− µL, L].
However, since the Hessianpeigenvalues of an L-smooth function are in [−L, L] a priori, there is
no additional restriction if µ/η ≥ L, i.e. if η < Lµ2 . This corresponds to the continuous time
guarantee of Theorem 6, which does not depend on the magnitude of the negative eigenvalues.


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


However, if the eigenvalues of D2 f are as negative as −L, the step size η√= µ/L2 is so small that
it does not improve upon gradient descent with step size η = 1/L since µη = µ/L in this case.
Thus, if f is too far from being convex, acceleration may not be achievable in discrete time. Notably,
especially close to the set of global minimizers, we can picture ε as small compared to L.

3.3   S TOCHASTIC OPTIMIZATION IN DISCRETE TIME

In typical applications in deep learning, the gradient ∇f of the objective function/loss function f is
prohibitively expensive to evaluate, but we have access to stochastic estimates of the true gradient. In
this section, in addition to the assumptions of Theorem 11, we assume that we are given a probability
space (Ω, A, Q) and a measurable function g : Rd × Ω → Rd such that
                                               Eω∼Q ∥g(x, ω)∥2 < +∞            ∀ x ∈ Rd .

              Eω∼Q g(x, ω) = ∇f (x),                                                                 (8)
For quantitative statements, a more precise assumption on the variance of the gradient estimates must
be made. We make the modelling assumption
                 Eω∼Q ∥g(x, ω) − ∇f (x)∥2 ≤ σa2 + σm    2
                                                          ∥∇f (x)∥2        ∀ x ∈ Rd .

                                                                                                  (9)
We call σa the additive standard deviation and σm the multiplicative standard deviation since they
resemble the prototypical example g = (1 + σm N1 )∇f + σa N2 where N1 , N2 are random variables
with mean zero and variance one. The case of purely additive noise (i.e. σm = 0) is classical and
hails back to the seminal article of Robbins & Monro (1951). The case of purely multiplicative noise
is much closer to reality in overparametrized learning: If all data points can be fit exactly, there is no
noise when estimating the gradient of the empirical risk/training loss on the set of global minimizers.
It has received significant attention more recently by Liu & Belkin (2018); Bassily et al. (2018);
Vaswani et al. (2019); Even et al. (2021); Wojtowytsch (2023); Gupta et al. (2024) and others.
Let us consider the purely additive case first. We follow the scheme (5), but we replace the determin-
istic gradient ∇f (x′n ) by gn = g(x′n , ωn ) where ω0 , ω1 , . . . are drawn from Ω independently of each
other and the initial condition x0 with law Q. This framework allows e.g. for minibatch sampling
(but assumes that all batches are drawn independently of each other from the dataset).
Theorem 13. [Acceleration with additive noise] Assume that f, P are as in Theorem 11 and that
the g satisfies (8) and (9) with σm = 0. Assume that  √
                                                          the sequences xn , x′n , vn are generated by the
                                                    1− µη
scheme (5) for parameters η ≤ 1/L and ρ = 1+√µη , but with the stochastic gradient estimates
g(x′n , ωn ) with independently identically distributed ωn in place of ∇f (x′n ). Then
                                                                                              √
                                     √        h                      µ                i    σa2 η
          E[f (xn ) − inf f ] ≤ (1 − µη)n f (x0 ) − inf f + ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥2 + √                   .
                                                                     2                        µ
                                                                                p
     Nesterov’s method reduces f (xn ) below a ‘noise level’ proportional to σa2 η/µ at a linear rate
Thus √
(1 − µη)n in the presence of additive noise. The analogous bound for stochastic gradient descent
was obtained (in the more general setting of PL functions) in (Karimi et al., 2016, Theorem 4) as
                                                                       Lσa2 η
                    E[f (xn ) − inf f ] ≤ (1 − µη)k E f (x0 ) − inf f +

                                                                                .
                                                                           2µ
With the largest admissible learning
                               √      rate η = 1/L, the noise level for GD is σa2 /2µ compared to the
usually much lower value σa2 / Lµ for Nesterov’s method. Keeping a memory of previous gradient
estimates facilitates ‘averaging out’ the random noise.
With a fixed positive learning rate η, generally f (xn ) ̸→ 0 unless σa = 0. We therefore consider a
sequence of decreasing step sizes.
Theorem 14. [Additive noise and decreasing step size] Assume that f, g are as in Theorem 13 and
that the sequences xn , x′n , ρn are generated by the scheme
                       √                                                           √
           x′n = xn + ηn−1 vn ,           xn+1 = x′n − ηn gn ,     vn+1 = ρn (vn − ηn gn )
                                               √                            √
                              µ              1− µηn          p
for parameters ηn = (n+√Lµ+1)       2 , ρn = 1+ µηn . If ε ≤    µ/η0 = µ + Lµ, then
                                               √
                            q
                                L
                                                      1               2
                                                                          σ2           p
                                µ E f (x0 ) − inf f + 2 ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥    + µa log 1 + n µ/L
     E f (xn ) − inf f ≤                                       p                               .
                                                          n + L/µ

                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  √
Note that the ‘physical’ step size ηn decays as 1/n and thus satisfies the (non-)summability
           of Robbins & Monro (1951). We can allow for larger ε by choosing ηn = µ/(n + n0 )
conditions p
with n0 > L/µ − 1 for a smaller initial step size.
If σm > 0, Liu & Belkin (2018) and Gupta et al. (2024) show that Nesterov’s scheme no longer
achieves acceleration. For general noise, we therefore consider a modified Nesterov scheme:
                         √                                                     √
            x′n = xn + αvn ,         xn+1 = x′n − ηgn ,       vn+1 = ρn vn − αgn )          (10)
where again gn = g(x′n , ωn ). The scheme (10) was introduced as the Accelerated Gradient method
with Noisy EStimators method (AGNES) by Gupta et al. (2024) in convex and strongly convex
optimization with purely multiplicative noise. Compared to Nesterov’s algorithm, AGNES has an
additional parameter α which is required to adapt to the multiplicative variance, at least if σm ≥ 1.
Here, we generalize the work of Gupta et al. (2024) by both allowing noise with general scaling for
σa , σm > 0 and relaxing the convexity assumption on f .
Theorem 15. [Additive and multiplicative noise] Assume that f, P, x∗ are as in Theorem 11 and
that g is a family of gradient estimators such that (8) and (9) hold for some σa , σm ≥ 0. Assume that
the sequences xn , x′n , vn are generated by the AGNES scheme (10) with parameters
                                              q
                                                   µη
                        1                 1 −    1+σm2
                                                                           p
                                                                       1 − µ(1 + σm    2 )η
        0<η≤                2 )
                                ,    ρ =      q         ,     α =       p                      η.
                  L(1 + σm                1+       µη
                                                     2
                                                                   1 − µ(1 + σm     2 )η + σ 2
                                                                                            m
                                                   1+σm
              p
Then, if ε < µ(1 + σm2 )/η, we have
                                     n h                                                 √
                                                                                      σa2 η
                         r
                              µη                            µ                2
                                                                               i
E f (xn ) − inf f ≤ 1 −          2
                                      E  f (x 0 ) − inf f +   ∥x 0 − π(x 0 )∥    + p            .
                            1 + σm                          2                               2 )
                                                                                     µ(1 + σm

The proof of Theorem 15 is given in Appendix B.4. While at a glance it appears that the multiplicative
noise is helping us reduce the additive error term, this is merely a consequence of the small √ learning 2
rate which is forced upon us. The condition on the negative eigenvalues is relaxed to ε ≤ µL(1+σm           )
                                                           2
with the largest admissible step size η = 1/(L(1 + σm         )) as the issues stemming from tangential
drift pale in comparison to those stemming from stochastic gradient     √ estimates.
                                                                              p         For √comparison, if
                                                                                       2 <              2
we chose the same η in Theorem 11, we could only p     allow for ε ≤ µL 1 + σm                 µL(1 + σm   ),
but we would    obtain a rate of convergence   of 1 −    µ/L(1    +  σ 2 ). In the stochastic case, we only
              p                                                        m
                              2
achieve 1 − µ/L/(1 + σm         ). Thus the limiting factor is the stochastic noise, not the geometry of f .
Remark 16. We opted for a linear closest point projection map to facilitate proofs. In the non-linear
case, closest point projections cannot be defined globally: Jessen (1940); Busemann (1947); Phelps
(1957) show that if K is a subset of Rd such that for every x ∈ Rd there exists a unique closest point
in K, then K is closed and convex. If K is both a k-dimensional submanifold of Rd and a convex set,
then K is an affine k-dimensional subspace of Rd , i.e. our assumptions are the most general when
assuming that a unique closest point projection onto a submanifold is defined globally.
Thus, if M is not an affine space, we can only assume that π is ‘good’ in a neighborhood of M.
In stochastic optimization, where we can randomly ‘jump’ out of the good neighborhood, this
leads to serious technical challenges. Guarantees on ‘remaining local’ with high probability have
recently been derived for SGD with additive noise and decaying learning rates by Mertikopoulos et al.
(2020) and with multiplicative noise by Wojtowytsch (2023). To avoid obscuring the new geometric
constructions, we opted to forgo this highly technical setting here and prioritize the extension of
Theorems 6 and 11 towards stochastic optimization.

4    C ONCLUSION
We have proved that first order momentum-based methods accelerate convergence in a more general
setting than convex optimization with many geometric features motivated by loss landscapes encoun-
tered in deep learning. The models we studied include the heavy ball ODE and deterministic and
stochastic optimization schemes in discrete time under various noise assumptions.
The most cumbersome limitation of our convergence guarantees is the assumption that the closest
point projection onto the set of minimizers is affine linear in the discrete time setting, i.e. the derivative
Dπ is constant in space. Future work will focus on relaxing this assumption.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the NSF, grant DMS 2424801. The
authors are grateful to Quentin Merigot, who pointed out a simpler proof of Lemma 7 which requires
less regularity than the authors’ original approach.

R EFERENCES
Guillaume Alain, Nicolas Le Roux, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Negative eigenvalues of the
  hessian in deep neural networks, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  S1iiddyDG.
Vassilis Apidopoulos, Nicolò Ginatta, and Silvia Villa. Convergence rates for the heavy-ball continu-
  ous dynamics for non-convex optimization, under polyak–łojasiewicz condition. Journal of Global
  Optimization, 84(3):563–589, 2022.
J-F Aujol, Ch Dossal, and Aude Rondepierre. Convergence rates of the heavy ball method for
  quasi-strongly convex optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 32(3):1817–1842, 2022.
Jean-François Aujol, Charles Dossal, Hippolyte Labarrière, and Aude Rondepierre. Heavy ball
  momentum for non-strongly convex optimization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2403.06930.
Raef Bassily, Mikhail Belkin, and Siyuan Ma. On exponential convergence of sgd in non-convex
  over-parametrized learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02564, 2018.
Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
 problems. SIAM journal on imaging sciences, 2(1):183–202, 2009.
Herbert Busemann. Note on a theorem on convex sets. Matematisk Tidsskrift. B, pp. 32–34, 1947.
Augustin Cauchy et al. Méthode générale pour la résolution des systemes d’équations simultanées.
 Comp. Rend. Sci. Paris, 25(1847):536–538, 1847.
Yaim Cooper. Global minima of overparameterized neural networks. SIAM Journal on Mathematics
  of Data Science, 3(2):676–691, 2021.
Alex Damian, Tengyu Ma, and Jason D Lee. Label noise sgd provably prefers flat global minimizers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27449–27461, 2021.
Simon S Du, Chi Jin, Jason D Lee, Michael I Jordan, Aarti Singh, and Barnabas Poczos. Gradient
  descent can take exponential time to escape saddle points. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Weinan E, Chao Ma, and Lei Wu. A comparative analysis of optimization and generalization
 properties of two-layer neural network and random feature models under gradient descent dynamics.
 Sci. China Math, 2019.
Mathieu Even, Raphaël Berthier, Francis Bach, Nicolas Flammarion, Pierre Gaillard, Hadrien
 Hendrikx, Laurent Massoulié, and Adrien Taylor. A continuized view on nesterov acceleration for
 stochastic gradient descent and randomized gossip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07644, 2021.
Qiang Fu, Dongchu Xu, and Ashia Camage Wilson. Accelerated stochastic optimization methods
  under quasar-convexity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10431–10460.
  PMLR, 2023.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Optimal stochastic approximation algorithms for strongly
  convex stochastic composite optimization i: A generic algorithmic framework. SIAM Journal on
  Optimization, 22(4):1469–1492, 2012.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Optimal stochastic approximation algorithms for strongly convex
  stochastic composite optimization, ii: shrinking procedures and optimal algorithms. SIAM Journal
  on Optimization, 23(4):2061–2089, 2013.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Baptiste Goujaud, Adrien Taylor, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Provable non-accelerations of the heavy-
  ball method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11291, 2023.
Sergey Guminov, Alexander Gasnikov, and Ilya Kuruzov. Accelerated methods for weakly-quasi-
  convex optimization problems. Computational Management Science, 20(1):36, 2023.
Kanan Gupta, Jonathan W. Siegel, and Stephan Wojtowytsch. Nesterov acceleration despite very
  noisy gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 20694–
  20744, 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2024/file/24d2dd6dc9b79116f8ebc852ddb9dc94-Paper-Conference.pdf.
J Hermant, J. F Aujol, C Dossal, and A Rondepierre. Study of the behaviour of nesterov accelerated
   gradient in a non convex setting: the strongly quasar convex case, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2405.19809.
Magnus Rudolph Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel. Methods of conjugate gradients for solving linear
 systems. NBS Washington, DC, 1952.
Oliver Hinder, Aaron Sidford, and Nimit Sohoni. Near-optimal methods for minimizing star-convex
  functions and beyond. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1894–1938. PMLR, 2020.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Prateek Jain, Dheeraj Nagaraj, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Making the last iterate of sgd information
  theoretically optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1752–1755. PMLR, 2019.
Børge Jessen. To saetninger om konvekse punktmaengder. Matematisk tidsskrift. B, pp. 66–70, 1940.
Cédric Josz, Lexiao Lai, and Xiaopeng Li. Convergence of the momentum method for semialgebraic
  functions with locally lipschitz gradients. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 33(4):3012–3037, 2023.
Hamed Karimi, Julie Nutini, and Mark Schmidt. Linear convergence of gradient and proximal-
  gradient methods under the Polyak-Lojasiewicz condition. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
  Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2016, Riva del Garda, Italy,
  September 19-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part I 16, pp. 795–811. Springer, 2016.
Sebastian Kassing and Simon Weissmann. Polyak’s heavy ball method achieves accelerated local
  rate of convergence under Polyak-Lojasiewicz inequality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16849, 2024.
Maxime Laborde and Adam Oberman. A lyapunov analysis for accelerated gradient methods: from
 deterministic to stochastic case. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
 pp. 602–612. PMLR, 2020.
Jason D Lee, Ioannis Panageas, Georgios Piliouras, Max Simchowitz, Michael I Jordan, and Benjamin
  Recht. First-order methods almost always avoid strict saddle points. Mathematical programming,
  176:311–337, 2019.
Laurent Lessard, Benjamin Recht, and Andrew Packard. Analysis and design of optimization
  algorithms via integral quadratic constraints. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 26(1):57–95, 2016.
Zhiyuan Li, Tianhao Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. What happens after sgd reaches zero loss?–a
  mathematical framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06914, 2021.
Chaoyue Liu and Mikhail Belkin. Mass: an accelerated stochastic method for over-parametrized
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13395, 2018.
Chaoyue Liu, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Misha Belkin, Damek Davis, and Yian Ma. Aiming towards
  the minimizers: fast convergence of sgd for overparametrized problems. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 36, 2024.
Xin Liu, Zhisong Pan, and Wei Tao. Provable convergence of nesterov’s accelerated gradient method
  for over-parameterized neural networks. Knowledge-Based Systems, 251:109277, 2022.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Panayotis Mertikopoulos, Nadav Hallak, Ali Kavis, and Volkan Cevher. On the almost sure conver-
  gence of stochastic gradient descent in non-convex problems. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:1117–1128, 2020.
Ion Necoara, Yu Nesterov, and Francois Glineur. Linear convergence of first order methods for
  non-strongly convex optimization. Mathematical Programming, 175:69–107, 2019.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on optimization, 19(4):1574–
  1609, 2009.
Yurii Nesterov. A method for solving the convex programming problem with convergence rate
  o(1/k 2 ). Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 269:543–547, 1983.
Michael O’Neill and Stephen J Wright. Behavior of accelerated gradient methods near critical points
 of nonconvex functions. Mathematical Programming, 176:403–427, 2019.
RR Phelps. Convex sets and nearest points. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 8(4):
 790–797, 1957.
Quentin Rebjock and Nicolas Boumal. Fast convergence to non-isolated minima: four equivalent
  conditions for c2 -functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00096, 2023.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The annals of mathematical
  statistics, pp. 400–407, 1951.
Levent Sagun, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. Eigenvalues of the hessian in deep learning: Singularity
  and beyond, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B186cP9gx.
Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V. Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Empirical analysis of
  the hessian of over-parametrized neural networks, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=rJrTwxbCb.
Ohad Shamir and Tong Zhang. Stochastic gradient descent for non-smooth optimization: Convergence
  results and optimal averaging schemes. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  71–79. PMLR, 2013.
Weijie Su, Stephen Boyd, and Emmanuel J Candes. A differential equation for modeling nesterov’s
 accelerated gradient method: Theory and insights. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17
 (153):1–43, 2016.
Sharan Vaswani, Francis Bach, and Mark Schmidt. Fast and faster convergence of sgd for over-
  parameterized models and an accelerated perceptron. In The 22nd international conference on
  artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1195–1204. PMLR, 2019.
Luca Venturi, Afonso S Bandeira, and Joan Bruna. Spurious valleys in one-hidden-layer neural
  network optimization landscapes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(133):1–34, 2019.
Jun-Kun Wang and Andre Wibisono. Continuized acceleration for quasar convex functions in
  non-convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07851, 2023.
Stephan Wojtowytsch. Stochastic gradient descent with noise of machine learning type part i: Discrete
  time analysis. Journal of Nonlinear Science, 33(3):45, 2023.
Pengyun Yue, Cong Fang, and Zhouchen Lin. On the lower bound of minimizing Polyak-łojasiewicz
  functions. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2948–2968. PMLR,
  2023.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A    P ROOFS OF L EMMAS 5 AND 7: G EOMETRY OF THE ENERGY LANDSCAPE

We assume that the reader is familiar with basic concepts of differential geometry, such as subman-
ifolds of Euclidean spaces and tangent spaces and with concepts of multi-variate analysis such as
compactness and the inverse function theorem.
We first recall an important observation: Assume that M is a C 1 -manifold. Fix a point x ∈ Rd .
Assume that the function d : M → R given by d(z) = ∥x − z∥ has a local extremum at z ∈ M.
Then for every C 1 -curve γ : (−ε, ε) → M such that γ(0) = z, we have
                          d
                    0=           d(γ(t))2 = 2⟨x − γ(0), γ̇(0)⟩ = 2⟨x − z, γ̇(0)⟩
                          dt t=0
or in other words: the connecting line x − z is orthogonal to the tangent space Tz M. This is in
particular true if z is the closest point in M to x.
Lemma 7. Let M be a C 2 -submanifold of Rd and U an open set containing M such that there
exists a unique closest point projection π : U → M. Let x : (−ε, ε) → U be a C 1 -curve and
z(t) := π ◦ x(t). Then ⟨ẋ, ż⟩ ≥ 0 on (−ε, ε).

Proof. The closest point projection onto a C 2 -manifold is C 1 -smooth and satisfies
                                        π(x) = x − d(x) ∇d(x)                                        (11)
where d(x) = dist(x, M) is the distance function to the manifold, i.e. ∇d(x) gives the unit vector
pointing directly towards the manifold. For details, see the proof of Lemma 5.
We can rewrite (11) as
                    ∥x∥2    d(x)2         ∥x∥2     minx∈M ∥x − z∥2

      π(x) = ∇           −          =∇           −
                      2       2             2              2
                          ∥x∥2    ∥x∥2 − 2⟨x, z⟩ + ∥z∥2                     ∥z∥2

            = ∇x max            −                         = ∇x max ⟨x, z⟩ −        .
                    M      2               2                   z∈M           2
We are taking the (pointwise in x) maximum over a class of functions which are linear in x, i.e. we
find that
                                                        ∥z∥2

                                  ξ(x) := max ⟨x, z⟩ −
                                          z∈M             2
is convex. In particular, the derivative matrix Dπ = D2 ξ is symmetric and positive semi-definite and
thus
                                       d
                                    ẋ, π ◦ x = ⟨ẋ, Dπ(x) ẋ⟩ ≥ 0.
                                       dt

Lemma 5. Assume that f : Rd → R is C 2 -smooth and that M = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) = inf f } is a
closed k-dimensional C 2 -submanifold of Rd (i.e. compact and without boundary). If D2 f (x) has
rank d − k everywhere on M, then there exist µ, α > 0 such that there exists a C 1 -smooth closest
point projection π : Uα → R with Uα = {x : f (x) < α} and f is µ-strongly aiming with π.

Proof. This result uses standard ideas from differential geometry. For the reader’s convenience, we
provide a full proof sketch.
Step 1. Closest point projection. Assume that M is a C m -manifold for m ≥ 2. Fix a point z0 ∈ M,
a radius r > 0 and the neighbourhood U = Br (z0 ). We assume that r > 0 is so small that there exists
a C m -diffeomorphism ϕ : U → V ⊆ Rd such that ϕ(U ∩ M) = V ∩ {y : yk+1 = · · · = yd = 0}.
If M is a C m -manifold, we can find a collection of C m−1 -smooth vector fields A1 , . . . , Ad such that

      1. A1 (z), . . . , Ad (z) span the tangent space Tz M for all z ∈ M ∩ U and
      2. ⟨Ai (z), Aj (z)⟩ = δij for all i, j = 1, . . . , d and z ∈ M ∩ U .


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Such vector fields can be obtained for instance by applying the Gram-Schmidt algorithm to the
columns of the derivative matrix D(ϕ−1 )ϕ(z) = (Dϕz )−1 of the inverse diffeomorphism. The
algorithm returns an orthonormal basis since ϕ is a diffeomorphism, i.e. Dϕ has full rank. The first k
columns span the tangent space of Tx M since motion tangential to M in U corresponds to motion
where the last d − k coordinates are kept zero in V , i.e. to the first k columns of Dϕ−1 .
We now introduce new coordinates: Denote by V̂ ⊆ Rk the set such that V̂ × {0d−k } = V ∩ {y :
yk+1 = · · · = yd = 0} and
                                                                                      d
                                                                                      X
       Ψ : V̂ × Rd−k → Rd ,          Ψ(ŷ, sk+1 , . . . , sd ) = ϕ−1 (ŷ, 0) +               si Ai ϕ−1 (ŷ, 0) .


                                                                                    i=k+1
                  m−1
The map Ψ is C             -smooth since it is linear in s and the least regular components, the vector fields
Ai , are C m−1 -smooth in y. If m ≥ 2, we trivially find that Ψ is differentiable and DΨ(ŷ,0) =
(∂ŷ1 ϕ, . . . , ∂ŷk ϕ, Ak+1 , . . . , Ad ) is invertible. Hence, the map Ψ is a local diffeomorphism by the
inverse function theorem. Notably, we see that
     x − Ψ(ŷ, 0)⊥TΨ(ŷ,0) M        ⇔     x − Ψ(ŷ, 0) ∈ span {Ak+1 (Ψ(ŷ, 0)), . . . , Ad (Ψ(ŷ, 0))}
and thus if and only if
                                               d
                                               X
                             x = Ψ(ŷ, 0) +           si Ai Ψ(ŷ, 0) = Ψ(ŷ, s)
                                              i=k+1
                 d−k
for some s ∈ R         . In a neighbourhood of z0 where Ψ is a diffeomorphism, we set π(Ψ(ŷ, s)) =
Ψ(ŷ, 0), i.e.
                  π = Ψ ◦ PRk ◦ Ψ−1 ,           P (y1 , . . . , yd ) = (y1 , . . . , yk , 0, . . . , 0).
The map is as smooth as Ψ, i.e. C m−1 -smooth (assuming that m ≥ 2). The map π defined in this
way may not be the unique closest point projection on all of U (e.g. when a point z ′ ∈ M \ U is
closer), but it is guaranteed to be the unique closest point projection on a smaller subset Br/2 (z ∗ )
where the closest point on M is closer than the boundary of U .
Thus, for every point z ∈ M, there exists a neighborhood
                                                  S       Br(z) (z) for r(z) > 0 in which a unique
closest point projection is defined. Setting U := z∈M Br(z) (z), we find a neighborhood of the
manifold M inside of which the closest point projection is defined.
Assume that the radius r(z) is chosen as the supremum of all admissible radii. Then the function
r(z) is strictly positive and Lipschitz-continuous with Lipschitz-constant 1: r(z ′ ) ≥ r(z) − ∥z − z ′ ∥
since Br−∥z−z′ ∥ (z ′ ) ⊆ Br (z). Exchanging the role of z, z ′ shows that
r(z ′ ) ≥ r(z)−∥z−z ′ ∥,     r(z) ≥ r(z ′ )−∥z−z ′ ∥           ⇒       |r(z)−r(z ′ )| ≤ ∥z−z ′ ∥           ∀ z, z ′ ∈ M.
In particular, if M is compact, then as a continuous positive function, r is uniformly positive and
there exists a neighborhood Wδ := {x ∈ Rd : dist(x, M) < δ} on which the unique closest point
projection is defined. Additionally, we find that
                                                            d
                                                            X
                         Ψ(ŷ, s) − π ◦ Ψ(ŷ, s) =                si Ai (Ψ(ŷ, 0)) = ∥s∥
                                                         i=k+1

since the vector fields Ai are orthonormal.
In Lemma 7, we require π(x(t)) to be C 2 -smooth if x(t) is C 2 -smooth due to the technicalities of
the proof. For this reason, we make the assumption that M is a C 3 -manifold to ensure that π is a
C 2 -map. For the required smoothness of solutions to the heavy ball ODE, it is sufficient to require
that f is C 2 -smooth.
Step 2. The geometry of f . Since M is the set of minimizers of f , the Hessian D2 f (z) is positive
semi-definite for every z ∈ M. As f is constant on M, we for every curve γ : (−ε, ε) → M we
have
          d2
     0=       f (γ(t)) = ∇f (γ(t)), γ ′′ (t)⟩ + γ ′ (t)T D2 f (γ(t)) γ ′ (t) = γ ′ (t)T D2 f (γ(t)) γ ′ (t)
          dt2

                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


because ∇f ≡ 0 on the set M of minimizers of f , i.e. v T D2 f (z)v = 0 for all z ∈ M and v ∈ Tz M.
If we assume that D2 f (z) has rank d − k for all z ∈ M, then necessarily v T D2 f (z)v > 0 for all v
which are orthogonal to M or equivalently
                                                          2
                           v T D2 f (z)v ≥ λ(z) Pz⊥ v         ∀ z ∈ M, v ∈ Rd
where Pz⊥ denotes the orthogonal projection onto the orthogonal complement of the tangent space of
M at z, i.e.
                                           Xd
                                 Pz⊥ v =       ⟨v, Ai (z)⟩ Ai (z).
                                             i=k+1
If M is compact, then the function λ is bounded from below by some λ0 > 0. Let ε = λ0 /2. Using
the uniform continuity of π, P and D2 f on a compact set Wδ and choosing δ > 0 suitably small, we
find that
                                   λ0     ⊥
                 v T D2 f (x)v ≥       Pπ(x) v∥2 − ε∥v∥2 ≥         ∀ x ∈ Wδ , v ∈ S d−1
                                    2
since the map from matrix to smallest eigenvalue is continuous on the space of symmetric matrices.
In particular, for any fixed (ŷ, s) ∈ V̂ × S d−1 we see that the function

                               g : (−δ, δ) → R,       g(t) = f Ψ(ŷ, ts)
                                                           Pd
is λ0 − ε strongly convex. To see this, abbreviate v := i=k+1 si Ai (ŷ) and compute
                      d2                                                           2
         g ′′ (t) =       f (Ψ(ŷ, 0) + tv) = v T D2 f (Ψ(ŷ, ts)) v ≥ (λ0 − ε) ∥v∥ = λ0 − ε
                      dt2
since v ∈ TΨ(ŷ,0) M⊥ and ∥v∥ = ∥s∥ = 1. Hence
                                      λ0 − ε 2
f Ψ(ŷ, 0) = g(0) ≥ g(t) − g ′ (t)t +

                                             t
                                        2
                                                    λ0 − ε       2
            = f Ψ(ŷ, ts) − t ⟨∇f (Ψ(ŷ, ts)), v⟩ +          tv
                                                       2
                                                                     λ0 − ε                      2
            = f Ψ(ŷ, ts) + ⟨∇f (Ψ(ŷ, ts)), Ψ(ŷ, 0) − Ψ(ŷ, ts)⟩ +        Ψ(ŷ, 0) − Ψ(ŷ, ts)
                                                                       2
or in the original coordinates of Wδ ⊆ Rd :
                                                          λ0 − ε
                      f (π(x)) ≥ f (x) + ⟨∇f (x), π(x) − x⟩ +    ∥x − π(x)∥2 .
                                                             2
By the same argument with reversed roles for x, π(x) we have
                                  λ0 − ε                       λ0 − ε
             f (x) ≥ f (π(x)) +          ∥x − π(x)∥2 = inf f +        dist(x, M)2 .
                                    2                            2
In particular: f (x) < inf f + α implies that
                                      r                         r
                                            2                       2α
                        dist(x, M) ≤            f (x) − inf f <          .
                                         λ0 − ε                   λ0 − ε
Choosing α small enough, we see that the open neighborhood
                                     Uα := {x : f (x) < inf f + α}
is a subset of Wδ . Within this neighborhood, the unique closest point projection is therefore well-
defined. This concludes the proof of the Lemma and shows that the Assumptions of Section 2.1 are
satisfied in this setting.
Remark 17. Controlling the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian rather than the smallest, we see that
there exist 0 < µ < L such that
                            µ                          L
                               dist(x, M)2 ≤ f (x) ≤ dist(x, M)2
                            2                          2
in a neighborhood of U. For this reason, we presented Example 3 for context and intuition.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     P ROOFS OF ACCELERATION IN O PTIMIZATION
B.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREMS 6 AND 8: O PTIMIZATION IN CONTINUOUS TIME

We first prove the ‘local’ convergence statement.
Theorem 6. [Continuous
                   √        time convergence guarantee] Assume that f satisfies the assumptions of
Section 2.1, γ = 2 µ and that x0 satisfies f (x0 ) < α where α is as in Section 2.1. Then there exists
a unique solution x(t) = xt of (3) and f (xt ) < α for all t > 0. Furthermore, x is C 2 -smooth and
                                          √                       µ
                 f (xt ) − inf f (z) ≤ e− µ t f (x0 ) − inf f + dist(x0 , M)2 .
                           z∈Rd                                   2

Proof. Step 0: Existence and Uniqueness. Note that a solution to the heavy ball ODE can be
obtained as a solution to the ODE system

                                       ẋ = v
                                       v̇ = −γv − ∇f (x).
If ∇f is locally Lipschitz-continuous (for instance if f is C 2 -smooth), a unique C 1 -solution (x, v)
of the ODE system exists by the Picard-Lindelöff Theorem. Since ẋ = v is C 1 -smooth, we see that
the solution x of the heavy ball ODE is C 2 -smooth.
Step 1: xt remains in Uα . Note that

     d             1                                                                 √
          f (xt ) + ∥ẋt ∥ = ⟨∇f (xt ), ẋt ⟩ + ⟨ẋt , ẍt ⟩ = ⟨ẍ + ∇f (x), ẋ⟩ = −2 µ ∥ẋt ∥2 ≤ 0,
                           2
     dt            2
so
                                        1                      1
                     f (xt ) ≤ f (xt ) + ∥ẋt ∥2 ≤ f (x0 ) + ∥ẋ0 ∥2 = f (x0 ) < α
                                        2                      2
for all t ≥ 0 since ẋ0 = 0, which implies xt ∈ Uα for all t ≥ 0.
Step 2: Bounding f (xt ). Let zt := π(xt ) denote the closest point projection of xt onto M and by
żt its derivative. Consider the Lyapunov function
                                                    1         √
                       L(t) = f (xt ) − f (π(xt )) + ∥ẋt + µ(xt − π(xt ))∥2
                                                    2
                                 √
We will show that L′ (t) ≤ − µL(t) under some neighborhood assumption on xt . Using the heavy
ball dynamics and properties of the projection, we can bound L′ (t) as:
                                        √                     √
      L′ (t) = ⟨∇f (xt ), ẋt ⟩ + ẋt + µ(xt − π(xt )), ẍt + µ(ẋt − żt )
                                       √       √         √                   √    √
             = ẋt , ∇f (xt ) + ẍt + µ ẋt − µ żt + µ xt − π(xt ), ẍt + µ ẋt − µżt
                      √          √         √                √               √
             = ẋt , − µ ẋt − µżt , + µ xt − zt , − µ ẋt − ∇f (xt ) − µ żt
                √                               √
             ≤ − µ∥ẋt ∥2 − µ⟨xt − zt , ẋt ⟩ − µ ⟨∇f (xt ), xt − zt ⟩
                                                    √
where we used the heavy ball dynamics ẍt = −2 µẋt − ∇f (xt ) and the geometric properties of
the closest point projection:

      1. −⟨ẋt , żt ⟩ ≤ 0 by Lemma 7 and
      2. ⟨xt − zt , żt ⟩ = 0 since xt − zt meets M orthogonally at zt and żt is tangent to M at zt .

Next, using the µ-strong aiming condition, we have
                                                                     µ
                  ⟨∇f (xt ), xt − π(xt )⟩ ≥ f (xt ) − f (π(xt )) +     ∥xt − π(xt )∥2 .
                                                                     2
Substituting this into the bound on L′ (t) and simplifying gives:
                √                                    √                      µ
    L′ (t) ≤ − µ ∥ẋt ∥2 − µ ⟨xt − π(xt ), ẋt ⟩ − µ f (xt ) − f (π(xt )) + ∥xt − π(xt )∥2
                                                                            2
                √                           1         √               2 1       2
           = − µ f (xt ) − f (π(xt )) +         ẋt + µ xt − π(xt )    + ∥ẋt ∥
                                            2                             2

                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                √
             ≤ − µ L(t).

Now, we can bound the initial value of the Lyapunov function L(0) as follows:
                                                 1       √
                     L(0) = f (x0 ) − inf f (z) + ∥ẋ0 + µ(x0 − π(x0 ))∥2
                                     z∈R d       2
                                                 µ
                          = f (x0 ) − inf f (z) + dist(x0 , M)2
                                     z∈R d       2
since ẋ0 = 0 and dist(x, M) = ∥x − π(x)∥. We deduce that
                             d √µt       √                 √
                                e L(t) =   µL(t) + L′ (t) e µt ≤ 0
                             dt
so
                                    √            √                    µ
         f (xt ) − inf f ≤ L(t) ≤ e− µt L(0) = e− µt f (x0 ) − inf f + dist(x0 , M)2
                                                                      2
Next, we prove the ‘global convergence’ statement.
Theorem 8. In addition to the assumptions of Section 2.1, assume that

      1. for every R > inf f , there exists LR > 0 such that ∇f is Lipschitz-continuous with Lipschitz
         constant LR on UR = {x : f (x) < R} and
      2. there exists a value δ > 0 such that ∥∇f (x)∥2 < δ implies that f (x) − inf f < α2 .

Then, for any x0 ∈ Rd , there exists T ≥  0√ such that x(t) ∈ Uα for all t ≥ T and such that
f (x(t)) − inf f ≤ 3α/2 + dist(xT , M)2 e µ(T −t) for all t > T .

Proof. The idea of the proof is to show that at some large time T , the trajectory of x enters the set
Uα with sufficiently low velocity that it gets trapped in Uα . From that point onwards, the proof of
Theorem 6 applies with minor modifications.
Step 1. Denote by E(t) = f (xt ) + 12 ∥ẋt ∥2 the ‘total energy’ of the curve x at time t. As in the proof
                                        √
of Theorem 6, we find that E ′ (t) = −2 µ ∥ẋt ∥2 , so in particular ∥ẋ∥2 is square integrable in time:
                    Z ∞
                                      E(0) − limt→∞ E(t)           f (x0 ) − inf f
                         ∥ẋ∥2 dt =               √             ≤         √        .
                     0                          2 µ                      2 µ
Recall for future use that f (xt ) ≤ E(t) ≤ E(0) = f (x0 ) for t ≥ 0.
Step 2. In this step, we show that also ∇f (xt ) is square integrable in time. To do this, we first
observe that
   Z T                           Z T
                    √      2                         √
       ∥∇f (x) + 2 µ ẋ∥ dt =         ∥∇f (x)∥2 + 4 µ ⟨∇f (x), ẋ⟩ + ∥ẋ∥2 dt
     0                                0
                                     Z T                            Z T                            Z T
                                                           √                  d
                                 =         ∥∇f (x)∥2 dt + 4 µ                    f (xt ) dt + 4µ          ∥ẋ∥2 dt.
                                      0                               0       dt                      0
On the other hand, we can write
       Z T                          Z T
                       √      2                    √
           ∥∇f (x) + 2 µ ẋ∥ dt = −     ⟨∇f (x) + 2 µ ẋ, ẍ⟩ dt
         0                                   0
                                            Z T                               Z T
                                                                      √             d
                                     =−           ⟨∇f (x), ẍ⟩ dt −       µ            ∥ẋ∥2 dt
                                             0                                 0    dt
                                                               Z T
                                                                                                  √
                                     = −⟨∇f (xT ), ẋT ⟩ +            ⟨D2 f (x)ẋ, ẋ⟩ dt −           µ ∥ẋT ∥2
                                                                0
since ẋ0 = 0. Overall, we find that
           Z T
                                  √                                      √
                ∥∇f (x)∥2 dt = 4 µ f (x0 ) − f (xT ) + ⟨∇f (xT ), ẋT ⟩ − µ ∥ẋT ∥2

              0


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                      Z T
                                  +         ⟨D2 f (x)ẋ, ẋ⟩ − 4µ ∥ẋ∥2 dt
                                       0
                                                                   Z T
                                 √
                                                                            ∥ẋ∥2 dt + ⟨∇f (x), ẋ⟩(T )

                              ≤ 4 µ f (x0 ) − inf f + L
                                                                    0

where L = Lf (x0 ) is the Lipschitz-constant of ∇f on the set {x : f (x) < f (x0 )}. Note that
                                                                d
                                       t 7→ ⟨∇f (x), ẋ⟩ =         f (xt )
                                                                dt
is the derivative of the bounded function f (xt ) ∈ [inf f, f (x0 )] and continuous, so there exists a
sequence of times Tn → ∞ such that ⟨f (x), ẋ⟩(Tn ) → 0. Since ∥∇f ∥2 is a non-negative integrand,
we can bound
     Z ∞                                                      Z Tn                              !
                    2              √                                     2
          ∥∇f (x)∥ dt ≤ lim 4 µ f (x0 ) − inf f + L                  ∥ẋ∥ dt + ⟨∇f (x), ẋ⟩(Tn )
      0                     n→∞                                         0
                                                           Z ∞
                           √
                                                                  ∥ẋ∥2 dt < +∞.

                        = 4 µ f (x0 ) − inf f + L
                                                            0


Step 3. Using Steps 1 and 2, we find that
                               Z T
                                    ∥∇f (xt )∥2 + ∥ẋt ∥2 dt < +∞.
                                  0

In particular, there exists a sequence of times tn → ∞ such that
                                      ∥∇f (x(tn ))∥2 + ∥ẋ(tn )∥2 → 0
as n → ∞. We can therefore choose T > 0 such that
                                ∥∇f (xT )∥2 + ∥ẋT ∥2 < min δ, α}.


Then we find that
                                                                                                  1
 ∥∇f (xT )∥2 < δ        ⇒   f (xT ) < α,          ∥ẋT ∥2 < α       ⇒         E(T ) = f (xT ) +     ∥ẋT ∥2 < α.
                                                                                                  2
In particular, we conclude that f (xt ) ≤ E(t) < α for all t > T , i.e. xt ∈ Uα for all t > T . Thus, by
the same argument as Theorem 6, we find that
                                                       1     √                2
                        L(t) := f (xt ) − inf f +        ẋ + µ xt − π(xt )
                                                       2
                    √
satisfies L(t) ≤ e− µ(t−T ) L(T ) for t > T , so

                                    √                              1      √               2
        f (xt ) − inf f ≤ L(t) ≤ e µ(T −t) f (xT ) − inf f +         ẋT + µ(xT − π(xT ))
                                                                   2

                           √                             2
                             µ(T −t)                               2               2

                        ≤e             f (xt ) − inf f +     ∥ẋT ∥ + ∥xT − π(xT )∥
                                                         2

                           √           3α
                             µ(T −t)                        2
                        ≤e                 + dist(xT , M) .
                                        2
Remark 18. Obviously, the condition that ∇f is Lipschitz-continuous on all sublevel sets could easily
be relaxed to requiring that the initialization x0 is such that ∇f is merely Lipschitz-continuous on
the set {x : f (x) < f (x0 )}, or even on every connected component of the set.

B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 11: ACCELERATION IN D ISCRETE T IME (D ETERMINISTIC SETTING )

Lemma 10. Assume that D2 f (x) ≥ −ε in a ball Br (x0 ). Then
                                                         ε
                ⟨∇f (x), x − z⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (z) −          ∥x − z∥2             ∀ x, z ∈ Br (x0 ).
                                                         2

                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. The function f (x) + 2ε ∥x∥2 is convex since all eigenvalues of its Hessian D2 f + εI are
non-negative, so
                            ε                  ε
                     f (z) + ∥z∥2 ≥ f (x) + ∥x∥2 + ⟨∇f (x) + εx, z − x⟩
                            2                  2
which is equivalent to
                                                 ε                       ε
              ⟨∇f (x), x − z⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (z) + ∥x∥2 + ε⟨x, z − x⟩ − ∥z∥2
                                                 2                      2
                                                 ε                           ε
                              = f (x) − f (z) + ∥x∥2 + ε⟨x, z⟩ − ε∥x∥2 − ∥z∥2
                                                 2                           2
                                                 ε
                              = f (x) − f (z) − ∥z − x∥2 .
                                                 2
Before proving Theorem 11, we recall a well-known auxiliary result.
Lemma 19. (Gupta et al., 2024, Lemma 13) Assume that ∇f is Lipschitz-continuous with Lipschitz-
constant L. Then
                                                                Lη 2
                            f (x − ηg) ≤ f (x) − η⟨∇f (x), g⟩ +       ∥g∥2 .
                                                                  2
Theorem 11. Assume that f is L-smooth and the sequences xn ,√     x′n , vn are generated
                                                                                √        according to
the Nesterov scheme (5) with parameters η ≤ 1/L and ρ = (1 − µη)/(1 + µη). Assume further
that there exists an affine linear projection map π(x) = P x + x∗ such that
                                                                µ
                      ⟨∇f (x), x − π(x)⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (π(x)) + ∥x − π(x)∥2 .                       (6)
                                                                2
Finally, assume that for arbitrary x, v ∈ Rd we have
                                                                    ε
                           ⟨∇f (x + v), v⟩ ≥ f (x + v) − f (x) −      ∥v∥2                       (7)
                                                                    2
             p
with some ε ≤ µ/η. Then
                                         √       h                 µ              i
                f (xn ) − inf f ≤ (1 −       µη)n f (x0 ) − inf f + ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥2 .
                                                                   2

Proof. Setup. Denote by P ⊥ = I − P the orthogonal projection onto the orthogonal complement of
the space which P projects onto. Consider the Lyapunov sequence defined by
                                                                        √
                                1           √                     (1 + µη)2
         Ln = f (xn ) − inf f + ∥ P ⊥ vn + µ(x′n − π(x′n ))∥2 +          √     ∥P vn ∥2 .
                                2                                 2(1 − µη)
This is a variation of the usual Lyapunov sequence in which we separately analyze the tangential and
normal velocities. Note however that
                                          √
                                     (1 + µη)2             √
                                           √     = 1 + O( η),
                                      (1 − µη)
i.e. if η → 0, we recover the Lyapunov function in the continuous time setting where tangential and
normal velocity are not separated:
                                 √
          √                 (1 + µη)2                      √                               √
∥ P ⊥ v+ µ(x−π(x))∥2 +            √    ∥P v∥2 → ∥ P ⊥ v+ µ(x−π(x))∥2 +∥P v∥2 = ∥v+ µ(x−π(x))∥2
                            2(1 − µη)
as η → 0 since the vectors P v and P ⊥ v + x − π(x) are orthogonal              ⊥
                                                             p µ and v = P v + P v. We want to
                        √                        √
show that Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µη)Ln . Note that 1 − µη ≥ 1 − L ≥ 0 since µ ≤ L by Lemma 24.
For simplicity, we assume that x∗ = 0, i.e. x′n − π(x′n ) = x′n − P x′n = P ⊥ x′n .
Step 1. Since f is L-smooth and η ≤ 1/L, we have

                            ′         Lη                              η
            f (xn+1 ) ≤ f (xn ) − 1 −      η ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 = f (x′n ) − ∥∇f (x′n )∥2
                                       2                              2
by Lemma 19 with x = x′n and g = ∇f (x′n ).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Step 2. We compute
                √                      √           √
     P ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n+1 = P ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ (x′n + ηvn+1 − η∇f (x′n ))
                       √              √           √
              = (P ⊥ + µηP ⊥ )vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n − η µ P ⊥ ∇f (x′n )
                      √            √         √ √              √ √
              = ρ(1 + µη)P ⊥ vn + µP ⊥ x′n − η µη + ρ(1 + µ η) P ⊥ ∇f (x′n )
                     √            √         √
              = (1 − µη)P ⊥ vn + µP ⊥ x′n − η P ⊥ ∇f (x′n ),
                                                                         √
                                                                       1− µη
where we simplify the coefficients in the last step by substituting ρ = 1+√µη . So,
                               √
   1 ⊥       √          2  (1 − µη)2 ⊥          µ              η
     P vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n+1 =          ∥P vn ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ ∇f (x′n )∥2
   2                           2                2              2
                             √     √                        √
                           + µ(1 − µη)⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ − µη ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩
                             √    √
                           − η(1 − µη)⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ vn ⟩.
Recall that since both P and P ⊥ are orthogonal projections, for any x, y ∈ Rd , ⟨P x, P y⟩ =
⟨P x, y⟩ = ⟨x, P y⟩, and the analogous result holds for P ⊥ as well.
Step 3. Now we expand the last term in the Lyapunov sequence,
         √                          √
    (1 + µη)2                 (1 + µη)2 2             √
          √    ∥P vn+1 ∥2 =          √     ρ ∥P (vn − η∇f (x′n ))∥2
    2(1 − µη)                 2(1 − µη)
                                  √
                              1 − µη                                   √
                                         ∥P vn ∥2 + η∥P ∇f (x′n )∥2 − 2 η⟨∇f (x′n ), P vn ⟩ .

                          =
                                  2

Step 4. We add the expressions from the previous steps and use the fact that P vn + P ⊥ vn = vn to
get
                             √
                       (1 − µη)2 ⊥               µ              η
              Ln+1 =               ∥P vn ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ ∇f (x′n )∥2
                             2                   2               2
                         √        √                        √
                       + µ(1 − µη)⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ − µη ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩
                                                             √
                         √        √           ′          1 − µη
                       − η(1 − µη)⟨∇f (xn ), vn ⟩ +                ∥P vn ∥2
                                                             2
                                 √
                          η(1 − µη)
                       +              ∥P ∇f (x′n )∥2 + f (xn+1 ) − inf f.
                               2

Using (6) and (7) to bound the inner products ⟨∇f (x′n ), vn ⟩ and ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩,
                       √
                 (1 − µη)2 ⊥                µ               η
       Ln+1 ≤                 ∥P vn ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2 + ∥P ⊥ ∇f (x′n )∥2
                       2                    2               2
                   √        √                         √                           µ
                + µ(1 − µη)⟨P vn , P xn ⟩ − µη f (x′n ) − inf f + ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2
                                      ⊥       ⊥ ′
                                                                                  2
                         √                          ε √             1 − √µη
                                    ′                           2
                − (1 − µη) f (xn ) − f (xn ) − ∥ η vn ∥ +                        ∥P vn ∥2
                                                    2                    2
                          √
                    η(1 − µη)                               η
                +                ∥P ∇f (x′n )∥2 + f (x′n ) − ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 − inf f.
                         2                                  2
Now, we use Pythagoras theorem, i.e. for all w ∈ Rd , ∥P w∥2 + ∥P ⊥ w∥2 = ∥P w + P ⊥ w∥2 = ∥w∥2 ,
and rearrange some of the terms,
                       √               √                           √
                 (1 − µη)2 + (1 − µη)ηε ⊥                2    (1 − µη)(1 + ηε)
         Ln+1 ≤                                 ∥P vn ∥ +                      ∥P vn ∥2
                               2                                      2
                           √                                         √ 3√
                   µ(1 − µη) ⊥ ′ 2 η − η                              η µ
                 +               ∥P xn ∥ +            ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 −       ∥P ∇f (x′n )∥2
                         2                       2                      2
                   √         √
                 + µ(1 − µη)⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩
                        √             √                    √
                 + (1 − µη − 1 + µη)f (x′n ) + (1 − µη)(f (xn ) − inf f ).


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The coefficients of f (x′n ) and ∥∇f (x′n )∥2
                                           p are zero and the coefficient of ∥P ∇f (x′n )∥2 is negative,
                                                                    ⊥
so we can disregard those terms. If ε ≤ µ/η, the coefficient ∥P vn ∥2 can be bounded as
                 √             √                   √          √        √            √
            (1 − µη)(1 − µη + ηε)             (1 − µη)(1 − µη + µη)             1 − µη
                                           ≤                                  ≤            ,
                           2                                2                       2
and the coefficient of ∥P ⊥ vn ∥2 can be bounded as
                        √                        √       √          √
                   (1 − µη)(1 + ηε)         (1 − µη)(1 + µη)    (1 + µη)2
                                         ≤                    ≤            .
                             2                      2               2
Thus, we conclude that
                                                         √
                               √                      1 − µη ⊥
                Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µη)(f (xn ) − inf f ) +          ∥P vn ∥2
                                                         2
                                    √
                            µ(1 − µη) ⊥ ′ 2 √              √
                         +                ∥P xn ∥ + µ(1 − µη)⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩
                                  2
                                  √
                            (1 + µη)2
                         +               ∥P vn ∥2
                               √  2
                       = (1 − µη)Ln .
Consequently,
                                     √                    √       h                 µ          i
       f (xn ) − inf f ≤ Ln ≤ (1 −       µη)n L0 = (1 −       µη)n f (x0 ) − inf f + ∥P ⊥ x0 ∥2 .
                                                                                    2

B.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREMS 13 AND 14: ACCELERATION WITH ADDITIVE NOISE

The proof of Theorem 13 mimics that of Theorem 11 with minor modifications to account for
stochastic gradient estimates. Since ωn is stochastically independent of anything which has happened
in the algorithm before, in particular of x′n , vn , we have the following.
Lemma 20. For all n ∈ N, we have
                E ⟨g(x′n , ωn ), ∇f (x′n )⟩ = E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 ]


                      E ⟨g(x′n , ωn ), vn ⟩ = E ⟨∇f (x′n ), vn ⟩]


                  E ⟨g(x′n , ωn ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩ = E ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩]


                                 E ∥gn ∥2 = E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 + E ∥gn − ∇f (x′n )∥2


where the expectations are taken over the (potentially random) initial condition x0 as well as the
random coefficients ω0 , . . . , ωn which govern the gradient estimates.

A proof can be found in (Gupta et al., 2024, Lemma 15). The second identity, which is not included
therein, can be proved analogously. As an application, we prove a stochastic analogue of Lemma 19.

Lemma 21. Assume that f is L-smooth and E ∥g(x, ω) − ∇f (x)∥2 ≤ σa2 + σm         2
                                                                                    ∥∇f (x)∥2 for all
       d
x ∈ R . Then, if x, ω are independent random variables, we have
                                                    L(1 + σ 2 )η                     Lη 2 2

                                                                   η E ∥∇f (x)∥2 +

      E(x,ω) f (x − ηg(x, ω)) ≤ E f (x) − 1 −                                              σ .
                                                         2                              2 a

Proof. Recall that for any x, η, g, the following holds
                                                            Lη 2
                           f (x − ηg) ≤ f (x) − η⟨∇f (x), g⟩ +   ∥g∥2
                                                             2
by Lemma 19. We now assume that g = g(x, ω) is a random estimator for ∇f (x), where x may be
random, but ω is independent of x. Then, by Lemma 20, we have
                                                Lη 2
      E f (x − ηg) ≤ E f (x) − η E ∥∇f (x)∥2 +       E ∥g∥2

                                                 2
                                            2
                                                Lη 2
                                                      E ∥∇f (x)∥2 + E ∥g − ∇f (x)∥2

                    = E f (x) − η E ∥∇f (x)∥ +
                                                 2

                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                          Lη 2   2

                                   Lη
                                        η E ∥∇f (x)∥2 +                2
                                                                          E ∥∇f (x)∥2

                   ≤ E f (x) − 1 −                               σa + σm
                                    2                        2
                                           2                      Lη 2 2

                                   L(1 + σm   )η
                                                   η E ∥∇f (x)∥2 +

                   = E f (x) − 1 −                                       σ .
                                        2                            2 a
Finally, we provide an auxiliary result to resolve a recursion.
Lemma 22. Assume a sequence xn satisfies the recursive estimate xn+1 ≤ axn + b for a ∈ (0, 1)
and b ≥ 0. Then
                                                          b
                                         xn ≤ an x0 +         .
                                                        1−a
                                         b
Proof. Consider the sequence yn := xn + a−1 . Then
                           b                   b             a−1      b           ab
      yn+1 = xn+1 +            ≤ axn + b +          = axn +      b+      = axn +
                        a−1                 a−1              a−1     a−1         a−1

                             b
            = a xn +              = ayn .
                         a−1
In particular, yn ≤ an y0 , so

                                        b        n         b        b
                           xn = yn +        ≤ a x0 +            +      .
                                      1−a                a−1      1−a
If b > 0, the estimate follows since b/(a − 1) < 0.

We now prove the first main result of this section.
Theorem 13. [Acceleration with additive noise] Assume that f, P are as in Theorem 11 and that
the g satisfies (8) and (9) with σm = 0. Assume that  √
                                                        the sequences xn , x′n , vn are generated by the
                                                   1− µη
scheme (5) for parameters η ≤ 1/L and ρ = 1+√µη , but with the stochastic gradient estimates
g(x′n , ωn ) with independently identically distributed ωn in place of ∇f (x′n ). Then
                                                                                            √
                                     √       h                  µ                  i     σa2 η
          E[f (xn ) − inf f ] ≤ (1 − µη)n f (x0 ) − inf f + ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥2 + √                 .
                                                                2                           µ

Proof. The proof is mostly identical to that of Theorem 11 with minor modifications: In Step 1, we
obtain the estimate
                                                    η                    Lσa2 η 2
                       E[f (xn+1 ] ≤ E[f (x′n )] − E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 +
                                                    2                        2
by Lemma 21. In the quadratic terms in steps 2 and 3, we need to take the expectation of gn rather than
∇f (x′n ). By construction, the terms involving E[∥∇f (x′n )∥2 ] still balance with the same parameters,
leading to an additional contribution of η σa2 due to the stochastic gradient estimates. Since η ≤ 1/L,
we can bound Lη 2 ≤ η so overall we obtain the estimate
                                                   √
                                    Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µη)Ln + σa2 η.
                            √
in place of Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µη)Ln since all other terms are identical under the expectation using
Lemma 20. The claim now follows from Lemma 22.

For readers who are looking for a more detailed proof, we note that Theorem 13 is a special case of
Theorem 15 with σm = 0, where we provide a full proof.
In the same spirit, we sketch the proof of Theorem 14. Let us recall the statement.
Theorem 14. [Additive noise and decreasing step size] Assume that f, g are as in Theorem 13 and
that the sequences xn , x′n , ρn are generated by the scheme
                       √                                                           √
           x′n = xn + ηn−1 vn ,           xn+1 = x′n − ηn gn ,     vn+1 = ρn (vn − ηn gn )
                                               √                            √
                              µ              1− µηn          p
for parameters ηn = (n+√Lµ+1)       2 , ρn = 1+ µηn . If ε ≤    µ/η0 = µ + Lµ, then
                                               √
                            q
                                L
                                                      1               2
                                                                          σ2           p
                                µ E f (x0 ) − inf f + 2 ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥    + µa log 1 + n µ/L
     E f (xn ) − inf f ≤                                       p                             .
                                                          n + L/µ

                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Note that in the proof of Theorem 15, we build on the relationships
                                                        ηn
                                 f (xn+1 ) ≤ f (x′n ) −    ∥∇f (x′n )∥2
                                                         2
                                                            √
                                     x′n+1 = x′n − ηn gn + αn vn
                                                        √
                                     vn+1 = ρn (vn − αn gn )
and do not enter further into the recursion. We additionally note that if ηn is a monotone decreasing
                                              √
                                           (1+ µη )2
sequence, then the sequence λn+1 := 1−√µηnn is also monotone decreasing. Hence, if ηn ≤
   1
     2 ) for all n ∈ N, then by the same proof as Theorem 13, the sequence
L(1+σm
                                                       1 ⊥     √         2  λn
                Ln+1 := f (xn ) − inf f +                P vn + µ P ⊥ x′n +    ∥P vn ∥2
                                                       2                     2
satisfies
               √                                       1 ⊥     √         2  λn+1
                                                         P vn + µ P ⊥ x′n +      ∥P vn ∥2       + σa2 ηn

   Ln ≤ 1 −        µηn )           f (xn ) − inf f +
                                                       2                     2
               √
                   µηn ) Ln + σa2 ηn

       ≤ 1−
if the parameters are chosen as in the theorem statement. If specifically ηn = µ (n+n10 +1)2 for
      p
n0 = L/µ, then
                                                σa2                                   σa2

                            1                                    n + n0
     Ln+1 ≤ 1 −                    Ln +                  2
                                                           =              Ln +                   .
                     n + n0 + 1          µ(n + n0 + 1)        n + n0 + 1        µ(n + n0 + 1)2
Thus the sequence zn := (n + n0 )Ln satisfies the relation
                                                             σa2                    σa2
       zn+1 = (n + n0 + 1)Ln+1 ≤ (n + n0 )Ln +                         = zn +
                                                      µ(n + n0 + 1)            µ(n + n0 + 1)
so
                   n                       n−1
                                                     σa2                   σ 2 n−1 1
                  X                        X                                  Z
      zn = z0 +       (zk − zk−1 ) ≤ z0 +                        ≤ n0 L0 + a                 dt
                                               µ(k + n0 + 1)                µ 0      n0 + t
                  k=1                      k=0
                      σa2

                                   n−1
          ≤ n0 L 0 +       log 1 +          .
                      µ              n0
Overall, we find that
                                      zn
       E f (xn ) − inf f ≤ Ln =
                                   n + n0
                              q
                                L                     1
                                                                           σ2
                                                                          + µa log 1 + n−1
                                                                       2

                                µ E f (x0 ) − inf f + 2 ∥x0 − π(x0 )∥                     n0
                            ≤                                                                  .
                                                           n + n0


B.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 15: ACCELERATION WITH BOTH ADDITIVE AND MULTIPLICATIVE
       NOISE

In the strongly convex setting, Gupta et al. (2024) state a version of Theorem 15 in slightly greater
generality in terms of choosing variables. The same more general proof goes through also here after
we account for the tangential and normal components of the velocity as in the proof of Theorem 11.
Theorem 15. [Additive and multiplicative noise] Assume that f, P, x∗ are as in Theorem 11 and
that g is a family of gradient estimators such that (8) and (9) hold for some σa , σm ≥ 0. Assume that
the sequences xn , x′n , vn are generated by the AGNES scheme (10) with parameters
                                              q
                                                   µη
                        1                 1 − 1+σ    2
                                                                           p
                                                                       1 − µ(1 + σm   2 )η
                                                     m
        0<η≤                2
                               ,     ρ=       q         ,     α=        p                    η.
                  L(1 + σm )              1+       µη
                                                     2
                                                                                    2
                                                                   1 − µ(1 + σm )η + σm    2
                                                         1+σm
            p
Then, if ε < µ(1 + σm2 )/η, we have
                                     n h                                                 √
                                                                                      σa2 η
                         r
                              µη                            µ                2
                                                                               i
E f (xn ) − inf f ≤ 1 −          2
                                      E  f (x 0 ) − inf f +   ∥x 0 − π(x 0 )∥    + p            .
                            1 + σm                          2                               2 )
                                                                                     µ(1 + σm

                                                           24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Proof. Setup. Mimicking the proof of Theorem 11, consider the sequence
                                  1                                  λ
        Ln = E f (xn ) − f (x∗ ) + E b P ⊥ vn + a x′n − π(x′n ) ∥2 + E ∥P vn ∥2

                                  2                                    2
for constants
           s                           √
                    2 )α
              (1 + σm             (b + µγ)2 γ                       √        √
       b=                ,     λ=      √      √        where γ = µ(η − α) + b α.
                  η                 b − µγ      α
The constants will be motivated below
                                 √      where they are introduced. Note that we have η = α if
σm = 0 and thus b√= 1√and γ = α, recovering the situation of Theorem 13. We want to show
that Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µ α/b)Ln . For simplicity, we again assume without loss of generality that
π(x) = P x, i.e. x∗ = 0 throughout the proof.
Step 1. Consider the first term first. Note that
                                                        L(1 + σ 2 )                     Lη 2 2

 E f (xn+1 ) = E f (x′n − ηgn ) ≤ E f (x′n ) − 1 −                  η η E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 +

                                                                                            σ
                                                            2                            2 a
                             η                     Lη 2 2
               ≤ E f (x′n ) − E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 +

                                                       σ
                               2                     2 a
          1
if η ≤ L(1+σ  2 ) by Lemma 21.


Step 2. We now turn to the second term and use the definition of x′n+1 from (10),
             √                           √              √
 bP ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n+1 = bP ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ (x′n + α vn+1 − ηgn )
                                  √                √           √           √
                          = (b + µα)ρP ⊥ vn − αgn ) + µP ⊥ x′n − µηP ⊥ gn
                                  √               √               √            √  √
                          = (b + µα)ρP ⊥ vn + µP ⊥ x′n −            µη + ρ(b + µα) α P ⊥ gn .
                                                      √
                                                    b− µα
In analogy to the proof of Theorem 11, we have ρ = b+√µα , so
                  √                     √               √            √            √   √
     bP ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n+1 = (b − µα)P ⊥ vn + µP ⊥ x′n −              µη + (b − µα) α gn .
                                                       √              √                    √
In the deterministic case where η = α, the coefficient µ(η − α) + b α of gn simplified to b α. It
                                                                                  √          √
does not in this more general setting anymore, so we introduce a new notation: γ = µ(η −α)+b α.
Taking expectation of the square, we find that
    h              √               2
                                     i
  E bP ⊥ vn+1 + µ P ⊥ x′n+1
            √                          √       √
    = (b − µα)2 E ∥P ⊥ vn ∥2 + 2 µ(b − µα) E ⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + a2 E ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2

               √                            √
       − 2(b − µα)γ E ⟨gn , P ⊥ vn ⟩ − 2 µγ E ⟨gn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + γ 2 E ∥P ⊥ gn ∥2

            √                          √       √
    = (b − µα)2 E ∥P ⊥ vn ∥2 + 2 µ(b − µα) E ⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + µE ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2

               √                                 √
       − 2(b − µα)γ E ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ vn ⟩ − 2 µγ E ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + γ 2 E ∥P ⊥ gn ∥2 .



Step 3. We now consider the third term
                                              √
           λ E ∥P vn+1 ∥2 = λρ2 E ∥P (vn − αgn )∥2

                                                            √
                            = λρ2 E ∥P vn ∥2 + α∥P gn ∥2 − 2 α⟨gn , P vn ⟩

                                                            √
                            = λρ2 E ∥P vn ∥2 + α∥P gn ∥2 − 2 α⟨∇f (x′n ), P vn ⟩ .



Step 4. We now add the estimates of steps 2 and 3, with
                                           √                 √
                                      (b − µα)γ        (b + µα)2 γ
                                λ=          √        =       √       √
                                         ρ2 α            b − µα        α
                                              √                                           √
such that the coefficients −2(b − µα)γ of E[⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ vn ⟩] and −2λρ2 α of
                                                                         √   √
E[⟨∇f (x′n ), P vn ⟩] coincide. Note that in the deterministic case γ = b α = α and we recover the
coefficient chosen in the proof of Theorem 11.
                   √
E ∥bP ⊥ vn+1 + µP ⊥ x′n+1 ∥2 + λ∥P vn+1 ∥2



                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



           √                               √        √
              µα)2 E ∥P ⊥ vn ∥2 + 2 µ(b − µα) E ⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + µE ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2

  = (b −
                                                                                        √
                √                                  √                            (b − µα)γ
     − 2(b − µα)γ E ⟨∇f (x′n ), vn ⟩ − 2 µγ E ⟨∇f (x′n ), P ⊥ x′n ⟩ +                         E ∥P vn ∥2

                                                                                        √
                                                                                          α
         2
                ⊥        2
                                       √       √             2

     + γ E ∥P gn ∥ + (b − µα)γ α E ∥P gn ∥ .
                                                                                    √      √
We note that the coefficient of the norm of the tangential gradient is (b − µα) α γ ≤ γ 2 by the
                          √       √       √
definition of γ = (b − µα) α + µη. Next, we combine this estimate with the bound on f (xn+1 )
from Step 1 and use the geometric conditions (6) and (7) on f to control the inner products of ∇f (x′n )
with vn and P ⊥ x′n in the previous expression as well as the variance bound (9) for the gradient
estimates:
                                  η                     γ2                Lη 2 2
Ln+1 ≤ E f (x′n ) − inf f − E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 + E ∥gn ∥2 +

                                                                                 σ
                                    2                       2                2 a
                  √
             (b − µα)2   ⊥                    √          √                            µ
                               E ∥P vn ∥2 + µ(b − µα) E ⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ + E ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2

          +
                   2                                                                     2
                  √          γ     h
                                         ′              εα         2
                                                                     i
          − (b − µα)       √     E f (xn ) − f (xn ) −      ∥vn ∥
                               α                         2
             √       h                      µ           i (b − √µα)γ
                             ′                    ⊥ ′ 2
                                                                            E ∥P vn ∥2

          − µγ E f (xn ) − inf f + ∥P xn ∥ +                          √
                                            2                       2 α

                       √         γ      √                             √                 √    γ
       = 1 − (b − µα) √ − µγ E f (x′n ) − (1 − µγ) inf f + (b − µα) √ E[f (xn )]

                                   α                                                          α
               2        2                                 2      2
             γ (1 + σm ) − η                           Lη + γ 2
                                   E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 +

          +                                                        σa
                     2                          √           2
                  √        2           √
             (b − µα) + (b − µα)εγ α                               √         √
                                                     E ∥P vn ∥2 + µ(b − µα)E ⟨P ⊥ x′n , P ⊥ vn ⟩

          +
                                 2
                  √                                  √
             µ − µγµ   ⊥ ′ 2                   (b − µα)γ(1 + εα)
                                                                        E ∥P vn ∥2 .

          +                 E ∥P xn ∥ ] +               √
                  2                                    2 α

Step 5. Recall that
                               p                                    s
                            1 − µη(1 + σm2 )                                  2 )α
                                                                        (1 + σm
                      α=     p                 η,              b=
                                    2
                         1 − µ(1 + σm )η + σm2                              η
and thus                                                    q
                            √    p
                                         2 )α/η − √µα
                                                              µη
                                                         1 − 1+σ
                         b − µα    (1 + σm                      m
                                                                 2
                      ρ=    √   =p                √    =    q
                         b + µα          2 )α/η +
                                   (1 + σm          µα   1+   µη
                                                                 2            1+σm

as desired.
                       √
Let us verify that γ = α/b. This is equivalent to
                s                            s             !
                        2                             2

 √                                                       √       √
                             r                                          r
                   1 + σm          η             1 + σm                      η
   µ(η − α) +             α−          2
                                         =              − µ α+     µη −        2
                                                                                   =0
                      η        1 + σm               η                     1 + σm
i.e. to the choice
                  √   q          √
                  µη − 1+σ η       µη − √ 1 2            p
                                                                   2 )
                             2
                             m           1+σm         1 − µη(1 + σm
              α=               =√               η=                         η
                 √
                      q                p                    p
                        1+σm2
                                  µη − 1 + σm 2         2 −
                                                   1 + σm     µη(1 + σm2 )
                   µ−     η

which we made above. In particular, we find that

                     √       γ      √           b  √ √   bγ
                (b − µα) √ + µγ = √ − µ + µ γ = √ = 1
                              α                  α        α
and therefore

               √     γ  √                   √                √     γ
       1 − (b − µα) √ − µγ E f (x′n ) + (1 − µγ) inf f + (b − µα) √ E[f (xn )]

                      α                                             α

                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                      √
             = (1 −   µγ) E f (xn ) − inf f .
In the coefficient of E ∥∇f (x′n )∥2 , we have the cancellations


                            2                  2 α            η
                      (1 + σm )γ 2 − η = (1 + σm ) 2 −η =       2 )α
                                                                     α − η = 0.
                                                  b       (1 + σm
By the same analysis, the coefficient of additive noise is
                                                                η
                                      Lη 2 + γ 2 = Lη 2 +         2
                                                                    ,
                                                             1 + σm
so overall
                                                             η
                  √                           Lη 2 + 1+σm      2
                                                                  σa2

  Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µ γ) E f (xn ) − inf f +
                                               √        2
                     √                √
               (b − µα)2 + (b − µα)εγ α                             √             √
                                                     E ∥P vn ∥2 + µ(b − µα)E ⟨P ⊥ x′n , P ⊥ vn ⟩

            +
                                2                                      √
                     √                                √
               a2 − µγµ   ⊥ ′ 2                (b − µα)γ(1 + ε α)
                                                                              E ∥P vn ∥2 .

            +                E ∥P xn ∥ ] +                  √
                     2                                     2 α
                                                                                       √
We now analyze the terms corresponding to the quadratic terms. Using γ = α/b, we obtain
                   √                 √        √                √                       √ √
              (b − µα)2 + (b − µα)εγ α                                           (εγ − µ) α

                                                                 µα
                                                    ≤    1 −               1 +
                              b2                                 b                     b
                                                                                     √ √
                                                                              (εγ − µ) α

                                                             √
                                                    = (1 − µ γ) 1 +
                                                                                     b
                                                            √
                                                    ≤ 1 − µγ
                                                          √       q          2 )
                                                            µ         µ(1+σm
for the coefficient of E[∥vn ∥2 ] if εγ ≤ a, i.e. if ε ≤ γ =              η       Analogously, we see that the
coefficient of E ⟨P vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩ that
                   ⊥

                                          √                            √
                               √ b − µα √

            √        √                                            √       α        √        √
              µ(b − µα) = µb                     = µb 1 − µ                     = µb(1 − µ γ)
                                          b                              b
                               ⊥ ′ 2
and for the coefficient of E ∥P xn ∥ that
                                        √
                                   µ − µγµ               γµ            √
                                                = 1 − √ = 1 − µγ.
                                        µ                  µ
Before proceeding to the next term, we observe that
                                                   p
                          2        η          1 − µη(1 + σ 2 )
                         γ =           ≥η                          = α,
                                1 + σ2
                                                     p
                                           1 + σ 2 − µη(1 + σ 2 )
              √         √
and hence ε ≤ µ/γ ≤ µγ/α. Finally, we note for the coefficient of E[∥P vn ∥2 ] that
                       √                        √                   √   √
                 (b − µα)γ(1 + εα)         (b − µα)γ(1 + εα)(b − µα) α
                          √             =            √         √
                            αλ                         α γ(b + µα)2
                                                  √  2
                                             b − µα

                                        =         √       (1 + εα)
                                             b + µα
                                                  √
                                             b − µα 2

                                        ≤                 (1 + εα)
                                                  b
                                                √     2
                                        = (1 − µγ) (1 + εα)
                                                √     2      √
                                        ≤ (1 − µγ) (1 + µγ)
                                                √
                                        = (1 − µγ) 1 − µγ 2 )
                                               √
                                        ≤ 1 − µγ


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


as desired. Overall, we find that
                                                  b2   ⊥

                     √
                                                      E ∥P vn ∥2 + ab E ⟨P ⊥ vn , P ⊥ x′n ⟩

      Ln+1 ≤ (1 − µγ) E[f (xn ) − inf f ] +
                                                   2
                                                        Lη 2 + η
                 µ                  λ                              2
                                                                1+σm
              + E ∥P ⊥ x′n ∥2 + E ∥P vn ∥2 +                         σa2

                 2                     2                      2

                     √                           1                          λ
            = (1 − µγ) E f (xn ) − inf f + E ∥P ⊥ vn + P ⊥ x′n ∥2 + E ∥P vn ∥2

                                                   2                        2
                     2      η
                 Lη + 1+σ2
              +               m
                                 σa2
                       2
                                            η
                     √             Lη 2 + 1+σ 2
            = (1 − µγ) Ln +                   m
                                                σa2 .
                                         2
By Lemma 22, we deduce
                                                 η
                        √               Lη 2 + 1+σ 2                   2
                                                                L(1 + σm )η 2 + η
            Ln ≤ (1 −       µγ)n L0 +        √     m
                                                     σa2 =           √  p             .
                                           2 µγ                   2 ) µ
                                                           2(1 + σm               2 )
                                                                          η/(1 + σm
             2
Since L(1 + σm )η ≤ 1, we can simplify the noise term to
                                                            √
                                        2
                                 L(1 + σm )η 2 + η        σ2 η
                                      √  p             ≤p a         .
                                   2 ) µ
                            2(1 + σm               2 )
                                           η/(1 + σm            2 )
                                                         µ(1 + σm

C     A BRIEF COMPARISON OF GEOMETRIC CONDITIONS FOR OPTIMIZATION
C.1   D EFINITIONS AND ELEMENTARY PROPERTIES

In this section, we compare some common geometric assumptions in optimization theory. Recall the
following notions.
Definition 23. Let U ⊆ Rd be an open set. We say that a C 1 -function f : U → R

      1. is γ-quasar convex if argmin f ̸= ∅ and if the inequality
                                    ⟨∇f (x), x − x∗ ⟩ ≥ γ f (x) − f (x∗ )


         holds for any x ∈ U and any x∗ ∈ argmin f .
      2. star-convex if it is 1-quasar convex.
      3. (γ, µ)-strongly quasar convex if argmin f ̸= ∅ and
                                                                 µ
                          ⟨∇f (x), x − x∗ ⟩ ≥ γ f (x) − f (x∗ ) + ∥x − x∗ ∥2
                                                                 2

      4. is first order µ-strongly convex if
                                                              µ
                        f (x) ≥ f (z) + ⟨∇f (z), x − z⟩ +       ∥x − z∥2        ∀ x, z ∈ U.
                                                              2

      5. satisfies the first order µ-strong aiming condition if for all x we have
                                                                µ
                     f (π(x)) ≥ f (x) + ⟨∇f (x), π(x) − x⟩ + ∥x − π(x)∥2                 ∀x∈U
                                                                 2
         where
                                                          2                      ′
                              π(x) = argmin ∥x − z∥ : f (z) = inf
                                                              ′
                                                                  f (x ) .
                                                                     x ∈U

         In particular, we assume that the set of minimizers of f is non-empty and that there exists a
         unique closest point π(x) for all x ∈ U .


                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      6. satisfies a PL condition with PL constant µ if
                                        ∥∇f (x)∥2 ≥ 2µ f (x) − inf f .



If U is a convex set, the fourth condition is of course equivalent to regular µ-strong convexity.
Lemma 24.           1. If f is first order µ-strongly convex and has a minimizer in U , then f satisfies
          the µ-strong aiming condition.
      2. If f satisfies the µ-strong aiming condition, then f satisfies the PL condition with the same
         constant µ.
      3. If f is µ-strongly aiming on Uα = {x ∈ Rd : f (x) < α}, then the line segment connecting
         x and π(x) is contained in Uα for all x ∈ Uα .
      4. If f is L-Lipschitz continuous on Uα and satisfies the PL-inequality with constant µ on Uα ,
         then µ ≤ L.
      5. If f is (γ, µ)-strongly quasar convex, then argmin f consists of a single point.
      6. If f is γ-quasar convex and U is star-shaped with respect to the minimizer x∗ ∈ argmin f ,
         then all sub-level sets of f are star-shaped with respect x∗ . In particular, the set of minimizers
         is convex.

If U = Rd , then any strongly convex function f : U → R has a minimizer in U . On general open
sets, this is not guaranteed.

Proof. First claim. If f is first order µ-strongly convex and has a minimizer in U , then the minimizer
x∗ is unique since for x ̸= x∗ we have
                                                µ                        µ
      f (x) ≥ f (x∗ ) + ⟨∇f (x∗ ), x − x∗ ⟩ + ∥x − x∗ ∥2 = f (x∗ ) + ∥x − x∗ ∥2 > f (x∗ ).
                                                2                        2
In particular, for every x there exists a unique closest minimizer π(x) = x∗ . The strong aiming
condition therefore requires the first order convexity condition only for pairs of points x, x∗ rather
than all points x, z.
Second claim. This result follows by the same proof that implies the PL condition for strongly
convex functions: If f satisfies the µ-strong aiming condition, then
                                                                 µ
                     ⟨∇f (x), x − π(x)⟩ ≥ f (x) − f (π(x)) + ∥x − π(x)∥2
                                                                 2
and thus

                                                      x − π(x)
                           ∥∇f (x)∥ ≥ ∇f (x),
                                                    ∥x − π(x)∥
                                         f (x) − f (π(x)) µ
                                      ≥                    + ∥x − π(x)∥
                                            ∥x − π(x)∥        2

                                                f (x) − f (π(x)) µ
                                      ≥ min                      + ξ .
                                         ξ>0            ξ          2
Setting the derivative with respect to ξ to zero, we find that the minimum is achieved when
                                                           s
                        f (x) − f (π(x))      µ               2 f (x) − inf f
                                           = , so ξ =                           ,
                               ξ2             2                       µ
so                    s                         r
                         µ f (x) − inf f       µ 2                    q
         ∥∇f (x)∥ ≥                         +          f (x) − inf f = 2µ f (x) − inf f .
                                 2             2 µ
The PL condition follows by squaring both sides.
Third claim. Let xt = (1 − t)π(x) + tx for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. First we observe that π(xt ) = π(x) for
every t ∈ [0, 1]. Indeed, if there is another minimizer z of f such that ∥xt − z∥ ≤ ∥xt , π(x)∥ then
           ∥x − π(x)∥ = ∥x − xt ∥ + ∥xt − π(x)∥ ≤ ∥x − xt ∥ + ∥xt − z∥ ≤ ∥x − z∥


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


since x, xt , and π(x) all lie on a straight line. If there exists a unique closest point π(x) in M, then
we find that z = π(x).
We note that xt − π(x) = t(x − π(x)) and thus
                  d                                  1
                     f (xt ) = ⟨∇f (xt ), x − π(x)⟩ = ⟨∇f (xt ), xt − π(xt )⟩ ≥ 0.
                  dt                                 t
In particular, t 7→ f (xt ) is an increasing function on the set Ix := {t > 0 : xt ∈ Uα }. If Ix has
multiple connected components in (0, 1), this is only possible if f = α on the boundaries. If f = α
on the lower boundary of a connected component, then f ≥ α inside the entire interval as f increases,
contradicting the definition of Uα .
Fourth claim. Since f is continuous, Uα is open. Therefore, xt := xt − t∇f (x) ∈ Uα if t is small.
If f is L-Lipschitz continuous in Uα , then
                                                                 L
                           f (xt ) ≤ f (x) + ⟨f (x), xt − x⟩ +     ∥xt − x∥2
                                                                 2
for all t such that xs ∈ Uα for s ∈ (0, t) and t ≤ 1/L by Lemma 19. Since the function t 7→
f (x) − 2t ∥∇f (x)∥2 is decreasing in t, we see that xt ∈ Uα for t ∈ [0, 1/L]. In particular, we note
that
                                         1                                2µ
                                           ∥∇f (x)∥2 − inf f ≤ f (x) −

0 ≤ f (x − ∇f /L) − inf f ≤ f (x) −                                           f (x) − inf f − inf f
                                        2L                                2L
   ≤ (1 − µ/L) f (x) − inf f ,
implying the result.
Fifth claim. Assume that x∗ , x′ ∈ argmin f . Define xt = tx∗ + (1 − t)x′ . Then
                                             xt − x′

 d                       ∗   ′                           γ                     µ
   f (xt ) = ⟨∇f (xt ), x − x ⟩ = ∇f (xt ),            ≥     f (xt ) − min f + ∥xt − x′ ∥2 > 0
dt                                              t         t                    2
unless ∥xt − x′ ∥2 = 0, i.e. unless x∗ = x′ . Thus f (xt ) is strictly monotone increasing on {t ∈
[0, 1] : xt ∈ U }. Since x∗ ∈ U , this means that f must be strictly increasing on the final segment
(1 − ξ, 1] where it reaches the global minimizer x∗ at t = 1, leading to a contradiction.
Sixth claim. This follows by essentially the same argument as the fifth claim: If x is any point, then
tx + (1 − t)x∗ ∈ U since U is star-shaped about x∗ and
                                                      xt − x∗

         d                                                         γ
            f (xt ) = ⟨∇f (xt ), x − x∗ ⟩ = ∇f (xt ),           ≥ (f (xt ) − f (x∗ )) ≥ 0.
         dt                                              t         t
In particular, f is increasing along any rays starting at x∗ , so if f (x) < α, then f (xt ) < α for any
t ∈ [0, 1].
The set of minimizers is star-shaped about every minimizer, hence convex.

C.2   A ONE - DIMENSIONAL EXAMPLE

In the following simple one-dimensional example, we illustrate the hierarchy of geometric conditions
between convexity and the PL condition.
Example 25. Let R > 0 and ε ∈ (0, 1). Consider the even function given for x > 0 by
            1 + ε sin(2R log x) 2
   f (x) =                     x
                     2
  f ′ (x) = 1 + ε sin(2R log x) + Rε cos(2R log x) x


  f ′′ (x) = 1 + ε sin(2R log x) + Rε cos(2R log x) + 2Rε cos(2R log x) − 2R2 ε sin(2R log x)
         = 1 + ε(1 − 2R2 ) sin(2R log x) + 3Rε cos(2R log x).
                                                                           ∗
We first note that evidently 1−ε 2         1+ε 2
                              2 x ≤ f (x) ≤ 2 x for all x. In particular, x = 0 is the unique
global minimizer of f .


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


L-smoothness. The function g(ξ) = A sin(ξ) + B cos(ξ) attains its maximum when A cos ξ −
B sin ξ = 0 for A, B ∈ R, i.e. sin ξ = √A2A+B 2 and cos ξ = √A2B+B 2 . In particular maxξ g(ξ) =
√
  A2 + B 2 , so
                                  q         2                p
                |f ′′ (x)| ≤ 1 + ε 1 − 2R2 + (3R)2 = 1 + ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4 .
                                          ∗
 √ second derivative is discontinuous at x = 0, but bounded on R \ {0} by L = 1 +
The
ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4 , i.e. f is L-smooth.
                                                                                ′′
Convexity. By√ the same consideration, we see that f is convex if and only if f ≥ 0, i.e. if
                     2    4
and only if√ε 1 + 5R + 4R ≤ 1. If the inequality is strict, f is strongly convex with constant
µ = 1 − ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4 .
PL inequality. By the same argument as above, we see that
                                                2         p       2
                 |f ′ (x)|2 ≥ 1 + ε sin +Rε cos x2 ≥ 1 − ε 1 + R2 x2
    √
if ε 1 + R2 < 1, where all trigonometric functions are evaluated at ξ = 2R log x.
                   √
In particular, if ε 1 + R2 < 1, then
                                             √          2                     √        2
    ′    2
                     p
                            2
                               2
                                  2     1 − ε 1 + R2 1 + ε 2             1 − ε 1 + R2
  |f (x)| ≥ 1 − ε 1 + R          x ≥2                           x ≥2                     f (x),
                                             1+ε            2                 1+ε
i.e. f satisfies the PL condition with constant
                                                  √
                                            (1 − ε 1 + R2 )2
                                         µ=                  .
                                                  1+ε
                                                              √
Infinite number of local minimizers cluster at the orgin. If ε 1 + R2 > 1 on the other hand, then
by the same argument f ′ changes sign an infinite number of times in any neighborhood of the origin
since limx→0+ log x = −∞.
µ-strong aiming condition. Note that

                    ′                1 ε
               x · f (x) − f (x) =     + sin(2R log x) + Rε cos(log x) x2
                                     2 2

                                     1 p
                                 ≥     − (ε/2) + (Rε) x2
                                                2      2
                                     2
                                   1        p
                                 =     1 − ε 1 + 4R2 x2 .
                                   2
In particular, f is µ-strongly aiming (with respect to the unique global minimizer) with
                                                   p
                                        µ = 1 − ε 1 + 4R2
    √
if ε 1 + 4R2 < 1 and it fails to be µ-strongly aiming for any µ > 0 otherwise.
Quasar-convexity. Since the minimizer is unique, (γ, µ)-strong convexity is a strictly more general
notion than strong aiming condition as we have an additional parameter γ to relax the requirements.
Essentially the same calculation reads
                                        γ
             x · f ′ (x) − γ f (x) = 1 − + ε ((1 − γ/2) sin(. . . ) + R cos(. . . )) x2
                                        2
                                        γ    p
                                   ≥ 1 − − ε (1 − γ/2)2 + R2 x2 .
                                        2
In particular, f is γ-quasar convex if
                                                                 s                   2
              γ   p                                                          R
           1 − − ε (1 − γ/2)2 + R2 ≥ 0                 ⇔   1−ε 1+                        ≥0
              2                                                           1 − γ/2

                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 4: We compare the trajectories of gradient descent and Nesterov’s algorithm for the objective
function f in Example   √ 25 with R = 6 and ε = 0.075 (left), ε = 0.08 (middle) and ε = 0.085
(right). Evidently, if ε 1 + 4R2 is very close to the threshold value 1, gradient descent outperforms
Nesterov’s algorithm with the theoretically guaranteed parameters.

                                                                                    2
                                                                            R               1
                                                          ⇔     1+                      ≤      .
                                                                         1 − γ/2            ε2
                                                 2
Such a γ can be found if and only if R2 < 1−ε  ε2 . Choosing γ slightly smaller, it is then also always
possible to make f (γ ′ , µ′ )-strongly convex for some γ ′ ∈ (0, γ) and µ′ > 0.
Relationship between conditions. We quickly summarize the various parameter ranges for which
the function f satisfies good geometric conditions.


                             PL condition     µ-strongly aiming            µ-strongly convex
                               √                  √                         √
            Must be < 1       ε 1 + R2           ε 1 + 4R2                 ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4
                                 √                  √                         √
                             (1−ε 1+R2 )2
                Constant         1+ε           1 − ε 1 + 4R2             1 − ε 1 + 5R2 + 4R4


Evidently, classical strong convexity implies strong aiming condition with respect to the global
minimizer which in turn implies the PL condition. The parameter ranges and constants are generally
vastly different. All estimates, except for the PL constant, are sharp. In particular, the one-dimensional
examples demonstrate that strong aiming condition is strictly weaker than convexity along the line
segment connecting x to π(x).
In the case of quadratic objective functions or functions modelled on them (such as the distance
function from a manifold), the PL constant is essentially the same as the parameter of strong convexity.
For the function f in Example 25 on the other hand, the PL constant is noticeably larger than the
parameter of strong convexity with respect
                                         √ to the unique√ minimizer. In Figure 4, we observe that with
the parameters η = 1/L and ρ = (1 − µη)/(1 + µη), gradient descent may at times converge
faster, at least with the parameter choice that is derived over a large function class rather than for an
individual objective function.

C.3   D EEP LEARNING

While some notions of a ‘good’ geometry are weaker than others (for instance, strong convexity
implies the PL condition but not vice versa), they all share an important common feature: If x
is a critical point of f , then it is a global minimizer. Namely, the PL inequality implies that
∥∇f (x)∥2 > 0 unless f (x) = inf f and γ-quasar convexity implies that ⟩∇f (x), x − x∗ ⟩ > 0 unless
f (x) = f (x∗ ) = inf f , showing that ∇f (x) ̸= 0.
In deep learning applications, critical points are guaranteed to occur under very general circumstances:
If
                                                        Xn
                              f (β, a, W, b; x) = β +       ai σ(wiT x + b)
                                                          i=1


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


is a neural network with a single hidden layer and a C 1 -activation function satisfying σ(0) = 0 (e.g.
tanh), then the loss function
                                                n
                                             1X                            2
                           L(β, a, W, b) =         f (β, a, W, b; xj ) − yj ,
                                             n j=1

satisfies
                                        ∇L(β, a, W, b) = 0
                                                    Pn
for a = b = 0 ∈ Rn , W = 0 ∈ Rn×d and β = n1 j=1 yj . The same is true if a row wi of W is
merely orthogonal to all data points xj but does not vanish.
For deeper networks, the set of critical points becomes larger: As long as the parameters of two
layers are all zero, the remaining layers can be chosen arbitrarily. If more than two layers are all zero,
then the also the second parameter derivative vanishes. In particular, the critical point for which all
parameters are zero cannot be a strict saddle point.
While there are guarantees that individual algorithms escape certain types of critical points almost
surely (e.g. strict saddles, (Lee et al., 2019; O’Neill & Wright, 2019)), they may take very long to do
so (Du et al., 2017). The analysis of accelerated rates becomes asymptotic at best. We claim that our
notion of strong aiming condition suffers from the same ‘optimism’ globally, but locally captures two
important features of deep learning landscapes close to the set of global minimizers which are not
captured by concepts which require a geometric condition with respect to all minimizers: A manifold
along which we can move tangentially, and convexity in directions which are perpendicular to the
manifold.


                                                    33
