Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


COMBO: C OMPOSITIONAL W ORLD M ODELS                                                             FOR
E MBODIED M ULTI -AGENT C OOPERATION
  Hongxin Zhang1∗, Zeyuan Wang2∗ , Qiushi Lyu3∗ , Zheyuan Zhang1 , Sunli Chen1 ,
 Tianmin Shu4 , Behzad Dariush5 , Kwonjoon Lee5 , Yilun Du6 , Chuang Gan1
 1
   University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 IIIS, Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
 4
   Johns Hopkins University 5 Honda Research Institute USA 6 MIT



                                              A BSTRACT
             In this paper, we investigate the problem of embodied multi-agent cooperation,
             where decentralized agents must cooperate given only egocentric views of the
             world. To effectively plan in this setting, in contrast to learning world dynam-
             ics in a single-agent scenario, we must simulate world dynamics conditioned on
             an arbitrary number of agents’ actions given only partial egocentric visual ob-
             servations of the world. To address this issue of partial observability, we first
             train generative models to estimate the overall world state given partial egocen-
             tric observations. To enable accurate simulation of multiple sets of actions on
             this world state, we then propose to learn a compositional world model for multi-
             agent cooperation by factorizing the naturally composable joint actions of mul-
             tiple agents and compositionally generating the video conditioned on the world
             state. By leveraging this compositional world model, in combination with Vi-
             sion Language Models to infer the actions of other agents, we can use a tree
             search procedure to integrate these modules and facilitate online cooperative
             planning. We evaluate our methods on three challenging benchmarks with 2-
             4 agents. The results show our compositional world model is effective and
             the framework enables the embodied agents to cooperate efficiently with dif-
             ferent agents across various tasks and an arbitrary number of agents, showing
             the promising future of our proposed methods. More videos can be found at
             https://umass-embodied-agi.github.io/COMBO/.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Building cooperative embodied agents that can engage in and help humans in tasks requiring visual
planning is a valuable yet challenging endeavor. To cooperatively plan in a multi-agent scenario,
in contrast to learning world dynamics in a single-agent scenario, there are additional challenges to
simulate world dynamics conditioned on joint actions and partial observations of the world.
Large generative models have brought remarkable advances to various domains, including language
understanding and generation (OpenAI, 2023), image understanding and generation (Liu et al.,
2023a; Ho et al., 2020), and video generation (Blattmann et al., 2023a). Many have explored how
to leverage these powerful foundation models for embodied AI, Ahn et al. (2022); Wang et al.
(2023a) leverage Large Language Models for decision-making, Zhang et al. (2023) incorporates
LLMs to build modular embodied agents for cooperation and communication, Driess et al. (2023)
uses Vision Language Models to build capable vision agents, Du et al. (2023b); Yang et al. (2024)
use Video Models to generate visual plans for robots and explore modeling world dynamics with
video models to improve single-agent planning. However, how to leverage Vision Language Models
and Video Models to build embodied agents capable of planning under a visual cooperation task
is under-explored where it’s important to accurately simulate the world dynamics conditioned on
an arbitrary number of agents’ actions given only partial egocentric observations at each step for
efficient cooperation.
We propose to learn a compositional world model for multi-agent cooperation by leveraging the nat-
ural compositionality of joint actions to generate future frames conditioned on the current world state
    ∗
        denotes equal contribution.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                            What may Bob do?
                                                                                               I can…

                         Egocentric RGBD     Bob may put the
                           Observation       hamburger patty on                                Then Bob
                                             the plate                                         may…

                                           infer other agents' intents
                                                                                               I can…

 Alice       Bob                            What should I do?
         TDW-Cook
                                Alice       I can cut the onion                                I can…


                                              I can pick up the                                Then Bob
                                              brown bread                                      may…


                                                                                 world @ t+1
                                           propose possible actions
                                                                                               I can…

                                                         simulate how the world may be
                                                       affected by multiple sets of actions
         TDW-Game
            (a)                                                                (b)                        world @ t+2


Figure 1: (a) Two challenging embodied multi-agent visual cooperation benchmarks TDW-Cook and TDW-
Game, where 2-4 agents cooperate to finish dishes according to the recipe or finish puzzles according to the
visual clue. (b) The agent needs to infer other agents’ intents, propose possible actions, and accurately simulate
how the world may be affected by multiple sets of actions to make efficient cooperation in the long run.
compositionally, which enables accurate simulation of multiple sets of actions on the world state. To
address the partial observability issue, we leverage a learned generative model to estimate the over-
all world state given partial egocentric observations. By leveraging the compositional world model,
in combination with Vision Language Models, we propose COMBO, a novel Compositional wOrld
Model-based emBOdied multi-agent planning framework to facilitate online cooperative planning.
COMBO first estimates the overall world state from partial egocentric observations, then utilizes
Vision Language Models to act as an Action Proposer to propose possible actions, an Intent Tracker
to infer other agents’ intents, and an Outcome Evaluator to evaluate the different possible outcomes.
In combination with the compositional world model to simulate the effect of joint actions on the
world state, COMBO uses a tree search procedure to integrate these modules and empowers embod-
ied agents to imagine how different actions may affect the world with other agents in the long run
and plan more cooperatively.
We instantiate the challenging embodied multi-agent visual cooperation task in ThreeDWorld (Gan
et al., 2021), and build TDW-Game and TDW-Cook where 2-4 decentralized agents must cooper-
ate to finish several puzzles according to the visual clue or dishes according to the recipe given only
partial egocentric views of the world as shown in Figure 1, requiring extensive visual cooperation.
The agents need to estimate the overall world state given partial egocentric observations, infer other
agents’ intents, and accurately simulate how the world state may be affected by multiple sets of
actions to make efficient cooperation in the long run. Our extensive experiments on these two chal-
lenging benchmarks and another adapted cooperation task show our learned compositional world
model delivers accurate video synthesis, conditioned on multiple sets of actions from an arbitrary
number of agents and COMBO enables the embodied agents to cooperate efficiently with different
agents across various tasks and an arbitrary number of agents. In sum, our contribution includes:

          • We propose to learn a compositional world model for multi-agent cooperation by factoriz-
            ing joint actions of an arbitrary number of agents and compositionally generating the video
            to enable accurate simulation of multiple sets of actions on the world state.
          • We introduce COMBO, a Compositional wOrld Model-based emBOdied multi-agent plan-
            ning framework to empower the agents to imagine how different actions may affect the
            world with other agents in the long run and plan more cooperatively.
          • We evaluate our methods on three challenging benchmarks and conduct ablation studies,
            the results show our framework enables the embodied agents to cooperate efficiently with
            different agents across various tasks and an arbitrary number of agents.


                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1    M ULTI -AGENT P LANNING

Multi-agent planning has a long-standing history (Stone & Veloso, 2000), with various tasks and
methods have been introduced (Lowe et al., 2017; Samvelyan et al., 2019; Carroll et al., 2019;
Suarez et al., 2019; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Amato et al., 2019; Baker et al., 2020; Bard et al., 2020;
Jain et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2022; Szot et al., 2023). For embodied intelligence, Puig et al. (2021)
explored the social perception of the agents during household tasks, Zhang et al. (2023) studied the
communication and cooperation of two agents in a multi-room house. However, these works didn’t
dig into the explicit challenge of modeling the world dynamics conditioned on an arbitrary number
of agents’ actions given partial egocentric observations of the world, which is essential for the agents
to cooperate efficiently in long-horizon cooperation-extensive visual tasks. In contrast, we learn a
compositional world model for multi-agent cooperation and propose a compositional world model-
based embodied multi-agent planning framework to empower the embodied agents to imagine and
plan more cooperatively with only partial egocentric observations.

2.2    L ARGE G ENERATIVE M ODELS FOR E MBODIED AI

With the recent advance of large generative models (Bubeck et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Driess
et al., 2023; Blattmann et al., 2023b), numerous works have explored how they can help build better
agents (Wang et al., 2023b; Xi et al., 2023; Sumers et al., 2023), especially in embodied environ-
ments (Zhou et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2023; Padmakumar et al., 2022; Kolve et al., 2017; Misra et al.,
2018; Xia et al., 2018; Xiang et al., 2020). Specifically, Wang et al. (2023c); Ahn et al. (2022);
Sharma et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2023a); Park et al. (2023) leverage Large Language Models to
help decision-making. Brohan et al. (2023); Jiang et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023d) use vision lan-
guage models to facilitate embodied agents to plan end-to-end in visual worlds. Hong et al. (2024);
Black et al. (2024) use diffusion models for decision-making. Xiang et al. (2024); Du et al. (2024);
Finn et al. (2016) use video models to help the robot make visual plans. There are two closely
related works. VLP (Du et al., 2023b) enables a single agent to perform complex long-horizon ma-
nipulation tasks by synergizing vision-language models and text-to-video models with tree search,
but they neglect the challenge of learning world dynamics conditioned on multiple sets of actions
of an arbitrary number of agents. RoboDreamer (Zhou et al., 2024b) decomposes language instruc-
tions into sets of lower-level primitives and compositionally synthesizes video plans on unseen goals
for robot manipulation tasks, however, they only focus on the low-level trajectory control, and as-
sume the observation is static and non-partial. In contrast, we learn a compositional world model
for multi-agent cooperation to enable accurate simulation of multiple sets of actions on the world
and leverage a learned generative model to estimate the overall world state given partial egocentric
observations to address the partial observability issue.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1    P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

Embodied multi-agent cooperation problem can be formalized as a decentralized partially observ-
able Markov decision process (DEC-POMDP) (Oliehoek et al., 2016; Bernstein et al., 2002; Spaan
et al., 2006), defined by (n, S, {Ai }, {Oi }, T, G, h), where:
       • n denotes the number of agents;
       • S is a finite set of states;
       • Ai is the action set for agent i;
       • Oi is the observation set for agent i, including partial egocentric visual observation the agent
    receives through its sensors;
       • T (s, a, s′ ) = p(s′ |s, a) is the joint transition model which defines the probability that after
    taking joint action a ∈ A = A1 × · · · × An in s ∈ S, the new state s′ ∈ S is achieved;
       • G is the final goal state;
       • h is the planning horizon.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Starting from an initial state S0 ∈ S, n decentralized agents need to act ai ∈ Ai given egocentric
RGBD observations oi ∈ Oi each step to achieve the goal state G using a minimal number of steps.

3.2    V IDEO D IFFUSION M ODELS

Given an initial image x0 and a text prompt txt as the condition, a video diffusion model learns to
model the distribution of possible future frames x1...T , denote as Pθ (x1...T |x0 , txt). A denoising
function ϵθ is trained to predict the noise applied to x1..T at diffusion time step t given the noisy
frames by optimizing the objective of
                                  L_{MSE}=\Vert \epsilon _\theta (x_{1...T},t|x_0,txt)-\epsilon \Vert ^2 \label {eq:objective} (1)

where ϵ is sampled from a standard Gaussian distribution, and t is a randomly sampled diffusion
time step, following Ko et al. (2023).

3.3    C OMPOSABLE D IFFUSION M ODELS

Liu et al. (2022); Du et al. (2023a) shows that diffusion models are functionally similar to
Energy-Based Models, and can be composed to generate images conditioned on a set of concepts
{c1 , c2 , · · · , cn } by training diffusion models to learn a set of score functions ϵθ (xt , t|ci ), and com-
posing them as

                         \hat \epsilon (x_t,t|c_1,c_2,\cdots ,c_n)=\epsilon _\theta (x_t,t)+\sum _{i=1}^n\epsilon _\theta (x_t,t|c_i)-\epsilon _\theta (x_t,t) \label {eq:compose-score}   (2)


Which corresponds to the production of the probability densities

                                                 P_\theta (x|c_1,c_2,\cdots ,c_n)\propto P_\theta (x)\prod _{i=1}^n\frac {P_\theta (x|c_i)}{P_\theta (x)} \label {eq:fact-prob}            (3)


Then the sampling process changes to xt−1 ∼ N (xt − ϵ̂(xt , t|c1 , c2 , · · · , cn ), σt2 I).


4     C OMPOSITIONAL W ORLD M ODEL

To cooperatively plan in a multi-agent scenario, in contrast to learning world dynamics in a single-
agent scenario, there is an additional challenge to simulate world dynamics conditioned on the ac-
tions of an arbitrary number of agents. We propose to learn a compositional world model for multi-
agent cooperation as shown in Figure 2 by factorizing the naturally composable joint actions of an
arbitrary number of agents as a set of text prompts and predicting the future state by compositionally
generating the future frames with a video diffusion model to enable accurate simulation of multiple
sets of actions on the world state. Our compositional world model aims to model P (s′ |s, a), where
s represents the current world state, a represents the joint action of n agents, and s′ is the future
world states. We first discuss how we learn the composable video diffusion model to act as a com-
positional world model in 4.1, then introduce the Agent-Dependent Loss Scaling we designed for
the challenging situation where we need to accurately model multiple agents’ manipulating multiple
objects to improve the video synthesis performance in 4.2.

4.1    C OMPOSABLE V IDEO D IFFUSION M ODELS

Our compositional world model can be learned as a video diffusion model by treating the current
world state s as the initial frame x0 , and the joint actions a as the text prompt, then modeling the
distribution of future frames X is learning the world dynamics and predicting future states s′ . The
text prompt with multiple agents interacting with multiple objects is challenging to be handled ac-
curately. Observing that the joint action a can be naturally factorized into n components a1 , · · · , an
corresponding to the action of each agent, we leverage the composable diffusion models introduced
in section 3.3 to learn the compositional world model as a composition of video diffusion models
conditioned on the initial frame x0 and each text component ai


                                                                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                                 Alice pick up the green-brown piece

                                                                                 Bob pick up the blue-brown piece

                                                                                 Charlie wait

                                                                                 David pick up the aqua-black piece



                    Current State                                                                 Joint Action



                                                                            Compositional World Model

                                                                       𝒂𝟏 = Alice pick up the
                                                                        green−brown piece
                                                                                                                           𝜖𝜃 (𝑋𝑡 , 𝑡|𝑥0 , 𝑎1 )

                                                                       𝒂𝟐 = Bob pick up the
                                                                        blue−brown piece


                                                                                                                                                                 Compose
                                                                                                                           𝜖𝜃 (𝑋𝑡 , 𝑡|𝑥0 , 𝑎2)


                                                                         𝒂𝟑 = Charlie wait
                                                                                                                           𝜖𝜃 (𝑋𝑡 , 𝑡|𝑥0 , 𝑎3)

                                                                     𝒂𝟒 = David pick up the
                                                                        aqua−black piece
                                                                                                                           𝜖𝜃 (𝑋𝑡 , 𝑡|𝑥0 , 𝑎4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Future States



Figure 2: Compositional World Model. Given the current world state x0 and joint action of multiple agents
a, the compositional world model predicts the future states by first factorizing a into several components ai
corresponding to each agent, then generating multiple scores conditioned on the current world state and the text
components, finally composing them to generate the video.



            P(s'|s,a) = P_\theta (X|x_0, a)=P_\theta (X|x_0, a_1,\cdots ,a_n)\propto P_\theta (X)\prod _{i=1}^n\frac {P_\theta (X|x_0, a_i)}{P_\theta (X)} \label {eq:comp-prob}                                        (4)


Using Equation 2, the video diffusion models learn a set of score functions ϵθ (Xt , t|x0 , ai ) and
composes the joint score as
                                  \hat \epsilon (X_t,t|x_0,a)=\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t)+\sum _{i=1}^n\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t|x_0, a_i)-\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t) \label {eq:sample-score}                                 (5)

We train this composable video diffusion model with two stages. In stage one, we learn to model the
distribution of Pθ (X|x0 , ai ) by training with text component corresponding to a single agent action
only using the standard denoising diffusion training objective introduced in section 3.2.
Then in stage two, we fine-tune the model to specifically learn compositional generation to model
Pθ (X|x0 , a) by training with conditions containing joint actions of multiple agents using the com-
posed score function loss

                       L_{Composed}=\Vert \overline {\epsilon }(X_t,t|x_0, a)-\epsilon \Vert ^2=\left \Vert \frac {1}{n}\sum _{i=1}^n\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t|x_0, a_i)-\epsilon \right \Vert ^2 \label {eq:comp-loss}   (6)

After the two-stage training, we can sample from the composed distribution with the composed score
function at inference time given current world state x0 and joint action a = (a1 , · · · , an ) as
                             \hat \epsilon (X_t,t|x_0,a)=\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t)+\sum _{i=1}^n\omega (\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t|x_0, a_i)-\epsilon _\theta (X_t,t)) \label {eq:sample}                                   (7)

where ω is the guidance weight controlling the temperature scaling on the conditions.
4.2   AGENT-D EPENDENT L OSS S CALING

A well-trained stage one model is vital to the final compositional generation performance since the
accurate modeling of Pθ (X|x0 , ai ) is the basis for modeling Pθ (X|x0 , a). We have employed a
technique named Agent-Dependent Loss Scaling to assist in stage one training.


                                                                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    World State Estimation
                                                                                              Environment                  Other Agents

    Reconstructed                                                                                Simulator
        Partial
     Point Clouds


                                              Egocentric RGBD
                                                Observation                                place the black
       Rendered                                                                         bread onto the plate
        Partial
         Noisy
      World State


                                                                                                                                          Outcome Evaluator
                                                                 place the black bread
                                                                onto the cutting board
            Diffusion Model           Action                                                               Compositional
                                     Proposer                                                              World Model
                                                                place the black bread
                                                                   onto the plate

       Inpainted                        Intent
      World State                                              Bob may place the burger bottom onto the plate
                                       Tracker


                    (a)                                                                          (b)

Figure 3: Method Overview. (a) Given partial egocentric RGBD observations, COMBO first reconstructs and
inpaints the top-down orthographic image as the overall world state estimation. (b) COMBO then leverage
the planning sub-modules built with Vision Language Models to propose actions, infer other agents’ intents,
and evaluate the outcomes simulated with the compositional world model to plan online with a tree search
procedure to cooperate in the long run.
Formally, we define an agent-dependent loss coefficient matrix C ∈ Rn×H×W for n agents and
images of H × W pixel, and change the Equation 1 to
                                 L_{MSE}=\sum _{i=1}^nC_{i}\cdot \Vert \epsilon _\theta (X,t|x_0, a_i)-\epsilon \Vert ^2                                      (8)


We simply set the loss coefficient matrix based on each agent’s reachable region in the image to su-
pervise the model to focus more on the related pixels. It’s observed that even this straightforward loss
coefficient approach brings a significant improvement to the modeling accuracy of Pθ (X|x0 , ai ).

5      C OMPOSITIONAL W ORLD M ODEL FOR M ULTI -AGENT P LANNING
To plan efficiently in the embodied multi-agent visual cooperation problem, we still need to address
the challenge of partial egocentric observation and model complex world dynamics in the long run.
We propose COMBO, a novel Compositional wOrld Model-based emBOdied multi-agent planning
framework, shown in Figure 3. After receiving the egocentric observations, COMBO first estimates
the overall world state to plan on, as discussed in 5.1. COMBO then utilizes Vision Language
Models to act as an Action Proposer to propose possible actions, an Intent Tracker to infer other
agents’ intents, and an Outcome Evaluator to evaluate the different possible outcomes, as detailed
in 5.2. In combination with the compositional world model to simulate the effect of joint actions
on the world state si+1 = CW M (si , a) introduced in 4, we discuss the tree search procedure to
integrate these planning sub-modules in 5.3. COMBO empowers embodied agents to imagine how
different plans may affect the world with other agents in the long run and plan cooperatively.

5.1      W ORLD S TATE E STIMATION WITH PARTIAL E GOCENTRIC V IEWS
Directly planning based on partial egocentric views presents a considerable challenge. To address
this, we initially reconstruct partial point clouds from multiple egocentric RGBD views oi captured
from different perspectives. These point clouds are then transformed into a unified top-down or-
thographic image representation, serving as the world state. This representation is constructed by
overlaying the views in chronological order. It is important to note that our world is inherently
dynamic, with other agents actively interacting, resulting in a top-down orthographic image repre-
sentation that is both noisy and incomplete, as depicted in 3 (a). To refine this representation, we
employ a diffusion model to inpaint the partial and noisy orthographic image, thereby enhancing


                                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


the estimation of the world state si for subsequent planning. This approach allows us to effectively
represent and rectify the world state, enabling more accurate planning in multi-agent environments.

5.2   P LANNING S UB - MODULES WITH V ISION L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Action Proposer Given the estimated world state si and the long horizon goal G, the Action Pro-
poser first searches over the potential action spaces Ai , and then proposes multiple possible actions
ai,1...p = AP (si , G) to explore on. We implement this module by querying a VLM to generate the
possible actions in the text given the task goal and encoded image world state as context. We finetune
LLaVA on randomly collected rollouts with possible actions labeled to construct this module.
Intent Tracker Inferring what other agents may do given observation history is important for effec-
tive multi-agent cooperation. We implement this module a−i = IT (si , G) by keeping the estimated
world state from the last k steps and then feed into the VLM together with the task goal to query
for the possible actions of other agents a−i . We construct this module by finetuning LLaVA on
collected short rollouts with other agents’ actions labeled.
Outcome Evaluator It’s vital to have a way to assess the value of the achieved state from differ-
ent plans so the search can be effectively deepened utilizing pruning. We implement an Outcome
Evaluator to fulfill this functionality v = OE(s, G) by generating a heuristic score v for each image
state s given the task goal G. To construct this module, we finetune LLaVA to describe the state of
each object in the image and the corresponding heuristic score representing steps left to achieve the
task goal considering all objects.
Algorithm 1 COMBO Planning Procedure for Agent i.
 1: Input: Estimated world state s0 from oi , task goal G
 2: Sub-modules: Action Proposer AP (s, G), Intent Tracker IT (s, G), Compositional World Model
    CW M (s, a), Outcome Evaluator OE(s, G)
 3: Parameters: Action Proposes P , Planning Beams B, Rollout Depths D
 4: plans ← [[s0 ]]
 5: new plans ← [[s0 ]]
 6: for d = 1 . . . D do
 7:    plans ← new plans[1...B]      # Keeps Only B Plan Beams with Best Scores
 8:    new plans ← []
 9:    for plan in plans do
10:       s ← plan[−1]              # Get the Last Image State in the Plan Beam
11:       ai,1:P ← AP (s, G)        # Generate P Different Action Proposals
12:       a−i ← IT (s, G)           # Infer Other Agents’ Possible Actions
13:       for p = 1 . . . P do
14:          a ← (ai,p , a−i )
15:          snext ← CW M (s, a) # Simulate Next State Conditioned on Joint Actions
16:          new plans.append(plan + snext )
17:       end for
18:    end for
19:    new plans ← sorted(new plans, OE(s, G))         # Sort Plans by the Score of the Final State
20: end for
21: plan ← new plans[1]                # Return the Plan with the Best Score

5.3   P LANNING P ROCEDURE WITH T REE S EARCH
With powerful generative sub-modules implemented so far, we can use an effective tree search algo-
rithm to integrate them into achieving the best planning performance. Formally, we need to search
for a sequence of actions that compose the plan to achieve the task goal with a minimal number of
steps. To sample the long-horizon plans, we can chain the sub-modules to expand future states from
current state si with si+1 = CW M (si , AP (si , G), IT (si , G)). By recursively deploying these
chained modules we can expand the plans until achieving the goal state. However this is impractical
due to the large search space, we implement a limited tree search procedure instead by always keep-
ing the B best-scored plan beams and exploring P action proposals at each plan step for a maximum
of D rollout steps. We show the complete COMBO planning procedure in Algorithm 1.
Due to the uncertainty of other agents, COMBO replans at every step to reflect the changing world
state. As similarly observed in (Du et al., 2023b), when searching for the best plan, the Outcome
Evaluator may leverage the irregular artifacts of the Compositional World Model to get artificially


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                 TDW-Game                         TDW-Cook
                                          Cooperator 1 Cooperator 2        Cooperator 1 Cooperator 2
             Recurrent World Models          0.00 / -          0.00 / -        0.00 / -       0.00 / -
             MAPPO                           0.00 / -          0.00 / -        0.00 / -       0.00 / -
             CoELA *                       0.90 / 18.4       0.60 / 27.6     0.15 / 37.8    0.05 / 29.5
             LLaVA                         0.55 / 28.4       0.60 / 29.2     0.35 / 33.0    0.50 / 35.0
             COMBO (w/o IT)                0.65 / 16.2       0.60 / 17.0     0.80 / 24.8    0.80 / 23.8
             COMBO (Ours)                  1.00 / 17.5       1.00 / 17.4     0.90 / 22.8    1.00 / 22.9
             Shared Belief Cooperator*     1.00 / 15.3       1.00 / 15.9     0.95 / 24.0    1.00 / 21.4
Table 1: Main results on TDW-Game and TDW-Cook. We report the mean success rate over a horizon of
30 and the average steps of the successful episodes over 20 episodes here. COMBO (w/o IT) denotes COMBO
without the Intent Tracker module. Shared Belief Cooperator has access to the Oracle state of the world and
other agents’ policies. * denotes Oracle vision perception.
              2D-FetchQ.*       BC-single        BC-GAIL           Co-GAIL         COMBO (Ours)
              Success Rate         21.1             27.2              53.3                 81.3
      Table 2: Results on 2D-FetchQ. We report the success rate on replay evaluation over 60 episodes.

high scores, such as where key objects are teleported to desired positions. To mitigate this artificial
exploitation issue, the Outcome Evaluator will use the default score from the last state if the new state
generated from the Compositional World Model suspiciously increases the score above a threshold.

6     E XPERIMENTS
6.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We instantiate the challenging embodied multi-agent visual cooperation task in ThreeDWorld and
build two challenging benchmarks: TDW-Game and TDW-Cook where 2-4 decentralized agents
must cooperate to finish several puzzles according to the visual clue or dishes according to the
recipe given only egocentric views of the world as shown in Figure 1, requiring extensive visual
cooperation. All the agents have an observation space of egocentric 336 × 336 RGBD images and
the corresponding camera matrix. We also adapt the 2D-FetchQ challenge from Wang et al. (2022)
with a visual observation space and high-level action space to evaluate our method. In this challenge,
two agents must coordinate their strategy to hold buttons to unlock rooms and fetch treasures from
the unlocked room. More details on the tasks can be found in Appendix A. We also verify our
method in a real-world human-robot cooperation task in Appendix D.
Metrics We evaluate the agent’s cooperation ability by task success rate and average steps of the
successful episodes when cooperating with different agents across 20 episodes. An episode is done
when the goal state is reached and considered successful, or the maximum planning horizon h is
reached and deemed failed. Specifically, we implement two different agent policies as cooperators
on both tasks to reliably evaluate the agents, which are elaborated in Appendix A.1.1.
Baselines We compare our methods to several multi-agent planning methods:
 • Recurrent World Models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), using VAE to encode the visual observations
   and a generative recurrent neural network to learn the world model. An evolution-trained simple
   policy is used as a controller.
 • MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), a MARL baseline where agents with shared weight Actor and Critic
   are trained jointly with PPO.
 • CoELA (Zhang et al., 2023), an LLM agent with access to the Oracle vision perception, re-
   implemented due to the lack of ground truth segmentation needed to train the Perception Module.
 • LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023a), an end-to-end VLM (LLaVA v1.5 7B) agent fine-tuned with the same
   collected rollouts to train the Action Proposer in our method.
 • Shared Belief Cooperator, a planner that shares the same policy as the cooperators and has access
   to the Oracle state of the environment and other agents’ policies, acting as a strong baseline.
Implementation details The video diffusion model of the compositional world model is built upon
AVDC (Ko et al., 2023) codebase, with the architectural modification of introducing a cross attention
layer to the text condition in the ResNet block and replacing the Perceiver with an MLP to enhance
the text conditioning. More details are in Appendix B.

                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                Current State                  Joint Action                     Current State                      Joint Action

        ×                                                                                               Alice pick up the green-brown piece
        √                                 Alice pick up the lettuce                                     Bob pick up the blue-brown piece
                                          Bob pick up the pickle slice                                  Charlie wait
                                                                                                        David pick up the aqua-black piece


              Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋2   Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋4   Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋7   Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋2 Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋4   Predicted Frame 𝑋𝑋7


      AVDC


   COMBO
   w.o ADLS


   COMBO



Figure 4: Compositional World Model learns world dynamics better. Our compositional world model can
simulate world dynamics conditioned on the joint action of multiple agents accurately while AVDC struggles
with simulating which agents should act, and COMBO w.o ADLS may simulate actions incorrectly.

                                                     TDW-Game                                              TDW-Cook
                                      Single         Multiple Plan                         Single         Multiple  Plan
      AVDC                             65%                20%             29.7(80%)          85%             25%             34.5(90%)
      COMBO w.o ADLS                   70%                55%            26.9(100%)          85%             70%            28.3(100%)
      COMBO                            95%                75%            17.5(100%)         100%            100%            21.5(100%)
Table 3: Human evaluation of generated videos from different World Models and the corresponding
plan performance. Single denotes the accuracy of synthesized videos conditioned on a single agent’s action
among 20 samples. Multiple denotes the accuracy of synthesized videos conditioned on multiple agents’
actions among 20 samples. Plan denotes the average steps (success rate) across cooperating with two different
cooperators over 10 episodes. Best performances are in bold.

6.2    R ESULTS
COMBO can cooperate efficiently with different cooperators As shown in Table 1, both co-
operators of different policies achieve the best performance when cooperating with COMBO on
TDW-Game and TDW-Cook, finishing all the tasks within the limited horizon with the least steps.
Both Recurrent World Models and MAPPO perform poorly due to the difficulty of the multi-agent
long-horizon task with only egocentric observations. Compared to LLM Agent CoELA and VLM
Agent LLaVA, COMBO with a compositional world model to explicitly model the world dynam-
ics and plan accordingly achieves more efficient cooperation. On adapted 2D-FetchQ, COMBO
surpasses other behavior cloning or Co-Gail baselines in a more challenging setting as shown in
Table 2, demonstrating the efficacy and adaptability of our proposed method.
Intent Tracker contributes to efficient cooperation Comparing the results of COMBO (w.o IT) and
COMBO in Table 1, we can see the Intent Tracker is important to empower the agent to infer other
agents’ intents and consider them during planning for better cooperation in the long run. A qualita-
tive case demonstrating the adaptability of the Intent Tracker Module is shown in Appendix C.1.
Compositional World Model is crucial to make cooperative plans We compared the generated
video quality with AVDC (Ko et al., 2023), a video diffusion model designed for robotics tasks,
and ablate on the effect of the Agent-Dependent Scaling Loss (COMBO w.o. ADSL) in Table 3
and Figure 4. Compared to AVDC, our CWM can accurately simulate which agents are acting
and what interactions are described in the text condition, leading to a large performance gain in the


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  Action    Rollout Plan Success Average                                         4-agent     3-agent       2-agent
Proposals P Depth D Beam B Rate   Steps                         LLaVA           0.58 / 28.7 0.65 / 27.4 0.80 / 20.7
      3          1       1      50%       27.8
      2          2       2      70%       18.1
                                                                COMBO           1.00 / 17.5 1.00 / 15.0 1.00 / 10.5
      3          3       3      100%      17.5                  Shared Belief* 1.00 / 15.9 1.00 / 13.5 1.00 / 8.7
Table 4: Plan performance improves with                   Table 5: Results on TDW-Game with different number
more compute budgets. We report the mean                  of agents. We report the mean success rate over a horizon
success rate and average steps of the successful          of 30 and average steps cooperating with two different co-
episodes cooperating with two different cooper-           operators over 10 episodes here.
ators over 5 episodes on TDW-Game here.

                                3 Action Proposals, 1 Rollout Depth, 1 Plan Beams


               Step 5        Step 7           Step 8              Step 9         Step 12         Step 14

                                3 Action Proposals, 3 Rollout Depth, 3 Plan Beams


               Step 5         Step 7             Step 8           Step 10         Step 12        Step 14

Figure 5: More Computation budgets leads to better plan. With more computation budgets (second row),
COMBO can search for a better plan where Alice first clears the common region with David so that he can pass
the next puzzle piece to her instead of having to wait, leading to a better state after same number of steps.

accuracy of modeling agent actions on the world state. Removing the Agent-Dependent Scaling Loss
leads to considerable accuracy degradation, showing the effectiveness of the introduced technique.
Moreover, with the compositional world model, the overall plan performance boosts to 17.5 steps
for TDW-Game compared to 29.7 steps with AVDC. See C.3 for additional failure case analysis.
More computation budgets lead to better Plan We study the effect of computation budgets on the
long-horizon plan quality in Table 4, where we can see more computation budgets with more action
proposals, larger plan beams, and deeper rollout depth leads to higher success rate and less average
steps. A qualitative example of generated plans with different computation budgets is shown in
Figure 5, where more searches can obtain better plans in the long run.
COMBO can generalize to an arbitrary number of agents COMBO trained with only data of
four agents playing TDW-Game can surprisingly generalize to three and two agents version well
as shown in Table 5, showing the strong generalization and promising future of the compositional
world model-based modularized planning framework for multi-agent cooperation.

7    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we learn a compositional world model for embodied multi-agent cooperation by fac-
torizing the naturally composable joint actions of an arbitrary number of agents and compositionally
generating the video to enable accurate simulation of multi-agent world dynamics. We then propose
COMBO, a novel Compositional World Model-based embodied multi-agent planning framework to
empower the agents to infer other agents’ intents and imagine different plan outcomes in the long
run. Our experiments on three challenging embodied multi-agent cooperation tasks show COMBO
can enable the embodied agents to cooperate efficiently with different agents across various tasks
and an arbitrary number of agents.
Future Work Our method leverages tree search combined with Large Generative Models to devise
long-horizon plans. The necessity for multiple inferences using large models leads to a relatively
slow inference speed, restricting the applicability of our method in scenarios demanding rapid re-
sponse. Exploring the development of more efficient models could potentially mitigate this draw-
back and enhance the practicality of our approach in time-sensitive environments.


                                                           10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jeremy Schwartz and Esther Alter for setting up the ThreeDWorld environments, and
Chunru Lin for the help with real-world experiments. This project is supported by the Honda Re-
search Institute.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022. 1, 3
Christopher Amato, George Konidaris, Leslie P Kaelbling, and Jonathan P How. Modeling and
  planning with macro-actions in decentralized pomdps. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
  64:817–859, 2019. 3
Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and
  Igor Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  SkxpxJBKwS. 3
Nolan Bard, Jakob N Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H Francis Song, Emilio
  Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, et al. The hanabi challenge: A
  new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence, 280:103216, 2020. 3
Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
  decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of operations research, 27(4):
  819–840, 2002. 3
Kevin Black, Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Pranav Atreya, Homer Rich Walke, Chelsea Finn, Aviral Ku-
  mar, and Sergey Levine. Zero-shot robotic manipulation with pre-trained image-editing diffu-
  sion models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=c0chJTSbci. 3
Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik
  Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling
  latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127, 2023a. 1
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler,
  and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion mod-
  els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 22563–22575, 2023b. 3
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choroman-
  ski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. 3
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece
   Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi,
   Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments
   with gpt-4, 2023. 3
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 32, 2019. 3
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
  and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  N19-1423. 18
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
  Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
  Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-e: An embodied
  multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023. 1, 3


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
  Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle:
  Compositional generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. In International con-
  ference on machine learning, pp. 8489–8510. PMLR, 2023a. 4

Yilun Du, Mengjiao Yang, Pete Florence, Fei Xia, Ayzaan Wahid, Brian Ichter, Pierre Sermanet,
  Tianhe Yu, Pieter Abbeel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, et al. Video language planning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.10625, 2023b. 1, 3, 7

Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and
  Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 3

Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
  through video prediction. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. 3

Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Damian Mrowca, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Ju-
  lian De Freitas, Jonas Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, Kuno Kim,
  Elias Wang, Michael Lingelbach, Aidan Curtis, Kevin Tyler Feigelis, Daniel Bear, Dan Gutfre-
  und, David Daniel Cox, Antonio Torralba, James J. DiCarlo, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Josh Mc-
  dermott, and Daniel LK Yamins. ThreeDWorld: A platform for interactive multi-modal phys-
  ical simulation. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  db1InWAwW2T. 2, 17

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 8, 18

Nikolaus Hansen. The cma evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772, 2016.
  18

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 1

Mineui Hong, Minjae Kang, and Songhwai Oh. Diffused task-agnostic milestone planner. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 3

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021. 20

Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castaneda, Charles Beattie, Neil C Rabinowitz, Ari S Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, et al. Human-
 level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based reinforcement learning. Sci-
 ence, 364(6443):859–865, 2019. 3, 21

Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Svetlana Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and
  Alexander Schwing. A cordial sync: Going beyond marginal policies for multi-agent embodied
  tasks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
  2020, Proceedings, Part V 16, pp. 471–490. Springer, 2020. 3

Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-
  Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with
  multimodal prompts. In Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023. 3

Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Learning to act
  from actionless videos through dense correspondences, 2023. 4, 8, 9

Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt
  Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, et al. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment
  for visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474, 2017. 3


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martı́n-
  Martı́n, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, et al. Behavior-1k: A
  benchmark for embodied ai with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, pp. 80–93. PMLR, 2023. 3
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023a. 1, 3, 8, 20
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  423–439. Springer, 2022. 4
Shaowei Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Saurabh Gupta, and Shenlong Wang. Physgen: Rigid-body physics-
  grounded image-to-video generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2024. 22
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan
  Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023b. 20
Ryan Lowe, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural information process-
  ing systems, 30, 2017. 3
Dipendra Misra, Andrew Bennett, Valts Blukis, Eyvind Niklasson, Max Shatkhin, and Yoav Artzi.
  Mapping instructions to actions in 3d environments with visual goal prediction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1809.00786, 2018. 3
Frans A Oliehoek, Christopher Amato, et al. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs,
  volume 1. Springer, 2016. 3
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023. 1
Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen,
  Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramuthu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Teach: Task-driven
  embodied agents that chat. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 2017–2025, 2022. 3
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023. 3
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 3
Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham
  Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junting Pan, Kalyan Va-
  sudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, and Christoph Fe-
  ichtenhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2408.00714. 20
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
 Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon White-
 son. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
 Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2186–2188, 2019. 3
Pratyusha Sharma, Antonio Torralba, and Jacob Andreas. Skill induction and planning with latent
  language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01517, 2021. 3
Matthijs TJ Spaan, Geoffrey J Gordon, and Nikos Vlassis. Decentralized planning under uncertainty
 for teams of communicating agents. In Proceedings of the fifth international joint conference on
 Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 249–256, 2006. 3


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Peter Stone and Manuela Veloso. Multiagent systems: A survey from a machine learning perspec-
  tive. Autonomous Robots, 8:345–383, 2000. 3
Joseph Suarez, Yilun Du, Phillip Isola, and Igor Mordatch. Neural mmo: A massively mul-
  tiagent game environment for training and evaluating intelligent agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1903.00784, 2019. 3
Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L Griffiths. Cognitive architec-
  tures for language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02427, 2023. 3
Andrew Szot, Unnat Jain, Dhruv Batra, Zsolt Kira, Ruta Desai, and Akshara Rai. Adaptive coordi-
  nation in social embodied rearrangement. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  33365–33380. PMLR, 2023. 3, 21
Chen Wang, Claudia Pérez-D’Arpino, Danfei Xu, Li Fei-Fei, Karen Liu, and Silvio Savarese. Co-
  gail: Learning diverse strategies for human-robot collaboration. In Conference on Robot Learn-
  ing, pp. 1279–1290. PMLR, 2022. 8, 18
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a. 1, 3
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b. 3
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe,
  explain, plan and select: interactive planning with llms enables open-world multi-task agents. In
  Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023c. 3
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. JARVIS-1: Open-world multi-
  task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. In Second Agent Learn-
  ing in Open-Endedness Workshop, 2023d. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  xzPkZyHlOW. 3
Muning Wen, Jakub Kuba, Runji Lin, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
 Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems, 35:16509–16521, 2022. 3
Sarah A Wu, Rose E Wang, James A Evans, Joshua B Tenenbaum, David C Parkes, and Max
  Kleiman-Weiner. Too many cooks: Bayesian inference for coordinating multi-agent collabora-
  tion. Topics in Cognitive Science, 13(2):414–432, 2021. 21
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023. 3
Fei Xia, Amir R Zamir, Zhiyang He, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. Gibson
  env: Real-world perception for embodied agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9068–9079, 2018. 3
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanx-
  iao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11097–11107, 2020. 3
Jiannan Xiang, Guangyi Liu, Yi Gu, Qiyue Gao, Yuting Ning, Yuheng Zha, Zeyu Feng, Tianhua
   Tao, Shibo Hao, Yemin Shi, et al. Pandora: Towards general world model with natural language
   actions and video states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09455, 2024. 3
Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Pack
  Kaelbling, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators.
  In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=sFyTZEqmUY. 1


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
  surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:24611–24624, 2022. 8, 17
Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tian-
  min Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large language
  models, 2023. 1, 3, 8
Tianyuan Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Rundi Wu, Brandon Y. Feng, Changxi Zheng, Noah Snavely,
  Jiajun Wu, and William T. Freeman. PhysDreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects via
  video generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2024. 22
Qinhong Zhou, Sunli Chen, Yisong Wang, Haozhe Xu, Weihua Du, Hongxin Zhang, Yilun Du,
  Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. Hazard challenge: Embodied decision making in dy-
  namically changing environments, 2024a. 3
Siyuan Zhou, Yilun Du, Jiaben Chen, YANDONG LI, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Chuang Gan. Robo-
  dreamer: Learning compositional world models for robot imagination. In Forty-first International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  kHjOmAUfVe. 3


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
A.1     TDW TASKS


      burger     burger        brown          black
       top       bottom      bread slice   bread slice



        pickle    lettuce      patty


      whole        whole      whole
      onion       tomato      cheese



      onion       tomato       cheese
       slice        slice       slice


                     TDW-Cook                                            TDW-Game
Figure 6: Objects of TDW-Cook and TDW-Game. Left: 13 food items that may occur on the table while 10
of them (except for the third row) may occur in the recipe. Right: 4 puzzles containing 3 to 4 pieces each with
different colors and shapes.

We instantiate the challenging embodied multi-agent visual cooperation task in ThreeDWorld (Gan
et al., 2021), and build two challenging benchmarks: TDW-Game and TDW-Cook where 2-4 de-
centralized agents must cooperate to finish several puzzles according to the visual clue or dishes
according to the recipe given only partial egocentric views of the world.
In TDW-Game, 3-4 agents cooperate to pass and place 6-8 puzzle pieces scattered randomly on the
table into the correct puzzle box according to visual clues such as the shape. The location of the
puzzle box and pieces are randomly initialized across different episodes. The action space includes
wait, pick up [obj], place [obj] onto [loc].
In TDW-Cook, 2 agents cooperate to pass, cut, and place 6-8 out of 10 possible food items randomly
scattered on the table to make some dishes according to the recipe. The location of the food items
and the recipe are randomly initialized across different episodes. Specifically, there is only one
cutting board where agents can pass or cut objects, making cooperation vital for efficient plans. The
action space is the same as TDW-Game with an addition of cut [obj].
The object assets of the two tasks are illustrated in Figure 6.

A.1.1      C OOPERATOR P OLICIES
In TDW-Game, Cooperator 1 takes the policy of always passing the unwanted puzzle pieces in
a clockwise manner, while Cooperator 2 takes the policy of always passing the unwanted puzzle
pieces in a counter-clockwise manner.
In TDW-Cook, Cooperator 1 takes a “selfish” policy of always operating objects in its own recipe
first, while Cooperator 2 takes an “altruistic” policy of always prioritizing operating objects in the
cooperator’s recipe.

A.1.2      BASELINES
MAPPO Our task is multi-agent reinforcement learning with decentralized observation and con-
trol, as different agents have disjoint observations to produce their actions. We followed the training
procedure in Yu et al. (2022). Each agent is an actor-critic network where the actor and critic share


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                     Initial
                     Frame


                                                              pick up the green-
                     Action        pick up the lettuce
                                                              brown piece


                     Generated
                     Frame


Figure 7: Recurrent world models failed to model world dynamics conditioned on single actions accu-
rately.


a common convolutional backbone. We pre-define a set of all possible actions for each environment
and let the PPO agent choose among them. We design rewards to reflect the steps left to finish the
episode in a similar spirit to the Outcome Evaluator’s heuristics score design.
However, in our setting, the embodied multi-agent simulation samples are relatively slow, creating a
higher demand for sample efficiency of the method. We conducted a grid search on hyper-parameters
of learning rate in {1e-6, 5e-5, 1e-3}, batch size in {2, 64}. However, the results are poor and the
behavior either falls to near-random or collapses to a single action, which verifies the challenge of
cooperative planning on ego-centric RGBD observations.

Recurrent World Models We followed the training procedure in Ha & Schmidhuber (2018),
firstly training a variational autoencoder (VAE) on the same data collected for training COMBO
to encode the egocentric observations in the TDW-Game and TDW-Cook environments into a 32-
dimensional latent vector z ∈ R32 . Then, we train a mixture density network combined with a
recurrent neural network (MDN-RNN) for predicting the future latent vector given a textual action
which is encoded by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), the current egocentric observation and the cur-
rent hidden state of the RNN, which is modeling P (zt+1 |at , zt , ht ). Finally, we train two simple
controllers using the covariance-matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen, 2016) to
maximize the expected cumulative reward of a rollout by interacting with the actual environments.
The recurrent world model failed to model world dynamics accurately conditioned on a single action,
as shown in Figure 7. Specifically, we predict the latent code zt+1 from MDN-RNN and use the
decoder of the VAE to generate the image of the next time step. Additionally, the simple controller
doesn’t work well on a task that requires complex planning as it keeps collapsing to single actions
in our experiments.

A.2   2D-F ETCH Q TASK

As shown in Figure 8, the 2D-FetchQ environment from Wang et al. (2022) was originally inspired
by the Fetch-Quest collaborative game in SuperMario Party where two agents must coordinate their
strategy to hold buttons to unlock rooms and fetch treasures from the unlocked room. At the be-
ginning of the game, two treasures are locked in the rooms located in two corners of the map. For
each agent, the only way to fetch a treasure is to let its collaborator press the button beside the room
to hold the door. After the collaborator presses the button, the agent can enter the room and get
the treasure. To win the game, both agents should get a treasure and reach the closest destination.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 8: 2D-FetchQ Task. Two agents coordinate their strategy to hold buttons to unlock rooms and fetch
treasures from the unlocked room.


Therefore, the agent who has already gotten the treasure will help the other agent to fetch its trea-
sure. We adapted this environment with a visual observation space and high-level action space to
evaluate our method.

Observation Space 128 × 128 RGB image.

Action space move up, move down, move lfet, move right, wait.

Baselines BC-single refers to directly applying behavior cloning to learn robot trajectories. BC-
GAIL involves using behavior cloning to learn human trajectories first, followed by interactive
learning of robot trajectories through GAIL (Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning) with the
human policy. Co-GAIL leverages data of human-human collaboration demonstrations as guid-
ance to concurrently generate simulated interactive behaviors and train a human-robot collaborative
policy.

Evaluation We evaluated COMBO using replay evaluation, where COMBO collaborates with
human demonstration trajectories collected through replay and determines whether the task suc-
ceeds.


B     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

B.1   C OMPOSITIONAL W ORLD M ODELS

Implementation Details We use the base resolution 128 × 128 for the video diffusion model
and train a super-resolution diffusion model to get the final 336 × 336 images. We use the T5-
XXL encoder to pre-process all the text conditions for a better contextual representation. All vision
language models used in the main experiments are LLaVA-v1.5-7B. The planning parameters are
set to Action Proposes P=3, Planning Beams B=3, and Rollout Depths D=3 unless other specified.

Dataset Collection We collect random rollouts with a scripted planner and generated 107k videos
of TDW-Game and 50k videos of TDW-Cook.

Model Parameters The parameters of our inpainting diffusion model, super-resolution diffusion
model, and video diffusion model are shown in Table 6.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                  Inpainting       Super-Resolution    Video Diffusion Model
       num parameters                 84M                 38M                  198M
       input resolution           336 × 336           128 × 128             128 × 128
       output resolution          336 × 336           336 × 336             128 × 128
       base channels                   64                  64                   128
       num res block                    2                   2                     2
       attention resolutions          (16,)               (16,)                (8, 16)
       channel mult              (1, 2, 4, 6, 8)     (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)       (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)

                                     Table 6: Model Parameters.



Agent-dependent Loss Scale We use a simple method to set the loss scale. If agent i is located
in the upper half of the image, then we set Ci,1:H/2,1:W = 2 and others are 1. Similarly, the same
approach is applied to other situations or conditions.
We utilize the agents’ reachable regions to define the coefficient matrix here, but it’s not the only
approach. The key idea of this technique is to encourage the model to focus more on the pixels
related to the action prompt. There are also other possible ways to leverage this technique when
such information of reachability is not available. One promising way is to use advanced object
detection and segmentation models like GroundingDINO (Liu et al., 2023b) and SAM2 (Ravi et al.,
2024) to identify the relevant regions in an image (e.g., “the lettuce” in the action prompt “Bob
pick up the lettuce”) and adjust the loss scale for those regions. Another promising approach is
to discover reachability during exploration, such as bootstrapping from zero-shot vision-language
models (VLMs), where an agent could learn reachability by interacting with the environment.


Compute We train the world model for 50k steps in the first stage with a batch size of 384 on 192
V-100 GPUs in 1 day. Then, we fine-tune the model for 25k steps in the second stage with 120 batch
size on 120 V-100 GPUs in 1 day. Both the inpainting model and the super-resolution model are
trained for 60k steps with a batch size of 288 on 24 V-100 GPUs in 1 day.


Samping We use DDIM sampling across the experiments with guidance weight 5 for the text-
guided video diffusion model.


B.2   P LANNING S UB - MODULES

Training Data Collection We generated 4k training environments by randomly sampling a recipe
in TDW-Cook and a puzzle box in TDW-Game for each agent. All objects were initialized at ran-
dom positions on the table. Scripted planners with randomness were then used to play out the
episodes and collect the state and action histories. We finetune LLaVA-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2023a)
with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) for one epoch to obtain one shared model for each submodule across
all tasks and cooperators.
For the Intent Tracker, we collected 40k short rollouts consisting of three images of consecutive
observations and a textual description of the next actions of all the agents, converted by a template
given the action history.
For the Outcome Evaluator, we collected 138k data consisting of one image of the observation and
a textual description of the state of each object in the image and the heuristic score, converted by a
template given each object’s location.


Compute For each planning sub-module, we finetune LLaVA-1.5-7B with LoRA for one epoch
with a batch size of 144 on 18 V-100 GPUs in about 3 hours.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS

C.1      I NTENT T RACKER CAN A DAPT THE P REDICTIONS

The intent tracker module should generalize to unseen cooperators and adapt its predictions dynam-
ically based on historical observations. Our approach employs a shared intent tracker module across
all tasks and cooperators. The test-time cooperator’s policy is agnostic to our agent during training,
meaning the intent tracker must rely on observation history to adapt its predictions and track the
intents of diverse cooperators effectively. As shown in Figure 9, given the same current state, the
intent tracker accurately predicts the next action of Agent Bob by leveraging its observation history,
which reveals a preference for preparing his recipe first or helping Agent Alice first. With accurate
intent tracking, it becomes possible for Agent Alice to select the best action to take.
While the intent tracker module is trained on a limited set of scripted planners (e.g., the 4-
agent TDW-Game setting), it generalizes reasonably well to new behaviors due to its reliance on
cooperator-independent observation patterns. As demonstrated in Table 5, the same intent tracker
was applied without retraining in 3-agent and 2-agent versions of TDW-Game, where cooperators
followed policies unseen during the training phase. The tracker demonstrated adaptability, achiev-
ing correct intent prediction rates of 75.8% in the 2-agent cooperation scenario and 64.6% in the
3-agent cooperation scenario. Among the wrong predictions, 20% attributes to the intent prediction
of ”wait” while it shouldn’t be. This adaptation showcases the model’s ability to adapt dynamically
and predict intents effectively without over-reliance on memorization.
Generalizing to more diverse and complex cooperator behaviors remains a challenging yet promising
direction for future work. Enhancements such as Population-Based Training (Jaderberg et al., 2019)
and Behavior Diversity Play (Szot et al., 2023) could expand the variety of cooperators encountered
during training, thereby increasing the robustness of the intent tracker. Furthermore, integrating
advanced modeling approaches, such as the Bayesian Theory of Mind (Wu et al., 2021), could
facilitate more nuanced inference and adaptability in multi-agent collaboration scenarios.


                                                                           Step 1            Step 5                 Step 9


                  Alice              Bob



 Selfish                                                                  Bob will pick
 cooperator                                                                                           I should cut the
                                                                          up the brown
                                                                                                      onion.
                                                                          bread.


                    History states         Current state         Intent
                                                                Tracker   Bob will cut the        I should pick up the
                                                                          onion.                  beef patty
Altruistic
cooperator
                                                                          Step 1             Step 5                 Step 8



                    History states         Current state


Figure 9: The Intent Tracker Module dynamically adapts its predictions based on historical observations.
When collaborating with agents exhibiting either selfish or altruistic policies, the Intent Tracker accurately pre-
dicts the cooperator’s next action by considering their historical behavior. This enables the agent to determine
its appropriate next action based on the predicted intent, even when faced with the same current state but dif-
ferent historical contexts.


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       LLaVA-1.5-7B       Simpler Supervised Model
              Action Proposer              98.3                     90.3
              Intent Tracker               79.4                     73.2
              Outcome Evaluator            99.7                     62.7

Table 7: Comparison of LLaVA-1.5-7B and the Simpler Supervised Model across different components.
The accuracy of the model prediction on the test set.



C.2   OTHER I MPLEMENTATION A LTERNATIVES

These planning sub-modules could also be implemented with other methods. Additionally, we im-
plemented a simpler supervised model to serve as the planning sub-modules and trained it using the
same dataset we employed for fine-tuning the VLM. This model encodes the input image using a
VIT-B/16 CLIP encoder and the textual task description using the BERT-base-uncased encoder. The
encoded outputs are concatenated and passed through a two-layer fully connected network with a
hidden dimension of 256.

       • For the Action Proposer, the output is a multi-hot vector of 157 dimensions, representing
         all possible actions.

       • For the Intent Tracker, the output is a vector of 4×157 dimensions, capturing intents across
         agents.

       • For the Outcome Evaluator, the output is a scalar representing the heuristic score.

Compute For each component, we preprocess the images and the textual prompts to extract the
features on 8 V100 GPUs in about 30 minutes. We then train the supervised model for 10 epochs
with a batch size of 64 on 1 V100 GPU in about 20 minutes.
For each component, we selected the best result across 10 training epochs. The results shown in Ta-
ble 7 indicate that VLMs not only offer better generalizability but also achieve superior performance
compared to this supervised model. This can be attributed to the common-sense knowledge embed-
ded in the VLM during its pretraining on large-scale internet data, as well as its superior ability to
integrate the two modalities effectively.


C.3   FAILURE C ASE A NALYSIS

As shown in Table 3, the compositional world model still fails 25% of the time for predicting the
next state conditioned on four agents’ actions. We attribute the errors to two primary factors:

       • Image Quality: This is the most critical issue, accounting for 80% of the errors. We be-
         lieve this problem arises from the use of CFG (Classifier-Free Guidance) based on multiple
         textual action conditions. Since CFG strongly guides the diffusion model to fulfill textual
         action conditions, it often results in contradictory behaviors, such as an agent simultane-
         ously placing a block on both the left and right sides (see Figure 10) or attempting to pick
         up a block but failing to do so.

       • Misunderstanding: This error type involves the agent failing to act according to the textual
         action conditions (see Figure 11). Compared to image quality issues, misunderstanding
         errors are less frequent, likely due to the influence of CFG. These errors may stem from
         data imbalance, insufficient training data, or inadequate model generalization capabilities.

Incorporating hidden physical parameters, such as object mass, is an essential direction for making
the task closer to real-world scenarios. Extending our framework to include physics-aware video
generation approaches (Liu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), is a promising avenue for future work
and could further improve the capability of world models to handle hidden variables effectively.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 10: An example of the image quality error. The agent at the bottom places the green-black piece on
both sides.


Figure 11: An example of the misunderstanding error. The textual action condition for the agent on the right
is to “place the blue-brown piece onto the right border of the reachable region”, but the agent places the piece
on the left side.



           Human Workspace Shared Region


                                              Step 1                Step 2                 Step 3
               Puzzle Box


             Robot Workspace


 Initial                                      Step 4                Step 5                 Step 6

                       (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 12: (a) Real-world task set up. The reachable region of the human and the robot is shown in blue and
yellow respectively. Their shared region is shown in green, and the puzzle box is shown in red. They need to
cooperate closely to pass and finish the puzzles. (b) An example plan execution. The robot passes the pieces
the human needs first and then finishes its own puzzle.


D     R EAL - WORLD TASK : H UMAN -ROBOT C OLLABORATION
Task Setup: We instantiate the TDW-Game environment in the real world with two agents. As
shown in Figure 12(a), a human and an XArm sit on the upper and right sides of the table, each can
only reach the objects on his side of the table, so there is only one shared region to exchange objects,
which is located at the upper-right corner of the table. They must cooperate to pass and place 3-5
puzzle pieces scattered randomly on the table into the correct puzzle box according to visual clues
such as the shape. In each step, the human or the robot can only pick or place one object within his
reachable region.
Results: We fine-tune the Compositional World Model with collected real-world data and use the
same VLMs without fine-tuning for other sub-modules. We conducted 5 trials of experiments and
reported the number of successful trials and the average steps in Table 8. An example plan execution
is shown in Figure 12(b), where the robot first helps pass the puzzle pieces the human needs, and
finally picks and places its last piece of the puzzle to finish the task. We also show two sampled
video generations of the compositional world model from the same current state and conditioned on
two different joint actions in figure 13. The result demonstrates our method is capable in real-world
scenarios involving low-level control and non-trivial generalization.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Figure 13: Two sampled video generations of the compositional world model conditioned on the same
current state but different joint actions.


                                                Success     Average Steps
                                  COMBO           4/5            8.4

Table 8: Real-world experiment results. We report the number of successful trials / total trials and the average
steps of the successful trials over 5 trials here.


                                                      24
