Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AF LOW :
AUTOMATING AGENTIC W ORKFLOW G ENERATION
 Jiayi Zhang1,2∗, Jinyu Xiang1∗, Zhaoyang Yu3 , Fengwei Teng3 , Xiong-Hui Chen4 ,
 Jiaqi Chen5 , Mingchen Zhuge6 , Xin Cheng3 , Sirui Hong1 , Jinlin Wang1 , Bingnan Zheng5 ,
 Bang Liu7 , Yuyu Luo2,8†, Chenglin Wu1†
 1
   DeepWisdom, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
 3
   Renmin University of China, 4 Nanjing University, 5 Fudan University,
 6
   King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 7 Université de Montréal & Mila,
 8
   The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology



                                              A BSTRACT
           Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in solv-
           ing complex tasks across diverse domains, typically by employing agentic work-
           flows that follow detailed instructions and operational sequences. However, con-
           structing these workflows requires significant human effort, limiting scalability
           and generalizability. Recent research has sought to automate the generation and
           optimization of these workflows, but existing methods still rely on initial man-
           ual setup and fall short of achieving fully automated and effective workflow gen-
           eration. To address this challenge, we reformulate workflow optimization as a
           search problem over code-represented workflows, where LLM-invoking nodes
           are connected by edges. We introduce AF LOW, an automated framework that
           efficiently explores this space using Monte Carlo Tree Search, iteratively refin-
           ing workflows through code modification, tree-structured experience, and execu-
           tion feedback. Empirical evaluations across six benchmark datasets demonstrate
           AF LOW’s efficacy, yielding a 5.7% average improvement over state-of-the-art
           baselines. Furthermore, AF LOW enables smaller models to outperform GPT-4o
           on specific tasks at 4.55% of its inference cost in dollars. The code is available at
           https://github.com/FoundationAgents/AFlow.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for solving complex tasks across
various domains, including code generation, data analysis, decision-making, and question answer-
ing (Liu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Zhu et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024b; Song et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024a; Zhong et al., 2024a). However, the rapid advancement
of LLMs heavily relies on manually designed agentic workflows – structured sequences of LLM
invocations accompanied by detailed instructions. Designing and refining these workflows requires
significant human effort, which limits the scalability and adaptability of LLMs to new, complex
domains and hinders their ability to transfer skills across diverse tasks (Tang et al., 2024).
Recent efforts have focused on automating the discovery of effective agentic workflows to reduce
the reliance on human intervention (Khattab et al., 2024; Yüksekgönül et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023;
Hu et al., 2024). Despite these advancements, full automation has not been achieved. For instance,
Khattab et al. (2024) requires manual workflow setup before automated prompt optimization. Simi-
larly, methods proposed by Yüksekgönül et al. (2024) and Zhuge et al. (2024) fail to capture the full
diversity of workflows necessary for a wide range of tasks (Yu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b; Sun
et al., 2023), as their optimization objectives struggle to represent the breadth of possible workflows.
The inability to effectively model diverse workflow structures within these automated systems lim-
its their utility and impact. ADAS (Hu et al., 2024) represents workflows using code, achieving a
     ∗
    These authors contributed equally to this work.
     †
    Corresponding authors: Yuyu Luo (E-mail:yuyuluo@hkust-gz.edu.cn), Chenglin Wu (E-mail: alexan-
derwu@deepwisdom.ai)


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


          100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IO


                                                                                                                                                                                    94.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CoT


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    93.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               92.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   92.7


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 92.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          92.4
                                                                                                                                                 91.6
                                                                                                                                                        91.6
              90


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             90.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        90.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      89.6
                                                                                                                                                               89.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CoT SC


                                                                                                                                          88.6


                                                                                                                                                                      87.8
                                                                                                                                   87.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MedPrompt


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            83.4
                                                                                                                                                                             82.4
              80


                                                                                                                            80.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MultiPersona
Performance


                                                                                         78.8
                                                                                  78.5


                                                                                                78.0



                                                                                                                     76.6
                                                                                                       74.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Self Refine


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       73.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                         73.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                73.6
                                                                    73.5


                                                                                                                                                                                           71.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  71.8
              70


                                                                                                              70.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              69.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADAS


                                               69.2
                                 68.9
                                        68.3


                                                                           68.3
                   68.1
                          67.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ours


                                                             64.5
              60



                                                      60.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            56.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     53.4
              50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  48.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           48.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              46.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35.4
              40


              30
                             HotpotQA                                                      DROP                                             HumanEval                                                       MBPP                                                  GSM8K                                                         Math
                                                                                                                                                                       Benchmark
Figure 1: Performance comparison with other methods. To assess the method’s performance,
we employ various metrics across different datasets: solve rate for Math and GSM8K, F1 score
for HotpotQA and DROP, and pass@1 for HumanEval and MBPP. Our AF LOW (highlighted in yel-
low) consistently outperforms all automated workflow optimization and manually designed methods
across all six benchmarks.
relatively complete representation. However, due to the efficiency limitations of its linear heuris-
tic search algorithm, ADAS struggles to generate effective workflows within a limited number of
iterations. This highlights the need for more effective techniques to represent and automate the
generation of agentic workflows, which would accelerate the application of LLMs across domains.
In response to these challenges, we introduce an innovative framework for automatically generating
agentic workflows. Our key idea is to model the workflow as a series of interconnected LLM-
invoking nodes, where each node represents an LLM action and the edges define the logic, depen-
dencies, and flow between these actions. This structure transforms the workflow into a vast search
space, encompassing a wide variety of potential configurations. Our goal is to efficiently navigate
this space, automatically generating optimized workflows that maximize task performance while
minimizing human intervention.
However, the diversity and complexity of tasks present significant challenges. Specifically, each task
can have different requirements, operations, and dependencies, which makes it difficult to represent
them in a unified yet flexible manner (Chen et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2018; Luo
et al., 2018). Furthermore, the search space for possible workflows, comprising an immense number
of code structures and node configurations, is virtually boundless, creating an additional challenge
for efficient exploration and optimization.
To address these challenges, we propose AF LOW, a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)-based frame-
work designed to systematically explore and discover optimal agentic workflows. AF LOW repre-
sents workflows as flexible nodes connected by code-based edges, which encapsulate possible rela-
tionships such as logical flows, conditions, and dependencies. These edges allow the workflow to be
modeled as a graph (Zhuge et al., 2024) or network (Liu et al., 2023), offering a powerful structure
for capturing complex interactions between LLM invocations.
To enhance the search process and improve efficiency, AF LOW introduces a novel concept of opera-
tors – predefined, reusable combinations of nodes representing common agentic operations (e.g., En-
semble, Review & Revise). These operators serve as foundational building blocks for constructing
workflows and are integrated into the search space, ensuring that the exploration process leverages
known patterns of effective agentic operations.
AF LOW employs the MCTS algorithm to navigate this infinite search space. The framework’s work-
flow optimization process incorporates several key innovations: a soft mixed-probability selection
mechanism for node exploration, LLM-driven node expansion to introduce new possibilities, execu-
tion evaluation to assess workflow performance, and backpropagation of experience to refine future
search iterations. This combination of techniques ensures that AF LOW efficiently discovers work-
flows that adapt to the complexity of diverse tasks while reducing reliance on manual intervention.
We make the following key contributions: (1) Problem Formulation: We formalize the work-
flow optimization problem, generalizing prior approaches as specific cases. This provides a unified
framework for future research at both the node and workflow optimization levels. (2) AF LOW:


                                                                                                                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


We introduce AF LOW, an MCTS-based method that automatically discovers effective workflows
across multiple domains with minimal human intervention. (3) Extensive Evaluation: We eval-
uate AF LOW on six benchmark datasets: HumanEval, MBPP, MATH, GSM8K, HotPotQA, and
DROP. AF LOW outperforms manually designed methods by 5.7% and surpasses existing automated
approaches by 19.5%. Notably, workflows generated by AF LOW enable smaller LLMs to outper-
form larger models, offering better cost-performance efficiency, with significant implications for
real-world applications.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Agentic Workflow Agentic workflow and autonomous agents (Zhuge et al., 2023; Hong et al.,
2024a; Zhang et al., 2024c; Wang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025) represent two distinct paradigms
of LLM application. The former completes tasks statically through predefined processes with mul-
tiple LLM invocations, while the latter solves problems dynamically through flexible autonomous
decision-making. Compared to autonomous agents that require specific actions and decision pat-
terns designed for the environment, agentic workflows can be constructed based on existing human
domain experience and iterative refinement, offering higher potential for automated construction.
Agentic workflows can be broadly categorized into general and domain-specific types. General
workflows emphasize universal problem-solving approaches, such as (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Madaan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a; Teng et al., 2025). Domain-specific workflows focus
on building effective processes to solve domain-specific problems, such as code generation (Hong
et al., 2024b; Ridnik et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024a), data analysis (Xie et al., 2024b; Ye et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2024a; Zhou et al., 2023), mathematics (Zhong et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024),
question answering (Nori et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024a). Existing work has manually discovered
numerous effective agentic workflows, but it’s challenging to exhaust various tasks across different
domains, further highlighting the importance of automated workflow generation and optimization.

Automated Agentic Optimization Recent work aims to automate the design of agentic work-
flows, categorized into three types: automated prompt optimization, hyperparameter optimization,
and automated workflow optimization. Prompt optimization (Fernando et al., 2024; Yüksekgönül
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a; Khattab et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2025) uses LLMs to optimize
prompts within fixed workflows. Hyperparameter optimization (Saad-Falcon et al., 2024) focuses
on optimizing predefined parameters. While these approaches improve performance, they are lim-
ited in generalization to new tasks and often require moderate human effort for task-specific designs.
Automated workflow optimization (Li et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2024b; Zhuge et al., 2024; Hu
et al., 2024) aims to optimize entire workflow structures, offering more potential for fully automated
generation. Recent works explore diverse representations and methods. GPTSwarm (Zhuge et al.,
2024) uses graph structures with reinforcement learning, but struggles to represent workflows with
conditional states due to graph structure limitations. ADAS (Hu et al., 2024) utilizes code structures
to represent workflows and stores historical workflows in a linear list structure, aligning closely with
our goals. However, it is constrained by the efficiency of its search algorithm as it relies on overly
simplistic representations of experiences in the searching process, making it challenging to discover
effective workflows.
AF LOW also uses code to represent workflows, but goes further by providing a more fundamen-
tal structure called named node. This structure encompasses various LLM invocation parameters,
allowing for more detailed workflow representation. We also introduce operators that implement
predefined node combination functions. Simultaneously, AF LOW employs a specially designed
MCTS algorithm for automated workflow optimization, leveraging the tree-structured experience
and execution feedback to efficiently discover effective workflows.

3   P RELIMINARY
In this section, we will first formulate the automated agentic workflows generation problem in Sec-
tion 3.1 and then discuss design considerations of our AF LOW in Section 3.2. For the core concept
of this section, we provide an example explanation in Figure 2.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                       Generate Node              Judge Node
  Prompt:
  You’re a helpful assistant…         Ensemble Node               Revise Node
  Let’s think step by step…
                                       Review Node
  Reason and act…
  Generate answer based on                Self-Consistency Ensemble
  the context…
  Temperatrue:[0,1]                                                                             Graph
                                                              …
                                                                                              …
                                             Multi-Agent Debate
   Models
                                                                                                  Code


                                          History          Conditions



                                                                                …                 …
                                                    Self Refine
   <thought>…</thought>
   <solution>…</solution>                                         Conditions

                                                                                             Networks

                      Node                                        Operator                     Edge
Figure 2: The example of node, operator, and edge. We demonstrate the optional parameters for
Nodes, the structure of some Operators, and common representations of Edges.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Agentic Workflow We define an agentic workflow W as a series of LLM-invoking nodes con-
nected by edges to define the exection orders, denoted as N = {N1 , N2 , . . . , Ni . . .}. Each node Ni
represents a specific operation performed by an LLM and is characterized by the following parame-
ters. The code abstraction of the node is shown in Appendix A.2.

   • Model M : The specific language model invoked at node Ni .
   • Prompt P : The input or task description provided to the model at each node.
   • Temperature τ : A parameter controlling the randomness of the LLM’s output at node Ni .
   • Output format F : The format in which the model’s output is structured (e.g., xml, json,
     markdown, raw). The node in workflow should provide different output formats, inspired by
     the Tam et al. (2024).

Edge E represent abstract structures defining node relationships, governing the sequence of execu-
tion. The edge E can be represented via various structures, such as:

   • Graph Zhuge et al. (2024): A flexible structure representing hierarchical, sequential, or par-
     allel relationships between nodes, allowing for complex branching workflows.
   • Neural Network (Liu et al., 2023): A structure that can represent complex, non-linear re-
     lationships between nodes, allowing for adaptive and learnable workflows based on input and
     feedback.
   • Code (Hu et al., 2024): A comprehensive representation that can express linear sequences,
     conditional logic, loops, and incorporate graph or network structures, offering the most precise
     control over workflow execution for LLMs.

While graph structures can represent workflow relationships, they require complex extensions (e.g.,
Petri nets, BPMN) beyond basic DAGs to naturally express parallel execution and conditional logic.
Neural networks enable adaptive transitions but lack precise control over workflow execution. In
contrast, code representation inherently supports all these relationships through standard program-
ming constructs. Therefore, we adopt code as our primary edge structure to maximize expressivity.

Automated Workflow Optimization Given a task T and an evaluation function G, the goal of
workflow optimization is to discover a workflow W that maximizes G(W, T ). This can be formu-
lated as a search process where an algorithm A explores the search space S to determine the optimal
workflow configuration. The search space S for a workflow optimization problem encompasses all
possible configurations of node parameters and edge structures:


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Search Space                             Search via AFLOW                                    Search Result
                   Node                                                                                      Math Workflow
                                                  Soft Mixed
             Fixed Parameters                                             LLM-Based Expansion                      Task
                                              Probability Selection
  Model              Temperature                                                                                                          Solution
                                                                                                                                          Generate
  Output Format                                                                                            Simplify     Refine
                                                                                                                                 Detail
       Variable Parameters
  PROMPT = """
  Think step by step and then
  answer the question.                                 m                           m
  Question: {question}                                                                                           Solution
  """                                                                                  n
                                                           if max N rounds or                          Question-Answering Workflow
                                                             no improvement
                 Operators                                                                                                                Identity
                                                                 Global                                                                     Check
      Test       Format       Programmer                                                        Task
                                                               Performance
      Ensemble     CodeGenerate                                                                                  Fact Check
      Review&Revise                               Experience                   Executing                                           Analysis
      ContextualGenerate                        Backpropagation                Evaluation
                                                                                                              Format

         Code Represented Edges
                                                                                                                      Answer
 def __call__(self, …):
     init_response = await self.generate(…)
     response = await self.custom(…)                                                                    Code Generation Workflow
     if response == 'False':
         …                                            m                            m
     else:
                                              Experience                                         Task
         …
     return final_response
                                                           n                         n
                                     …          Candidate Workflow            Execute                                   True        if …
                                                                                                                                   else …
                      False                                                     performance                                               False
                                                Selected Workflow
                    if …      True                                                                               Solution
                   else …                       Expanded Workflow                                                                 Fix Code



Figure 3: Overall AF LOW framework: By setting a search space composed of nodes with only
prompt parameters flexible, a given operator set, and a code representing edge, AF LOW performs
an MCTS-based search within this space. Through a variant of MCTS designed for workflow op-
timization, AF LOW iteratively executes a cycle of Soft Mixed Probability Selection, LLM-Based
Expansion, Execution Evaluation, and Experience Backpropagation until reaching the maximum
number of iterations or meeting convergence criteria.


                                                  S = {(N , E) | E ∈ E},

where N = {N (M, τ, P, F ) | M ∈ M, τ ∈ [0, 1], P ∈ P, F ∈ F}, with M, P, F, E representing
the sets of possible language models, prompts, output formats, and edge configurations, respectively.
With this formulation, the workflow optimization problem can be expressed as:

                                                 W = A(S, G, T ),
                                                 W ∗ = arg max G(W, T ),
                                                               W ∈S

where A is the search algorithm that explores the search space S, and W ∗ is the optimal workflow
configuration that maximizes the evaluation function G for the given task T .

3.2     AF LOW OVERVIEW

Limitations of Previous Methods Previous approaches Yüksekgönül et al. (2024); Khattab et al.
(2024); Zhuge et al. (2024) to workflow optimization have primarily been constrained by the limited
scope of their search spaces, based on problem definition in Section 3.1. Another related work,
ADAS (Hu et al., 2024), searches in a larger space comprising a combination of prompts N (P, T )
and edges E, but fails to discover effective workflows due to the efficiency limitations of its linear
heuristic search algorithm.

Formulation To address the limitations of previous methods, we propose AF LOW, a novel frame-
work that leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) as optimizers within a variant of Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) to search for optimal workflows. As discussed in Section 3.1, edges can be
represented in both graphs and code. To ensure AFLOW can explore the full range of possible agen-
tic workflows, we represent nodes N and edges E through code. Specifically, as shown in Figure 3,


                                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


AF LOW uses a variant of MCTS to iteratively explore the workflow search space, evaluate different
configurations, and backpropagate experiences to refine the workflow optimization process.
To enhance search efficiency in practice, we simplify the search space by fixing key parameters
such as the model M , temperature τ , and format F . This simplification allows AF LOW to focus
its search primarily on the code-represented edges E and prompts. To navigate this still vast search
space effectively, we introduce the concept of Operators. These Operators encapsulate common
agentic operations (e.g., Ensemble, Review, Revise) by combining N and E into unified interfaces,
thereby enabling more efficient utilization by AF LOW. By employing these Operators, we achieve
more efficient search and streamlined workflow generation.
Formally, given a set of Operators O that represents predefined node combinations, and an edge
space E represented through code, the optimization problem can be formalized as:

                SAFlow = {(P1 , . . . , Pn , E, O1 , . . . , On ) | Pi ∈ P, E ∈ E, Oi ∈ O}          (1)
                                    W ∗ = AF LOW(SAFlow , G, T )                                    (2)

Tasks Scope and Operations In this paper, we focus on applying AF LOW to reasoning tasks with
numerical evaluation functions. We extract common operations from existing literature and define
them as part of the operator set O. These operations include: (1) Generate, (2) Format, (3) Review
and Revise Madaan et al. (2023), (4) Ensemble Wang et al. (2022), (5) Test Zhong et al. (2024a), (6)
Programmer, and (7) Custom as the default operator for basic node construction. The operator set O
can be easily expanded to enhance search efficiency for various tasks. Even without any predefined
operators, AF LOW can construct different workflow nodes using the basic Custom operator. The
efficiency comparison between these approaches is detailed in Section 5.2. For a comprehensive
understanding of the operators, we provide their detailed structures in Appendix A.4.


4   T HE D ESIGN D ETAILS OF AF LOW

The core concept of AF LOW is to employ Large Language Models (LLMs) as optimizers within a
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) variant to discover effective workflows. In our MCTS structure,
each tree node represents a complete workflow rather than individual LLM-invoking node,
enabling the discovery of universal solutions for classes of problems. The search process operates
through an iterative cycle of soft mixed probability selection, LLM-based optimization expansion,
execution evaluation, and experience backpropagation until reaching maximum iterations or conver-
gence criteria. A simplified illustration is shown in Figure 3, with detailed algorithm process and
theoretical analysis presented in Appendix A.6 and Appendix G, respectively.
Existing workflow optimization methods iteratively use past workflow structures to prompt LLMs
to discover new structures. However, due to information loss during accumulation (as input tokens
increase), this approach struggles to guide LLMs towards specific performance metrics. Combined
with the vast search space of code, this reduces search efficiency. Our key idea is to leverage the tree
structure of MCTS to preserve workflow-based exploration experiences in Nmax rounds workflow
optimization. When a workflow is revisited, we accurately reuse past successful experiences and
avoid failures, enabling effective workflow generation and improving search efficiency. To prevent
local optima, we introduce a special selection mechanism allowing generation from a blank template
at any round. Next, we will introduce the complete process of AF LOW, as shown in Algorithm 1.
Initialization AF LOW begins with a template workflow W0 , which provides a framework for invok-
ing nodes and operators. The code template, detailed in Appendix A.3, allows the LLM optimizer
to complete workflow simply by completing call functions. Prior to initiating the search process, we
randomly partition the dataset into a validation set (20%) and a test set (80%), with the random seed
fixed at 42. To optimize computational efficiency, AF LOW then executes the blank template five
times on the validation dataset. From these executions, we select a subset of problems that exhibit
high variance in scores, which becomes the final validation set.
Selection Our algorithm forms the initial workflow by evaluating an empty workflow on the val-
idation set. And then continuously select workflows based on a soft mixed probability selection
strategy. cWe propose this strategy for workflow optimization: combining uniform and score-based


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Algorithm of AF LOW: Detailed implementation
Require: Evaluator G, Dataset D, Operators O
Ensure: Optimized Workflow W ∗
 1: Initialize W0 , split D into DV and DT
 2: W ∗ ← W0
 3: for iteration ← 1 to Nmax do
 4:     workf low ← Select(tree)                       ▷ Using soft mixed probability strategy
 5:     child.workf low ← Expand(workf low, O)                       ▷ LLM-based expansion
 6:     score ← Evaluate(child.workf low, G, DV )               ▷ Multiple runs for robustness
 7:     Backpropagate(child.workf low, score)                 ▷ Update experience and scores
 8:     Update W ∗ if improved
 9:     if ConvergenceCriteriaMet() then break
10:     end if
11: end for
12: return W ∗


weighted probability distributions to select from top-k workflows and the initial workflow, where
including the initial workflow ensures persistent exploration capability while avoiding local optima.
The formula for this selection strategy is as follows:

                                       1               exp(α · (si − smax ))
                    Pmixed (i) = λ ·     + (1 − λ) · Pn                         ,                 (3)
                                       n              j=1 exp(α · (sj − smax ))

where n is the number of workflows, si is workflow i’s score, smax is the maximum score, α (0.4)
controls score influence, and λ (0.2) balances exploration and exploitation.
Expansion In the expansion phase, we employ an LLM as an optimizer to create new workflows and
the optimize prompt is illustrated in Appendix A.1. The optimizer leverages the selected workflow’s
experience to generate new prompts or modify node connections by altering code, resulting in new
workflows. Specifically, to maximally uncover insights from past iterations, the experience includes
all modifications and their corresponding improvements or failures on the selected workflow, along
with precise logs of predictions and expected output.
Evaluation AF LOW directly executes workflows to get feedback due to explicit evaluation functions
in reasoning tasks. We test each generated workflow 5 times on the validation set, computing mean
and standard deviation. While this increases per-iteration cost, it provides more accurate feedback
for the optimizer. This precision enhances search efficiency, ultimately reducing the number of
iterations required to reach an effective solution.
Backpropagation After execution, we record: (1) the workflow’s performance, (2) the optimizer’s
modification of its parent workflow, and (3) optimization success relative to its parent. This infor-
mation is stored in experience and propagated back to the parent workflow, while the performance
score is added to the global record for selection.
Terminal Condition We implement early stopping to reduce unnecessary execution costs: the pro-
cess terminates if the top-k average score shows no improvement for n consecutive rounds, or after
N total rounds otherwise. See Appendix A.6 for algorithmic details.


5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets We utilized six public benchmarks for our experiments. Following established prac-
tices (Saad-Falcon et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024) in workflow optimization, we divide the data into
validation and test sets using a 1:4 ratio. Specifically, we use the full datasets for GSM8K (Cobbe
et al., 2021), HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021). For HotpotQA (Yang
et al., 2018) and DROP (Dua et al., 2019), we randomly select 1,000 samples each, in line with (Hu
et al., 2024; Shinn et al., 2023). For the MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset, we follow (Hong


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


et al., 2024a) in selecting 617 problems from four typical problem types (Combinatorics & Proba-
bility, Number Theory, Pre-algebra, Pre-calculus) at difficulty level 5.
Baselines We compare workflow discovered by AF LOW against manually designed methods for
LLMs, including IO (direct LLM invocation), Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022), Self Consis-
tency CoT (5 answers) (Wang et al., 2022), MultiPersona Debate (Wang et al., 2024a), Self-Refine
(max 3 iteration rounds) (Madaan et al., 2023), and MedPrompt (3 answers and 5 votes) (Nori et al.,
2023). We also compared against workflow designed by automated workflow optimization method
ADAS (Hu et al., 2024).
Implementation Details AF LOW utilizes different models for optimization and execution. We
employ Claude-3.5-sonnet (Anthropic, 2024) as the optimizer and use models: DeepSeek-
V2.5 (Deepseek, 2024), GPT-4o-mini-0718 (OpenAI, 2024b), Claude-3.5-sonnet-0620 (Anthropic,
2024), GPT-4o-0513 (OpenAI, 2024a)) as executors. All models are accessed via APIs. We set the
temperature to 1 for DeepSeek-V2.5 and to 0 for the other models. We set iteration rounds to 20 for
AF LOW. For ADAS, we use Claude-3.5-sonnet as the optimizer and GPT-4o-mini as the executor,
with the iteration rounds set to 30.
Metrics. For GSM8K and MATHlv5∗ , we report the Solve Rate (%) as the primary metric. For
HumanEval and MBPP, we report the pass@1 metric as presented in (Chen et al., 2021) to assess
code accuracy. For HotpotQA and DROP, we report the F1 Score. Additionally, for all datasets,
we calculate the cost by tracking token usage to construct a pareto front, visually demonstrating the
performance-cost trade-offs between different methods.

5.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Main Results The main experimental results, as shown in Table 1, demonstrate the effectiveness of
AF LOW. Workflows optimized by AF LOW outperform all manually designed methods by an aver-
age of 5.7% and surpass contemporary automatic workflow optimization work by 19.5%. Across
six datasets in QA, Code, and Math domains, AF LOW achieves an average performance of 80.3%,
marking the capability and usability of this method. Notably, compared to similar works, AF LOW
performed better on more challenging tasks, improving over ADAS on MATHlv5∗ and MBPP tasks
by 57%, showcasing the robustness of the model on complex datasets.
Table 1: Comparison of performance between manually designed methods and workflow generated
by automated workflow optimization methods in QA, code, and Math scenarios. All methods are
executed with GPT-4o-mini on divided test set, and we tested it three times and reported it on the
average.
                                                      Benchmarks
  Method                                                                       Avg.
                                      HotpotQA DROP HumanEval MBPP GSM8K MATH
  IO (GPT-4o-mini)                      68.1    68.3   87.0    71.8 92.7  48.6 72.8
  CoT (Wei et al., 2022)                67.9    78.5   88.6    71.8 92.4  48.8 74.7
  CoT SC (5-shot) (Wang et al., 2022)   68.9    78.8   91.6    73.6 92.7  50.4 76.0
  MedPrompt (Nori et al., 2023)         68.3    78.0   91.6    73.6 90.0  50.0 75.3
  MultiPersona (Wang et al., 2024a)     69.2    74.4   89.3    73.6 92.8  50.8 75.1
  Self Refine (Madaan et al., 2023)     60.8    70.2   87.8    69.8 89.6  46.1 70.7
  ADAS (Hu et al., 2024)                64.5    76.6   82.4    53.4 90.8  35.4 67.2
  Ours                                  73.5    80.6   94.7    83.4 93.5  56.2 80.3
To explore whether the workflow searched by AF LOW is model-agnostic, we use GPT-4o-mini and
DeepSeek-V2.5 as execution LLMs to search effective workflows with different structures, with
the results illustrated in Table 2. When applying these workflows to other models, the vast ma-
jority demonstrate stronger performance than the baseline, showcasing the generalizability of the
workflows discovered by AF LOW. Simultaneously, we observe that the workflow identified using
DeepSeek-V2.5 performs notably weaker on GPT-4o-mini compared to the workflow found using
GPT-4o-mini itself. This suggests that different language models require different workflows to
achieve their optimal performance.
Cost Analysis We demonstrate the comparison of performance and cost between the baselines and
the top three workflows found by AF LOW using GPT-4o-mini and DeepSeek-V2.5 as execution
LLMs. The comparison is made across four models with different capabilities and price points.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 2: Comparison of performance between manually designed methods and workflows generated
by AF LOW with two executor LLM: GPT-4o-mini (“Ours”) and DeepSeek-V2.5 (“Ours*”). All
workflows are tested thrice on the humaneval test set, with average results reported. “MP” denotes
“MedPrompt” (Nori et al., 2023), and “MPD” denotes “MultiPersona Debate” (Wang et al., 2024a).
The results demonstrate that workflows obtained through AF LOW exhibit strong transferability.
                                                       Methods
             Model
                                  IO    CoT      CoT SC MP MPD          SR    Ours   Ours∗
             GPT-4o-mini         87.0   88.6      91.6   91.6 89.3     87.8   94.7   90.8
             DeepSeek-V2.5       88.6   89.3      88.6   88.6 89.3     90.0   93.9   94.7
             GPT-4o              93.9   93.1      94.7   93.9 94.7     91.6   96.2   95.4
             Claude-3.5-sonnet   90.8   92.4      93.9   91.6 90.8     89.3   95.4   94.7


                             Scatter Plot with Pareto Front of HumanEval
pass@1 (%)


                                               Cost ($) in Log Scale

Figure 4: The cost refers to the total expense of executing the divided HumanEval test set. AF LOW
(execution model) refers to workflows found by AF LOW using the execution model to obtain feed-
back. The colors in the legend represent the LLM used to execute each workflow in test dataset. The
specific numerical values for this Figure can be found in Appendix D.

Results demonstrate that AF LOW can identify workflows that allow weaker models to outperform
stronger models on the pareto front of cost-effectiveness. This breakthrough effectively removes
barriers to the widespread application of agentic workflows across various domains. By automating
the design of effective agentic workflows, AF LOW eliminates the human labor costs previously
required. Moreover, the ability to achieve superior performance at lower costs compared to stronger
models opens up further possibilities for widespread adoption.
Ablation Study We introduce operators as human-designed effort to enhance search efficiency. An
ablation study on GSM8K (Figure 5) shows that operators help AF LOW discover better workflows
more efficiently, achieving incremental improvements. Notably, even without operators, AF LOW
maintains strong performance (93.1%), surpassing manual designs. Notably, AF LOW autonomously
develops ensemble-like structures without operators, demonstrating its capability for independent
workflow design and marking a significant step towards full automation. Details is shown in Ap-
pendix B.
Case Study AF LOW demonstrates a clear iteration process, as shown in Figure 6, illustrating how
it evolves from a blank template (containing only a single Node without prompts) to the structure
presented in Figure 5(B). In each iteration, AF LOW employs a single-step modification, meaning
it either adds one operator (rounds 2, 3) or makes a targeted modification to a prompt (rounds
8, 10). Among the unsuccessful exploration rounds, AF LOW introduced a custom review node
that directly modified answers generated through complex processes without additional reasoning
(round 5), which decreased accuracy. In round 14, AF LOW attempted to rephrase the problem but
overly focused on “discount” information, leading to a decrease in accuracy. This iteration process
showcases how tree-based search allows AF LOW to further optimize known paths while retaining


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              The Test and Validation Curve of GSM8K                                           The Code Represented Workflow of GSM8K
                                                                                                       async def __call__(self, problem: str):
                 94
                                                                                                       """
                                                                                                       Implementation of the graph
                 92                                                                                    """
                                                                                                           solutions = []
                 90                                                                                        for _ in range(5): # Generate 5 solutions
                                                                                                               solution = await self.custom(
                                                                                                                   input=problem, instruction=MATH_SOLVE_PROMPT
Solve Rate (%)



                 88                                                                                            )
                                                                                                               solutions.append(solution['response'])
                 86
                                                                                                             final_solution = await self.sc_ensemble(
                                                                                                                 solutions=solutions, problem=problem
                 84                                                                                          )
                                                                                                             # Add a verification step using Programmer operator
                 82                                                                                          verification = await self.programmer(
                                                                                                                 problem=problem,
                                                                                                                 analysis=final_solution['response']
                 80
                                                                                                             )

                 78                                                                                          if verification['output']:
                                                                                                                 return verification['output'], self.total_cost
                                                                                                             else:
                 76
                                                                                                                 return final_solution['response'], self.total_cost
                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                  Iteration Round
                                                         (A)                                                                             (B)

Figure 5: (A) Comparison of highest performance curves on GSM8K for both validation and test
sets generated by AF LOW with and without operators. Compared to other datasets, GSM8K has
a larger data volume, meaning that the same percentage improvement represents a greater increase
in correctly solved samples, avoiding fluctuations in improvement due to small data size that could
affect comparisons; (B): The code for the best-performing workflow discovered by AF LOW on the
GSM8K dataset.
 MATH_SOLVE_PROMPT =                                                                     1                 Score: 0.8591                             MATH_SOLVE_PROMPT =
                                              Score: 0.8872                                                                                          """
 """
 …Provide a clear and                         Modification:Add a                                                                                     …Double-check your
                                                                                     2       4                                                       calculations and
 concise final answer.                        ScEnsemble operator.                                               Score: 0.9160
 …                                                                                                                                                   reasoning at each
                                                                                                                 Modification:Add a review step      step.
 Ensure that your                                                               3                5               using the Programmer operator.
 final answer is a                                                                                                                                   Verify your solution
 single numerical                                                                                                                                    by plugging it back
 value without any                            Score: 0.9333                8         9       6        13                                             into the original
                                                                                                                 Score: 0.9352                       problem or using an
 units or additional                          Modification:Modify
 text.                                                                                                           Modification:Modify the custom      alternative method if
                                              the custom prompt       12        10       7       14
                                                                                                                                                     possible.
 Do not include any                           for formatting the                                                 prompt for reasoning and checking
 explanatory text with                                                                                           step by step.                       …
                                              final answer.                                                                                          Show each step of
 your final answer,                                                        16                         15
 just the number                                                                                                                                     your solution process
 itself…                                                                                                                                             clearly.
 """                                                                                                                                                 …
                                                      round in the optimal path                                 round out of the optimal path        """


Figure 6: Tree-structured iteration process of AF LOW on GSM8K: We highlight the path from the
initial round (round 1) to the best-performing workflow, reporting the score for each node and its
modification from the previous node. The purple sections in the prompts on both sides represent the
main prompt modifications in this iteration.

the ability to explore new ones. On the MBPP dataset, AF LOW discovered structures similar to
current manually designed workflows, such as test generation and execution by LLMs as seen in
Ridnik et al. (2024). The workflow and more discovered results are presented in Appendix B and a
complete optimization process is presented in Appendix C.

6                 C ONCLUSION
This paper has introduced AF LOW, a novel framework for automated workflow optimization. We
have comprehensively formulated the automated workflow optimization problem, establishing a
foundational structure for future research. AF LOW has leveraged Monte Carlo Tree Search and
code-represented workflows to navigate the vast search space of possible workflows efficiently.
Our experiments across six benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of AF LOW, which has out-
performed manually designed methods and existing automated optimization approaches. Ablation
studies have shown that AF LOW can autonomously discover effective structures, even without pre-
defined operators. Importantly, AF LOW has enabled weaker models to outperform stronger ones
on the Pareto front of cost-effectiveness. We further discuss the potential applications of AF LOW
across diverse domains in Appendix F, potentially revolutionizing the adoption of agentic workflows
across various domains. These results have highlighted AF LOW’s potential for enhancing LLMs’
problem-solving capabilities while optimizing computational costs.



                                                                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper is supported by NSF of China (62402409), Guangzhou Municipality Big Data In-
telligence Key Lab (2023A03J0012), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation
(2023A1515110545), Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2025A04J3935),
and Guangzhou-HKUST(GZ) Joint Funding Program (2025A03J3714).

R EFERENCES
Anthropic. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet.            https://www.anthropic.com/news/
  claude-3-5-sonnet, 2024.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell I. Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Do-
  han, Ellen Jiang, Carrie J. Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc V. Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis
  with large language models. CoRR, abs/2108.07732, 2021.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
 Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating
 large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.
Yanqi Dai, Huanran Hu, Lei Wang, Shengjie Jin, Xu Chen, and Zhiwu Lu. Mmrole: A compre-
  hensive framework for developing and evaluating multimodal role-playing agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.04203, 2024.
Deepseek. DeepSeek-V2.5. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V2.
  5, 2024.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner.
  DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In
  NAACL-HLT (1), pp. 2368–2378. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel.
  Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In ICML. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
  Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset.
  In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track (Round 2), 2021.
Sirui Hong, Yizhang Lin, Bang Liu, Bangbang Liu, Binhao Wu, Danyang Li, Jiaqi Chen, Jiayi
  Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Li Zhang, Lingyao Zhang, Min Yang, Mingchen Zhuge, Taicheng Guo, Tuo
  Zhou, Wei Tao, Wenyi Wang, Xiangru Tang, Xiangtao Lu, Xiawu Zheng, Xinbing Liang, Yaying
  Fei, Yuheng Cheng, Zongze Xu, and Chenglin Wu. Data interpreter: An LLM agent for data
  science. CoRR, abs/2402.18679, 2024a.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao
  Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao,
  Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Metagpt: Meta programming for A multi-agent collabo-
  rative framework. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2024b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
 hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei
 Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-
 the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024.
Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, Chengliang Chai, Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. The dawn of natural language
  to SQL: are we fully ready? Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11):3318–3331, 2024a.
Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Kai Mei, Wenyue Hua, Balaji Rama, Om Raheja, Hao Wang, He Zhu, and
  Yongfeng Zhang. Autoflow: Automated workflow generation for large language model agents.
  CoRR, abs/2407.12821, 2024b.
Bang Liu, Xinfeng Li, Jiayi Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Tanjin He, Sirui Hong, Hongzhang Liu, Shaokun
  Zhang, Kaitao Song, Kunlun Zhu, et al. Advances and challenges in foundation agents: From
  brain-inspired intelligence to evolutionary, collaborative, and safe systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2504.01990, 2025.
Xinyu Liu, Shuyu Shen, Boyan Li, Peixian Ma, Runzhi Jiang, Yuyu Luo, Yuxin Zhang, Ju Fan,
  Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. A survey of NL2SQL with large language models: Where are we,
  and where are we going? CoRR, abs/2408.05109, 2024.
Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. Dynamic llm-agent network: An llm-
  agent collaboration framework with agent team optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02170,
  2023.
Yuyu Luo, Xuedi Qin, Nan Tang, and Guoliang Li. Deepeye: Towards automatic data visualization.
  In ICDE, pp. 101–112. IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2023.
Boye Niu, Yiliao Song, Kai Lian, Yifan Shen, Yu Yao, Kun Zhang, and Tongliang Liu. Flow: Mod-
  ularized agentic workflow automation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2025.
Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolò Fusi, Nicholas King,
  Jonathan Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, Renqian Luo, Scott Mayer McKinney, Robert Os-
  azuwa Ness, Hoifung Poon, Tao Qin, Naoto Usuyama, Chris White, and Eric Horvitz. Can
  generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine. CoRR,
  abs/2311.16452, 2023.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/, 2024a.
OpenAI. GPT-4o mini: Advancing cost-efficient intelligence. https://openai.com/index/
  gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/, 2024b.
Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Zhisong Qiu, Xiaobin Wang, Ningyu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun
  Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Benchmarking agentic workflow generation, 2025. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07869.
Tal Ridnik, Dedy Kredo, and Itamar Friedman. Code generation with alphacodium: From prompt
  engineering to flow engineering. CoRR, abs/2401.08500, 2024.
Jon Saad-Falcon, Adrian Gamarra Lafuente, Shlok Natarajan, Nahum Maru, Hristo Todorov,
  Etash Guha, E. Kelly Buchanan, Mayee Chen, Neel Guha, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirho-
  seini. Archon: An architecture search framework for inference-time techniques. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2409.15254, 2024.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2023.
Chan Hee Song, Brian M Sadler, Jiaman Wu, Wei-Lun Chao, Clayton Washington, and Yu Su.
  Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In
  2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2986–2997. IEEE
  Computer Society, 2023.
Hongda Sun, Weikai Xu, Wei Liu, Jian Luan, Bin Wang, Shuo Shang, Ji-Rong Wen, and Rui Yan.
  From indeterminacy to determinacy: Augmenting logical reasoning capabilities with large lan-
  guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18659, 2023.
Yiyou Sun, Junjie Hu, Wei Cheng, and Haifeng Chen. Chatbot meets pipeline: Augment large
  language model with definite finite automaton. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04411, 2024.
Zhi Rui Tam, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Yi-Lin Tsai, Chieh-Yen Lin, Hung-yi Lee, and Yun-Nung Chen.
  Let me speak freely? A study on the impact of format restrictions on performance of large lan-
  guage models. CoRR, abs/2408.02442, 2024.
Nan Tang, Chenyu Yang, Ju Fan, Lei Cao, Yuyu Luo, and Alon Y. Halevy. Verifai: Verified genera-
  tive AI. In CIDR. www.cidrdb.org, 2024.
Fengwei Teng, Zhaoyang Yu, Quan Shi, Jiayi Zhang, Chenglin Wu, and Yuyu Luo. Atom of thoughts
  for markov llm test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12018, 2025.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the
  emergent cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona
  self-collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 257–279, 2024a.
Zilong Wang, Hao Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Vincent Perot, Zifeng Wang,
  Lesly Miculicich, Yasuhisa Fujii, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, et al. Chain-of-table: Evolving
  tables in the reasoning chain for table understanding. In The Twelfth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2024b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Jinyu Xiang, Jiayi Zhang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Jinhao Tu, Xinbing Liang, Sirui
   Hong, Chenglin Wu, and Yuyu Luo. Self-supervised prompt optimization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2502.06855, 2025.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and
   Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents. In Forty-first
   International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Yupeng Xie, Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. Haichart: Human and AI paired visualization
  system. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11):3178–3191, 2024b.
Yiheng Xu, SU Hongjin, Chen Xing, Boyu Mi, Qian Liu, Weijia Shi, Binyuan Hui, Fan Zhou, Yitao
  Liu, Tianbao Xie, et al. Lemur: Harmonizing natural language and code for language agents. In
  The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
  Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2024a.
Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Shiyi Cao, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez,
  and Bin Cui. Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04271, 2024b.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In EMNLP, pp. 2369–2380. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Yilin Ye, Jianing Hao, Yihan Hou, Zhan Wang, Shishi Xiao, Yuyu Luo, and Wei Zeng. Generative
  AI for visualization: State of the art and future directions. Vis. Informatics, 8(1):43–66, 2024.
Junchi Yu, Ran He, and Zhitao Ying. Thought propagation: An analogical approach to complex
  reasoning with large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Mert Yüksekgönül, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
 James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic ”differentiation” via text. CoRR, abs/2406.07496, 2024.
Guibin Zhang, Yanwei Yue, Zhixun Li, Sukwon Yun, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng,
  Jeffrey Xu Yu, and Tianlong Chen. Cut the crap: An economical communication pipeline for
  llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02506, 2024a.
Guibin Zhang, Yanwei Yue, Xiangguo Sun, Guancheng Wan, Miao Yu, Junfeng Fang, Kun Wang,
  and Dawei Cheng. G-designer: Architecting multi-agent communication topologies via graph
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11782, 2024b.
Jiayi Zhang, Chuang Zhao, Yihan Zhao, Zhaoyang Yu, Ming He, and Jianping Fan. Mobileexperts:
   A dynamic tool-enabled agent team in mobile devices. CoRR, abs/2407.03913, 2024c.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
  chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
Li Zhong, Zilong Wang, and Jingbo Shang. Debug like a human: A large language model debugger
  via verifying runtime execution step by step. In ACL (Findings), pp. 851–870. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2024a.
Qihuang Zhong, Kang Wang, Ziyang Xu, Juhua Liu, Liang Ding, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Achiev-
  ing¿ 97% on gsm8k: Deeply understanding the problems makes llms perfect reasoners. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2404.14963, 2024b.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Lan-
  guage agent tree search unifies reasoning, acting, and planning in language models. In Forty-first
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024a.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yixin Ou, Shengwei Ding, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Jiamin Chen,
 Shuai Wang, Xiaohua Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Huajun Chen, and Yuchen Eleanor Jiang. Symbolic
 learning enables self-evolving agents. CoRR, abs/2406.18532, 2024b.
Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, and Zhiyuan Liu. Llm as dba. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05481, 2023.
Yizhang Zhu, Shiyin Du, Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, and Nan Tang. Are large language models good
  statisticians? In NeurIPS, 2024.
Mingchen Zhuge, Haozhe Liu, Francesco Faccio, Dylan R Ashley, Róbert Csordás, Anand
 Gopalakrishnan, Abdullah Hamdi, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Vincent Herrmann,
 Kazuki Irie, et al. Mindstorms in natural language-based societies of mind. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.17066, 2023.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen
 Schmidhuber. Gptswarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In Forty-first International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX

A.1     LLM BASED E XPANSION : P ROMPT FOR LLM O PTIMIZER

      Workflow optimize prompt


      PROMPT = """You are building a Graph and corresponding Prompt to jointly solve {type}
      ,→ problems. Referring to the given graph and prompt, which forms a basic example of
      ,→ a {type} solution approach, please reconstruct and optimize them. You can add,
      ,→ modify, or delete nodes, parameters, or prompts. Include your single modification
      ,→ in XML tags in your reply. Ensure they are complete and correct to avoid runtime
      ,→ failures. When optimizing, you can incorporate critical thinking methods like
      ,→ review, revise, ensemble (generating multiple answers through different/similar
      ,→ prompts, then voting/integrating/checking the majority to obtain a final answer),
      ,→ selfAsk, etc. Consider Python's loops (for, while, list comprehensions),
      ,→ conditional statements (if-elif-else, ternary operators), or machine learning
      ,→ techniques (e.g., linear regression, decision trees, neural networks, clustering).
      ,→ The graph complexity should not exceed 10. Use logical and control flow (IF-ELSE,
      ,→ loops) for a more enhanced graphical representation.Ensure that all the prompts
      ,→ required by the current graph from prompt_custom are included.Exclude any other
      ,→ prompts. Output the modified graph and all the necessary Prompts in prompt_custom
      ,→ (if needed).The prompt you need to generate is only the one used in
      ,→ `prompt_custom.XXX` within Custom. Other methods already have built-in prompts and
      ,→ are prohibited from being generated. Only generate those needed for use in
      ,→ `prompt_custom`; please remove any unused prompts in prompt_custom. the generated
      ,→ prompt must not contain any placeholders. Considering information loss, complex
      ,→ graphs may yield better results, but insufficient information transmission can
      ,→ omit the solution. It's crucial to include necessary context during the
      ,→ process."""


A.2     BASIC S TRUCTURE OF N ODE

    Node structure


    class ActionNode:
        async def fill(self, context, llm, schema...):
            """
            :param context: Everything we should know when filling node.
            :param llm: Large Language Model with pre-defined system message.
            :param schema: json/markdown/xml, determine example and output format.
             - raw: free form text
             - json: it's easy to open source LLM with json format
             - markdown: when generating code, markdown is always better
             - xml: its structured format is advantageous for constraining LLM outputs
            """
            ...
            return self


A.3     BASIC S TRUCTURE OF W ORKFLOW

    Workflow structure


    DatasetType = Literal["HumanEval", "MBPP", "GSM8K", "MATH", "HotpotQa", "DROP"]

    class Workflow:
        def __init__(
            self,
            name: str,
            llm_config,
            dataset: DatasetType,
        ) -> None:
            self.name = name
            self.dataset = dataset
            self.llm = create_llm_instance(llm_config)
            self.llm.cost_manager = CostManager()


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       async def __call__(self, problem: str):
           """
           Implementation of the workflow
           """
           raise NotImplementedError("This method should be implemented by the subclass")


A.4   O PERATORS

   Operators


   class ContextualGenerate(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, problem, context, mode: str = None):
           prompt = CONTEXTUAL_GENERATE_PROMPT.format(problem_description=problem,
           ,→ thought=context)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(GenerateOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
           return response

   class CodeGenerate(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, problem, function_name, mode: str = None):
           prompt = GENERATE_CODEBLOCK_PROMPT.format(problem_description=problem)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm, "function_name":
           ,→ function_name}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(CodeGenerateOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
           return response


   class Format(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, problem, solution, mode: str = None):
           prompt = FORMAT_PROMPT.format(problem_description=problem, solution=solution)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(FormatOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
           return response

   class Review(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, problem, solution, mode: str = None):
           prompt = REVIEW_PROMPT.format(problem_description=problem, solution=solution,
           ,→ criteria=self.criteria)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(ReviewOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
           return response

   class Revise(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, problem, solution, feedback, mode: str = None):
           prompt = REVISE_PROMPT.format(problem_description=problem, solution=solution,
           ,→ feedback=feedback)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(ReviseOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
           return response

   class Ensemble(Operator):
       async def __call__(self, solutions: List[str], problem: str, mode: str = None):
           answer_mapping = {}
           solution_text = ""
           for index, solution in enumerate(solutions):
               answer_mapping[chr(65 + index)] = index
               solution_text += f"{chr(65 + index)}: \n{str(solution)}\n\n\n"


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


           prompt = ENSEMBLE_PROMPT.format(solutions=solution_text,
           ,→ problem_description=problem)
           fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm}
           if mode:
               fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
           node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(EnsembleOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
           response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()

           answer = response.get("solution_letter", "")
           answer = answer.strip().upper()

           return {"solution": solutions[answer_mapping[answer]]}

   class Test(Operator):
       def exec_code(self, solution, entry_point):
           fail_cases = []
           ...
           if fail_cases != []:
               return fail_cases
           else:
               return "no error"

       async def __call__(self, problem, solution, entry_point, test_loop: int = 3):
           for _ in range(test_loop):
               result = self.exec_code(solution, entry_point)
               if result == "no error":
                   return {"result": True, "solution": solution}
               elif "exec_fail_case" in result:
                   result = result["exec_fail_case"]
                   prompt = REFLECTION_ON_PUBLIC_TEST_PROMPT.format(
                       problem=problem,
                       solution=solution,
                       exec_pass=f"executed unsuccessfully, error: \n {result}",
                       test_fail="executed unsucessfully",
                   )
                   node = await
                   ,→ ActionNode.from_pydantic(ReflectionTestOp).fill(context=prompt,
                   ,→ llm=self.llm, mode="code_fill")
                   response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
                   solution = response["reflection_and_solution"]
               else:
                   ...
           result = self.exec_code(solution, entry_point)
           if result == "no error":
               return {"result": True, "solution": solution}
           else:
               return {"result": False, "solution": solution}

   class Programmer(Operator):
       async def exec_code(code, timeout=180):
           def run_code():
               try:
                   global_namespace = {}

                   exec(code, global_namespace)
               except ...

           done_event = threading.Event()
           result = ["Error", "subprocess error"]

           def wrapper():
               nonlocal result
               result = run_code()
               done_event.set()

           with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=1) as executor:
               future = executor.submit(wrapper)
               try:
                   if done_event.wait(timeout=timeout):
                       return result
                   else:
                       future.cancel()
                       return "Error", "Exceed time limit"
               finally:
                   executor.shutdown(wait=False)

       async def code_generate(self, problem, analysis, feedback, mode):
           prompt = PYTHON_CODE_VERIFIER_PROMPT.format(problem=problem, analysis=analysis,
           ,→ feedback=feedback)


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            fill_kwargs = {"context": prompt, "llm": self.llm, "function_name": "solve"}
            if mode:
                fill_kwargs["mode"] = mode
            node = await ActionNode.from_pydantic(CodeGenerateOp).fill(**fill_kwargs)
            response = node.instruct_content.model_dump()
            return response

        async def __call__(self, problem: str, analysis: str = "None"):
            code = None
            for i in range(3):
                code = await self.code_generate(problem, analysis, feedback,
                ,→ mode="code_fill")
                code = code["code"]
                status, output = await self.exec_code(code)
                if status == "Success":
                    return {"code": code, "output": output}
                else:
                    ...
            return {"code": code, "output": "error"}



Providing predefined operators can effectively enhance the search efficiency of AF LOW. We imple-
ment six common operator structures, including: Generate (Contextual, Code), Format, Review &
Revise, Ensemble, Test, and Programmer. For the Test Operator, we use the public test dataset of the
dataset as test data. For datasets like MBPP that don’t provide a public test dataset, we follow the
setting in Zhong et al. (2024a) where we use the first test case of each problem as public test data.

A.5   M APPING WORKFLOW FROM F ORMULATION TO C ODE

   An example of Workflow


   async def __call__(self, problem: str, entry_point: str):
       """
       Implementation of the workflow
       Custom operator to generate anything you want.
       But when you want to get standard code, you should use custom_code_generate
       ,→ operator.
       """
       solutions = []
       for _ in range(3): # Generate 3 solutions
           solution = await self.custom_code_generate(problem=problem,
           ,→ entry_point=entry_point, instruction=prompt_custom.CODE_GENERATE_PROMPT)
           solutions.append(solution['response'])

        best_solution = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=solutions, problem=problem)

        test_result = await self.test(problem=problem, solution=best_solution['response'],
        ,→ entry_point=entry_point)

        if test_result['result']:
            return test_result['solution'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost
        else:
            # If the test fails, try to fix the solution
            fixed_solution = await self.custom(input=f"Problem: {problem}\nFailed solution:
            ,→ {best_solution['response']}\nError: {test_result['solution']}",
            ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.FIX_CODE_PROMPT)
            return fixed_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



In this example,

  • self.custom is the interface for building nodes, through which the Optimizer can generate/mod-
    ify its prompts.
  • self.test and self.sc ensemble are interfaces for using Operators (In this example, this workflow
    only use 2 operators).
  • Edge in AF LOW are represented through code, controlling the flow of all input/output vari-
    ables between Nodes and Operators to form a complete workflow. Given this definition, the
    traditional concept of a ’node having two outgoing edges’ does not apply to this formulation.

A.6   MCTS A LGORITHM OF AF LOW .
                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 Detailed Explanation of the AF LOW Algorithm
Require: Initial Workflow W0 , Evaluator G, Dataset D, Number of rounds N , Operators O, Top k
    k, Early stopping rounds n
Ensure: Optimal Workflow W ∗
 1: Initialize results ← ∅, experiences ← ∅, N ← 20, k ← 3, n ← 5
 2: DV , DT ← RandomSplit(D, 0.2, 0.8)            ▷ Split dataset: 20% for validation, 80% for training
 3: scores ← Execute(W0 , G, DV )
 4: DV ← SelectHighVarianceInstances(DV , scores, threshold)                         ▷ Select instances
 5: for round ← 1 to N do
 6:     if round = 1 then
 7:          parent ← W0
 8:     else
 9:          parent ← SelectParent(results)
10:     end if
11:     context ← LoadContext(parent, experiences)
12:     Wround ,modification← Optimizer(context, O)
13:     for i ← 1 to 5 do
14:          score, cost ← Executor(Wround , E, DV )
15:          results.append(round, score, cost)
16:     end for
17:     avgScore ← CalculateAverageScore(results[round])
18:     experience ← CreateExperience(parent, modif ication, avgScore)
19:     experiences.append(experience)
20:     if avgScore > bestScore then
21:          W ∗ ← Wround
22:          bestScore ← avgScore
23:     end if
24:     if The Top k Workflows remains unchanged in n rounds then                      ▷ Early stopping
          return W ∗
25:     end if
26: end for
27: return W ∗
28: procedure S ELECT PARENT(results)
29:     sorted results ← SortDescending(results, key=lambda r: r.scores)
30:     top k results ← sorted results[: k]
31:     scores ← [result.scores for result in top k results]
32:     probabilities ← CalculateMixedProbabilities(scores)
33:     return SampleFromCategorical(probabilities)
34: end procedure
35: procedure C ALCULATE M IXED P ROBABILITIES(scores)
36:     n ← length(scores), λ ← 0.4, α ← 0.2, smax ← max(scores)
37:     wi ← exp(α · P  (si − smax )) for i ∈ [1, n]
                           n
38:     Pscore ← wi / j=1 wj for i ∈ [1, n]
39:     Punif orm ← 1/n for i ∈ [1, n]
40:     Pmixed ← λ · Punif orm + (1 − λ) · Pscore
41:     return Pmixed
42: end procedure
43: procedure O PTIMIZER(context, Operators)
44:     // LLM as Optimizer, generate new workflow and modification.
45:     return newW orkf low, modif ication
46: end procedure
47: procedure E XECUTOR(W , evaluator, dataset)
48:     // LLM as Executor, execute workflow on dataset and return score and cost
49:     return score, cost
50: end procedure


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


B     C ASE S TUDY

B.1   C ASE S TUDY OF AF LOW

    Alpha Codium like workflow for MBPP


    CODE_GENERATE_PROMPT = """
    Generate a Python function to solve the given problem. Ensure the function name matches
    ,→ the one specified in the problem. Include necessary imports. Use clear variable
    ,→ names and add comments for clarity.

    Problem:
    {problem}

    Function signature:
    {entry_point}

    Generate the complete function below:
    """

    FIX_CODE_PROMPT = """
    The provided solution failed to pass the tests. Please analyze the error and fix the
    ,→ code. Ensure the function name and signature remain unchanged. If necessary, add or
    ,→ modify imports, correct logical errors, and improve the implementation.

    Problem:
    {input}

    Provide the corrected function below:
    """

    GENERATE_TESTS_PROMPT = """
    Given the problem and a potential solution, generate additional test cases to
    ,→ thoroughly evaluate the function. Include edge cases and typical scenarios. Format
    ,→ the test cases as assert statements that can be directly added to a Python test
    ,→ function.

    Problem:
    {input}

    Generate 3-5 additional test cases as assert statements:
    """

    async def __call__(self, problem: str, entry_point: str):
        solutions = []
        for _ in range(3): # Generate 3 solutions
            solution = await self.custom_code_generate(problem=problem,
            ,→ entry_point=entry_point, instruction=prompt_custom.CODE_GENERATE_PROMPT)
            solutions.append(solution['response'])
        best_solution = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=solutions, problem=problem)
        # Generate additional test cases
        additional_tests = await self.custom(input=f"Problem: {problem}\nSolution:
        ,→ {best_solution['response']}", instruction=prompt_custom.GENERATE_TESTS_PROMPT)
        # Combine original problem and additional tests
        enhanced_problem = f"{problem}\n\nAdditional test
        ,→ cases:\n{additional_tests['response']}"
        test_result = await self.test(problem=enhanced_problem,
        ,→ solution=best_solution['response'], entry_point=entry_point)
        if test_result['result']:
            return test_result['solution'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost
        else:
            # If the test fails, try to fix the solution
            fixed_solution = await self.custom(input=f"Problem: {problem}\nFailed solution:
            ,→ {best_solution['response']}\nError: {test_result['solution']}",
            ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.FIX_CODE_PROMPT)
            return fixed_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



AF LOW demonstrates its ability to reduce human effort by evolving from an empty workflow to a
solution highly similar to manually designed workflows like Ridnik et al. (2024) in the code gener-
ation scenario. This showcases AF LOW’s capability to generate efficient workflows comparable to
expert designs with minimal human intervention.



                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   The optimal workflow generated for MATH

   REFINE_ANSWER_PROMPT = """
   Given the mathematical problem and the output from the code execution, please provide a
   ,→ well-formatted and detailed solution. Follow these guidelines:
   1. Begin with a clear statement of the problem.
   2. Explain the approach and any formulas or concepts used.
   3. Show step-by-step calculations, using LaTeX notation for mathematical expressions.
   4. Interpret the code output and incorporate it into your explanation.
   5. Provide a final answer, enclosed in \boxed{} LaTeX notation.
   6. Ensure all mathematical notation is in LaTeX format.
   Your response should be comprehensive, mathematically rigorous, and easy to follow.
   """
   GENERATE_SOLUTION_PROMPT = """
   Please solve the given mathematical problem step by step. Follow these guidelines:
   1. State the problem clearly.
   2. Outline the approach and any relevant formulas or concepts.
   3. Provide detailed calculations, using LaTeX notation for mathematical expressions.
   4. Explain each step of your reasoning.
   5. Present the final answer enclosed in \boxed{} LaTeX notation.
   6. Ensure all mathematical notation is in LaTeX format.
   Your solution should be thorough, mathematically sound, and easy to understand.
   """
   DETAILED_SOLUTION_PROMPT = """
   Provide a comprehensive, step-by-step solution to the given mathematical problem. Your
   ,→ response should include:
   1. A clear restatement of the problem.
   2. An explanation of the mathematical concepts and theorems involved.
   3. A detailed, logical progression of steps leading to the solution.
   4. Clear explanations for each step, including the reasoning behind it.
   5. All mathematical expressions and equations in LaTeX format.
   6. Visual aids or diagrams if applicable (described in text).
   7. A final answer clearly marked and enclosed in \boxed{} LaTeX notation.
   8. A brief explanation of the significance of the result, if relevant.
   Ensure your solution is rigorous, easy to follow, and educational for someone learning
   ,→ the concept.
   """
   async def __call__(self, problem: str):
       """
       Implementation of the graph
       """
       # Use Programmer to generate and execute Python code
       code_solution = await self.programmer(problem=problem)
       # Use Custom to refine and format the answer
       refined_solution = await self.custom(input=problem + f"\nCode output:
       ,→ {code_solution['output']}", instruction=prompt_custom.REFINE_ANSWER_PROMPT)
       # Generate a detailed step-by-step solution using Custom
       detailed_solution = await self.custom(input=problem,
       ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.DETAILED_SOLUTION_PROMPT)
       # Generate multiple solutions using Custom
       solutions = [
           refined_solution['response'],
           detailed_solution['response']
       ]
       for _ in range(2):
           solution = await self.custom(input=problem,
           ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.GENERATE_SOLUTION_PROMPT)
           solutions.append(solution['response'])
       # Use ScEnsemble to select the best solution
       final_solution = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=solutions, problem=problem)
       return final_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



This optimal workflow generated for the MATH task showcases the model’s ability to generate com-
plex, task-specific solutions from task-agnostic initial settings. It combines programmatic solutions
with various reasoning strategies, culminating in an ensemble selection process, and spontaneously
formats the answer into the required form. This adaptation demonstrates the model’s flexibility in
tailoring workflows to different problem domains, while maintaining sophisticated problem-solving
structures.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   The optimal workflow generated for MBPP

   CODE_GENERATE_PROMPT = """
   Generate a Python function to solve the given problem. Ensure the function name matches
   ,→ the one specified in the problem. Include necessary imports. Use clear variable
   ,→ names and add comments for clarity.

   Problem:
   {problem}

   Function signature:
   {entry_point}

   Generate the complete function below:
   """

   FIX_CODE_PROMPT = """
   The provided solution failed to pass the tests. Please analyze the error and fix the
   ,→ code. Ensure the function name and signature remain unchanged. If necessary, add or
   ,→ modify imports, correct logical errors, and improve the implementation.

   Problem:
   {input}

   Provide the corrected function below:
   """

   async def __call__(self, problem: str, entry_point: str):
       """
       Implementation of the workflow
       Custom operator to generate anything you want.
       But when you want to get standard code, you should use custom_code_generate
       ,→ operator.
       """
       solutions = []
       for _ in range(3): # Generate 3 solutions
           solution = await self.custom_code_generate(problem=problem,
           ,→ entry_point=entry_point, instruction=prompt_custom.CODE_GENERATE_PROMPT)
           solutions.append(solution['response'])

       best_solution = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=solutions, problem=problem)

       test_result = await self.test(problem=problem, solution=best_solution['response'],
       ,→ entry_point=entry_point)

       if test_result['result']:
           return test_result['solution'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost
       else:
           # If the test fails, try to fix the solution
           fixed_solution = await self.custom(input=f"Problem: {problem}\nFailed solution:
           ,→ {best_solution['response']}\nError: {test_result['solution']}",
           ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.FIX_CODE_PROMPT)
           return fixed_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



The optimal workflow generated for the MBPP task simply combines operators with an ingenious
FIX-CODE PROMPT, achieving the optimal workflow in the iteration at the fourteenth round. Al-
though this workflow is simple, its score is extremely high and stable, demonstrating AF LOW’s
potential to find the optimal cost-performance balance.

   The optimal workflow generated for HotpotQA

   FORMAT_ANSWER_PROMPT = """
   Given the question and the best answer, format the final answer to be concise,
   ,→ accurate, and directly addressing the question. Ensure the answer is a clear, brief
   ,→ statement without additional explanation or reasoning. If the answer is a name,
   ,→ profession, or short phrase, provide only that information without forming a
   ,→ complete sentence.

   For example:
   - If the answer is a person's name, just provide the name.
   - If the answer is a profession, state only the profession.
   - If the answer is a short phrase, give only that phrase.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Do not include any prefixes like "The answer is" or "The profession is". Just provide
   ,→ the answer itself.
   """

   async def __call__(self, problem: str):
       """
       Implementation of the workflow
       """
       solutions = []
       for _ in range(3):
           initial_response = await self.answer_generate(input=problem)
           thought_process = initial_response['thought']
           initial_answer = initial_response['answer']
           solutions.append(initial_answer)

       ensemble_result = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=solutions)
       best_answer = ensemble_result['response']

       refined_solution = await self.custom(
           input=f"Question: {problem}\nBest answer: {best_answer}",
           instruction=prompt_custom.FORMAT_ANSWER_PROMPT
       )

       return refined_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



The optimal workflow generated for the HotpotQA task demonstrates the effectiveness of execution
feedback. Apart from logical reasoning, another factor affecting QA problem scores is effective
formatting. AF LOW can effectively identify the correct format and automatically perform formatting
through learning from execution feedback, showcasing the efficacy of this design.

   An ensemble structure that emerged in the GSM8K ablation experiment

   SOLVE_APPROACH1_PROMPT = """
   Solve the given math problem step by step using a standard algebraic approach. After
   ,→ solving, extract the final numerical answer and format it as follows:

   Final Answer: [Insert the numerical value here]

   Ensure that only the numerical value is provided after "Final Answer:", without any
   ,→ units or additional text.

   Problem:
   """

   SOLVE_APPROACH2_PROMPT = """
   Solve the given math problem step by step using a visual or diagrammatic approach, if
   ,→ applicable. If not applicable, use an alternative method different from the
   ,→ standard algebraic approach. After solving, extract the final numerical answer and
   ,→ format it as follows:

   Final Answer: [Insert the numerical value here]

   Ensure that only the numerical value is provided after "Final Answer:", without any
   ,→ units or additional text.

   Problem:
   """

   SOLVE_APPROACH3_PROMPT = """
   Solve the given math problem step by step using estimation or approximation techniques,
   ,→ then refine the answer for accuracy. After solving, extract the final numerical
   ,→ answer and format it as follows:

   Final Answer: [Insert the numerical value here]

   Ensure that only the numerical value is provided after "Final Answer:", without any
   ,→ units or additional text.

   Problem:
   """

   COMPARE_AND_SELECT_PROMPT = """


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   Compare the three solutions provided for the given math problem. Analyze each solution
   ,→ for correctness, completeness, and consistency with the problem statement. Select
   ,→ the most accurate and reliable solution, or if all solutions agree, confirm their
   ,→ consistency.

   If the solutions differ, explain the differences and justify your selection of the most
   ,→ accurate answer. If all solutions agree, state this consistency.

   Provide the final answer in the following format:

   Final Answer: [Insert the numerical value here]

   Ensure that only the numerical value is provided after "Final Answer:", without any
   ,→ units or additional text.

   Problem:
   """

   async def __call__(self, problem: str):
       """
       Implementation of the workflow
       """
       solution1 = await self.custom(input=problem,
       ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.SOLVE_APPROACH1_PROMPT)
       solution2 = await self.custom(input=problem,
       ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.SOLVE_APPROACH2_PROMPT)
       solution3 = await self.custom(input=problem,
       ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.SOLVE_APPROACH3_PROMPT)
       combined_solutions = f"Solution 1: {solution1['response']}\nSolution 2:
       ,→ {solution2['response']}\nSolution 3: {solution3['response']}"
       final_solution = await self.custom(input=problem + "\n" + combined_solutions,
       ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.COMPARE_AND_SELECT_PROMPT)
       return final_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost



In the ablation study, where predefined operators were deliberately removed, AF LOW surpris-
ingly developed this simplified yet effective workflow. Most notably, it independently evolved an
ensemble-like operator, mirroring a key aspect of the optimal workflow. This emergence of a multi-
solution generation and selection process, despite reduced guidance, highlights AF LOW’s inherent
tendency towards robust problem-solving strategies. The spontaneous development of this ensem-
ble approach in a constrained environment underscores AF LOW’s ability to identify and implement
effective techniques, even when operating with limited resources or instructions. This unexpected
convergence between the ablated and optimal workflows further demonstrates AF LOW’s capacity
for developing sophisticated, human-like problem-solving paradigms across different experimental
conditions.

B.2   C ASE S TUDY OF ADAS

   Iterative Knowledge-Enhanced Refinement workflow for HotpotQA


   async def forward(self, taskInfo):
       import asyncio

       # Step 1: Initial reasoning by diverse expert agents
       initial_instruction = 'Please think step by step and solve the task based on your
       ,→ expertise.'
       expert_agents = [
           LLMAgentBase(['thinking', 'answer'], 'Expert Agent', role=role,
           ,→ temperature=0.7)
           for role in ['Reading Specialist', 'Logic Specialist', 'Generalist']
       ]

       async def run_expert(agent):
           return await agent([taskInfo], initial_instruction)

       initial_results = await asyncio.gather(*[run_expert(agent) for agent in
       ,→ expert_agents])

       combined_infos = [taskInfo] + [info for result in initial_results for info in
       ,→ result] # Flattening initial_results


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


        # Step 2: Iterative refinement with external knowledge integration
        max_iterations = 2
        for iteration in range(max_iterations):
            # Retrieve external knowledge
            knowledge_retrieval_instruction = 'Retrieve relevant information from a
            ,→ knowledge base that can assist in refining the solution.'
            knowledge_retrieval_agent = LLMAgentBase(['retrieved_info'], 'Knowledge
            ,→ Retrieval Agent')
            retrieved_results = await knowledge_retrieval_agent(combined_infos,
            ,→ knowledge_retrieval_instruction)
            retrieved_info = retrieved_results[0]

            # Verify external knowledge
            verification_instruction = 'Verify the relevancy and accuracy of the retrieved
            ,→ information.'
            verification_agent = LLMAgentBase(['verified_info'], 'Verification Agent')
            verified_results = await verification_agent([taskInfo, retrieved_info],
            ,→ verification_instruction)
            verified_info = verified_results[0]

            # Refinement phase using verified knowledge
            refinement_instruction = 'Review and refine the insights provided by other
            ,→ agents using the verified external knowledge.'
            refinement_agents = [
                LLMAgentBase(['refined_thinking', 'refined_answer'], 'Refinement Agent',
                ,→ role=role, temperature=0.5)
                for role in ['Reading Specialist', 'Logic Specialist', 'Generalist']
            ]
            combined_infos_with_verification = combined_infos + [verified_info]

            async def run_refinement(agent):
                return await agent(combined_infos_with_verification,
                ,→ refinement_instruction)

            refinement_results = await asyncio.gather(*[run_refinement(agent) for agent in
            ,→ refinement_agents])
            combined_infos.extend([info for result in refinement_results for info in
            ,→ result]) # Flattening refinement_results

        # Step 3: Final synthesis agent integrates all refined insights
        final_decision_instruction = 'Synthesize all refined insights and provide a final
        ,→ answer.'
        final_decision_agent = LLMAgentBase(['thinking', 'answer'], 'Final Decision Agent',
        ,→ temperature=0.3)
        final_thinking, final_answer = await final_decision_agent(combined_infos,
        ,→ final_decision_instruction)

        return final_answer}



When designing workflows, ADAS incorporates all workflows from the search history into the
prompt, distinguishing them only by their generation order and scores. However, the complex infor-
mation embedded in the intricate structure of workflows, coupled with the accumulation of search
iterations, the vast amount of information, and the continuously accumulating irrelevant information,
poses significant challenges for LLM reasoning. ADAS stores experience from previous searches at
the coarsest granularity—directly storing all complete workflows. This approach causes the LLM
designing workflows in ADAS to behave more like an explorer of infinite possibilities within E
rather than a designer seeking the optimal workflow.
As shown in the code in Appendix B.2, the optimal workflow discovered by ADAS assigns diverse
roles and multiple steps for refinement and summarization. However, for multi-hop reasoning tasks,
the correct approach is to continuously reduce the problem scale to single-hop reasoning. Contrary
to this, ADAS’s optimal workflow actually increases the problem scale, ultimately attempting to
use the LLM’s summarization ability to synthesize information, rather than gradually reducing the
number of hops based on the characteristics of multi-hop reasoning scenarios.


C    O PTIMIZATION P ROCESS OF AF LOW

Taking AF LOW’s search process on the Math dataset as an example, we demonstrate how AF LOW
iteratively improves workflows based on tree-structured experience and execution feedback.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.1    T REE -S TRUCTURED E XPERIENCE .

   Processed Experience (formatted as tree sturcture)


   {
        "1": {
            "score": 0.4873949579831933,
            "success": {
                "2": {
                    "modification": "Add the Programmer operator to generate and execute
                    ,→ Python code for mathematical calculations, and use the Custom
                    ,→ operator to refine and format the final answer.",
                    "score": 0.5243697478991597
                }
            },
            "failure": {
                "8": {
                    "modification": "Add a ScEnsemble operator to generate multiple
                    ,→ solutions and select the best one. This will help improve the
                    ,→ accuracy of the final answer.",
                    "score": 0.4336134453781512
                }
            }
        },
        "2": {
            "score": 0.5243697478991597,
            "success": {
                "3": {
                    "modification": "Add a ScEnsemble operator to improve the reliability
                    ,→ of the final answer by generating multiple solutions and selecting
                    ,→ the most consistent one.",
                    "score": 0.5277310924369747
                }
            },
            "failure": {
                "6": {
                    "modification": "Add a ScEnsemble operator to improve the reliability
                    ,→ of the final answer by generating multiple solutions and selecting
                    ,→ the most consistent one.",
                    "score": 0.4722689075630252
                },
                "7": {
                    "modification": "Add a ScEnsemble operator to improve the reliability
                    ,→ of the final answer by generating multiple solutions and selecting
                    ,→ the most consistent one.",
                    "score": 0.5243697478991597
                }
            }
        },
        "3": {
            "score": 0.5277310924369748,
            "success": {
                "14": {
                    "modification": "Modify the Custom operator to generate a more detailed
                    ,→ step-by-step solution, and add a new Custom operator to review and
                    ,→ refine the final answer. This will improve the clarity, accuracy,
                    ,→ and completeness of the solution process.",
                    "score": 0.5310924369747899
                },
                "5": {
                    "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a detailed
                    ,→ step-by-step solution, and modify the ScEnsemble operator to
                    ,→ compare and select the best solution from multiple approaches.",
                    "score": 0.5512605042016807
                },
                "9": {
                    "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a detailed
                    ,→ step-by-step solution, and modify the ScEnsemble operator to
                    ,→ compare and select the best solution from multiple approaches.",
                    "score": 0.5378151260504201
                }
            },
            "failure": {
                "10": {
                    "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a step-by-step
                    ,→ solution, and modify the ScEnsemble operator to compare and select
                    ,→ the best solution from multiple approaches.",


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   "score": 0.5042016806722688
               },
               "13": {
                   "modification": "Modify the Custom operator to generate a more detailed
                   ,→ step-by-step solution, and add a new Custom operator to refine and
                   ,→ format the final answer. This will improve the clarity and accuracy
                   ,→ of the solution process.",
                   "score": 0.5193277310924369
               },
               "4": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate multiple
                   ,→ solutions using different approaches, then use ScEnsemble to select
                   ,→ the best solution. This will increase the diversity of solutions
                   ,→ and potentially improve accuracy.",
                   "score": 0.0
               }
           }
       },
       "9": {
           "score": 0.5378151260504203,
           "success": {},
           "failure": {
               "11": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a detailed
                   ,→ step-by-step solution with explanations, and incorporate it into
                   ,→ the ensemble process. This will provide a more comprehensive
                   ,→ approach to solving math problems.",
                   "score": 0.5159663865546219
               },
               "12": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate multiple
                   ,→ solution approaches, then use ScEnsemble to select the best
                   ,→ solution. This will increase the diversity of solutions and
                   ,→ potentially improve accuracy.",
                   "score": 0.0
               },
               "16": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate multiple
                   ,→ solution approaches, then use ScEnsemble to select the best
                   ,→ solution. This will increase the diversity of solutions and
                   ,→ potentially improve accuracy.",
                   "score": 0.5210084033613446
               }
           }
       },
       "14": {
           "score": 0.5310924369747899,
           "success": {},
           "failure": {
               "15": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate multiple
                   ,→ solutions, then use ScEnsemble to select the best one. This
                   ,→ modification aims to improve the accuracy and consistency of the
                   ,→ final answer.",
                   "score": 0.5243697478991596
               },
               "18": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a more detailed
                   ,→ step-by-step solution, and modify the ScEnsemble operator to
                   ,→ compare and select the best solution from multiple generated
                   ,→ solutions.",
                   "score": 0.5176470588235293
               }
           }
       },
       "5": {
           "score": 0.5512605042016807,
           "success": {},
           "failure": {
               "17": {
                   "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate multiple
                   ,→ solutions using different approaches, and modify the ScEnsemble
                   ,→ operator to select the best solution from a larger pool of
                   ,→ candidates.",
                   "score": 0.0
               },
               "19": {


                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                    "modification": "Add a new Custom operator to generate a simplified
                    ,→ solution, which will be used alongside the existing detailed
                    ,→ solution to provide a more comprehensive answer. This simplified
                    ,→ solution will be added to the list of solutions for the ScEnsemble
                    ,→ operator to consider.",
                    "score": 0.5445378151260505
                }
            }
        }
   }



More optimization trajectories will be made available in an open-source repository upon publication.
Less Effective Optimization Steps:

  • Round 1 → Round 8 (Score decreased from 0.4873 to 0.4336): The key change was the removal
    of the Programmer operator, relying solely on Custom + ScEnsemble, which lost the compu-
    tational precision provided by programmatic solutions, demonstrating that removing concrete
    computational capabilities significantly hurts performance.
  • Round 9 → Round 16 (Score decreased from 0.5378 to 0.5210): The key change involved
    simplifying the solution generation process without maintaining the review step, which resulted
    in the loss of the quality control aspect of solution refinement, showing that solution quality
    checks are important for maintaining performance.

Successful Optimization Steps:

  • Round 1 → Round 2 (Score improved from 0.4874 to 0.5244): The addition of the Programmer
    operator to generate executable Python code and the use of the Custom operator to refine re-
    sults introduced concrete computational capabilities alongside human-like reasoning, creating
    a more robust solution approach and providing a foundation for both numerical accuracy and
    explanation quality.
  • Round 2 → Round 3 (Score improved from 0.5244 to 0.5277): The introduction of the
    ScEnsemble operator to select from multiple solutions added solution diversity and reliabil-
    ity through ensemble selection, creating a more robust system by considering multiple solution
    approaches.
  • Round 3 → Round 5 (Score improved from 0.52773 to 0.5513): The key change was the ad-
    dition of detailed step-by-step solution generation, which enhanced solution clarity and com-
    prehensiveness, ultimately improving the pedagogical value of solutions while maintaining
    accuracy.

The tree-structured optimization process helped guide LLM workflow improvements in sev-
eral ways:

  • Path Discovery: The tree structure allowed exploration of multiple optimization directions
    simultaneously, enabling the development of successful paths while pruning less successful
    branches, which facilitated the efficient discovery of effective combinations of operators.
  • Incremental Improvement: Each node in the tree represents a specific workflow configura-
    tion, and the success/failure feedback at each step helped identify which modifications were
    beneficial, with the scoring system providing quantitative guidance for optimization decisions.
  • Pattern Recognition: The tree structure made it easier to identify patterns in successful versus
    unsuccessful modifications, revealing common elements in high-scoring branches, such as the
    combination of Programmer + Custom + ScEnsemble, which informed future optimization
    decisions.
  • Error Recovery: When a modification led to decreased performance, the tree structure facil-
    itated easy backtracking, allowing exploration of alternative optimization paths from previous
    successful states and preventing the process from getting stuck in local optima.


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


C.2   E XECUTION FEEDBACK .

In the process of optimizing the overall response generation, we implemented a concise and task-
agnostic prompt: “Below are the logs of some results with the aforementioned Graph that per-
formed well but encountered errors, which can be used as references for optimization: {log}”. This
approach enabled execution feedback to assist LLM in workflow optimization. The following ex-
amples demonstrate how adjustments to the prompts enhanced the quality, consistency, and clarity
of the answers, with particular emphasis on answer formatting as a key illustration.
Optimization Steps:

  • Round 1 → Round 2: REFINE ANSWER PROMPT adds “Provide a final answer, enclosed in
    \boxed{} LaTeX notation”, resulting in the ability to identify patterns in the scoring feedback
    without knowing the specific rules of the scoring function.
  • Round 1 → Round 8: While REFINE ANSWER PROMPT adds “Provide a clear, concise
    final answer” to shift focus towards presenting answers more concisely, Round 8 lacks the
    strict LaTeX formatting constraints present in Round 2. This leads to Round 8 scoring lower
    than the baseline Round 1. However, the emphasis on concise answers also appears in the
    high-scoring Round 19, indicating that this remains a valid optimization direction.
  • Round 3 → Round 13: REFINE ANSWER PROMPT introduces two new requirements:
    “If there are multiple possible answers, list all of them separated by commas within the
    \boxed{}” and “Simplify expressions where possible without losing accuracy”. While the
    former aims to standardize the format for multiple solutions, including this as a general instruc-
    tion may interfere with the solution process. Statistical analysis shows that Round 13 contains
    55 instances of comma-separated answers, notably higher than better-performing rounds such
    as Round 5 (43 instances) and Round 9 (42 instances).


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


D    PARETO F RONT: D ETAILED C OST-P ERFORMANCE DATA
Detailed cost-performance data for HumanEval. Executing AF LOW (GPT-4o-mini) with deepseek
achieves parity with GPT-4o IO at 4.55% of the cost. Executing AF LOW (deepseek) with deepseek
and AFlow(GPT-4o-mini) with GPT-4o-mini outperform GPT-4o IO at 5.92% and 8.05% of the
cost, respectively.

     Model                    Method                             Score (%)               Cost ($)
   gpt-4o-mini                IO                                  0.8702                 0.0223
   gpt-4o-mini                CoT                                 0.8860                 0.0277
   gpt-4o-mini                CoT SC                              0.9160                 0.1794
   gpt-4o-mini                MedPrompt                           0.9160                 0.2200
   gpt-4o-mini                LLM Debate                          0.8930                 0.2278
   gpt-4o-mini                Self Refine                         0.8780                 0.1232
   gpt-4o-mini                AF LOW (gpt-4o-mini)                0.9470                 0.0513
   gpt-4o-mini                AF LOW (deepseek)                   0.9084                 0.0669
    deepseek                  IO                                  0.8860                 0.0127
    deepseek                  CoT                                 0.8930                 0.0180
    deepseek                  CoT SC                              0.8860                 0.1168
    deepseek                  MedPrompt                           0.8860                 0.1433
    deepseek                  LLM Debate                          0.8930                 0.1484
    deepseek                  Self Refine                         0.9000                 0.0802
    deepseek                  AF LOW (gpt-4o-mini)                0.9390                 0.0291
    deepseek                  AF LOW (deepseek)                   0.9466                 0.0377
     gpt-4o                   IO                                  0.9389                 0.6371
     gpt-4o                   CoT                                 0.9310                 0.7772
     gpt-4o                   CoT SC                              0.9470                 5.0345
     gpt-4o                   MedPrompt                           0.9390                 6.1756
     gpt-4o                   LLM Debate                          0.9470                 6.3952
     gpt-4o                   Self Refine                         0.9160                 3.4589
     gpt-4o                   AF LOW (gpt-4o-mini)                0.9620                 1.0111
     gpt-4o                   AF LOW (deepseek)                   0.9542                 1.6600
claude-3.5-sonnet             IO                                  0.9084                 0.6987
claude-3.5-sonnet             CoT                                 0.9240                 0.6412
claude-3.5-sonnet             CoT SC                              0.9390                 4.1534
claude-3.5-sonnet             MedPrompt                           0.9160                 5.0949
claude-3.5-sonnet             LLM Debate                          0.9080                 5.2761
claude-3.5-sonnet             Self Refine                         0.8930                 2.8536
claude-3.5-sonnet             AF LOW (gpt-4o-mini)                0.9540                 1.1612
claude-3.5-sonnet             AF LOW (deepseek)                   0.9466                 1.3252


E   D ISCUSSION ON W ORKFLOW, AGENTIC W ORKFLOW, M ULTI AGENT
    S YSTEMS
In the field of LLM applications, concepts such as Workflow, Agentic Workflow, and MultiAgent
Systems are frequently referenced, each with distinct emphases. The notion of Workflow in (Qiao
et al., 2025) primarily focuses on the structured decomposition of real-world tasks, such as gen-
erating execution sequences for specific tasks in digital environments. (Qiao et al., 2025) work
represents a significant advancement in workflow benchmarking through its comprehensive multi-
faceted approach spanning function calls, problem-solving, embodied planning, and open-grounded
planning scenarios.


                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Despite terminological differences, the multi-agent systems described in Zhang et al. (2024a;b);
Zhuge et al. (2024) are functionally equivalent to agentic workflows. Both consist of a series of
LLM-invoking nodes that lack autonomous capability and execute in a predetermined logical se-
quence. Though the terminology varies, these approaches essentially describe identical technical
architectures.
Meanwhile, Niu et al. (2025) explores methods for dynamically adjusting workflows during task
execution, enhancing the system’s ability to address complex problems by modifying workflows in
real-time based on execution feedback.
AF LOW proposed in this paper focuses on the automated generation and optimization of workflows,
aiming to reduce dependence on manually designed initial workflows while improving the scala-
bility and generalizability of agentic workflows. This approach complements existing research and
collectively advances the field of LLM applications.

F     D ISCUSSION O N O PEN - ENDED TASKS
F.1    A DAPTING AF LOW FOR O PEN - ENDED TASKS

While we emphasized AF LOW’s powerful capabilities in solving reasoning tasks with numerical
feedback in the main body, there are many tasks in the real world without numerical feedback and
non-reasoning requirements (Dai et al., 2024). These scenarios lack numerical feedback because for
open-ended tasks, performance is typically evaluated by humans who propose the tasks, making it
difficult to evaluate using fixed and quantitative criteria. By introducing LLM as a judge (Zheng
et al., 2023), this challenge can be addressed to some extent, as the LLM-as-judge evaluation prompt
can effectively incorporate human preferences to adaptively evaluate open-ended tasks. In this sec-
tion, we discuss how to leverage LLM as a judge while maintaining AF LOW’s core architecture to
search for agentic workflows for these types of tasks.
To extend AF LOW’s capabilities to open-ended tasks, we modified the original workflow optimize
prompt by removing reasoning-specific instructions. The new prompt is as follows:
      Workflow optimize prompt for open-ended tasks


      PROMPT = """You are constructing a graph and corresponding prompts to jointly solve
      ,→ {type} problems. Referring to the provided graph and prompts, which form a basic
      ,→ example of a {type} solution approach, please reconstruct and optimize them. You
      ,→ may add, modify, or delete nodes, parameters, or prompts. Include your single
      ,→ modification enclosed in XML tags in your reply. Ensure they are complete and
      ,→ correct to avoid runtime failures.Use logical and control flow (such as IF-ELSE
      ,→ and loops) to achieve more advanced code representation.Ensure all prompts
      ,→ required by the current graph are included in `prompt_custom`. Do not include any
      ,→ additional prompts. The prompts you need to generate are limited to those used in
      ,→ `prompt_custom.XXX`. Other methods already have built-in prompts and are
      ,→ prohibited from being generated. Generate only the prompts needed by the graph and
      ,→ remove any unused prompts from `prompt_custom`.The generated prompts must not
      ,→ contain any placeholders. Considering information loss, complex graphs may yield
      ,→ better results, but insufficient information transmission might omit the solution.
      ,→ Ensure that the necessary context is included throughout the process.
      """



For tasks without numerical feedback, we propose a evaluation prompt based on LLM as a Judge.
We utilize GPT-4o as our evaluation model, implementing the following prompt for scoring open-
ended tasks:
      Evaluation prompt


      EVAL_PROMPT = """You are an expert evaluator tasked with scoring responses to
      ,→ open-ended questions. You will be provided with:
      1. The original question/prompt
      2. A golden (reference) answer (if available)


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


      3. A candidate response to be evaluated

      Please evaluate the candidate response on the following dimensions, each scored from
      ,→ 1-5. When no reference answer is provided, use your expert judgment to assess the
      ,→ expected quality level for the given task type:

      1. Content Relevance (1-5):
      - 5: Perfectly addresses all aspects of the prompt
      - 4: Addresses most key aspects with minor omissions
      - 3: Addresses main points but misses some important elements
      - 2: Only partially relevant to the prompt
      - 1: Largely irrelevant or off-topic

      2. Content Quality (1-5):
      - 5: Exceptional depth, insight, and originality
      - 4: Strong analysis/creativity with good supporting details
      - 3: Adequate development with some supporting elements
      - 2: Superficial treatment with minimal development
      - 1: Poor quality with major flaws in reasoning/execution

      3. Coherence and Structure (1-5):
      - 5: Excellent organization with seamless flow
      - 4: Clear structure with minor transition issues
      - 3: Generally organized but some awkward transitions
      - 2: Poorly organized with frequent disconnects
      - 1: Chaotic or illogical structure

      4. Reference Comparison (1-5):
      - 5: Matches or exceeds expected quality for this type of task
      - 4: Slightly below ideal but strong performance
      - 3: Moderately below ideal but acceptable
      - 2: Significantly below expected quality
      - 1: Far below acceptable quality standards

      Please provide:
      1. Numeric scores for each dimension (1-5)
      2. Brief justification for each score (1-2 sentences)
      3. Total score (sum of the four dimensions, maximum 20 points)
      4. Summary feedback (2-3 sentences)

      Format your response as:
      Content Relevance: [score] points
      - Justification: [brief explanation]

      Content Quality: [score] points
      - Justification: [brief explanation]

      Coherence: [score] points
      - Justification: [brief explanation]

      Reference Comparison: [score] points
      - Justification: [brief explanation]

      Summary Feedback:
      [2-3 sentences highlighting key strengths and areas for improvement]

      <score>[sum of all dimensions](pure number)</score>

      """



This evaluation framework replaces the original evaluation function in AF LOW’s executing evalu-
ation stage, enabling assessment of open-ended tasks while maintaining consistent evaluation stan-
dards.

F.2    C ASE S TUDY

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our adapted AF LOW through two open-ended task scenarios:
long-form novel generation and academic idea generation. Both cases lack numerical feedback and
utilize our adapted methodology. To evaluate AF LOW’s performance on these tasks, we first hired
three human annotators at $10/hour to score and rank the results generated during AF LOW’s iteration
process. Additionally, we compared results generated directly by LLM with those generated by
AF LOW to observe the differences. Due to space limitations, we provide the complete results of the
two task generations in the supplementary materials.


                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


F.2.1   L ONG - FORM N OVEL G ENERATION
In this case study, we employed Claude-3.5-sonnet as the execution and optimization model and
GPT-4o as the evaluation model due to its strong language capabilities. The system was tested with
a single question without reference answers:

    Novel data

    {
    "question":"Create a novel-length narrative, exactly 20,000 words long (please ensure
    ,→ this specific length is met), exploring a world where time's flow varies for each
    ,→ person based on their deepest regrets. The story should meticulously examine how
    ,→ emotional burdens affect temporal perception, with careful attention to
    ,→ maintaining the required length. Focus on developing several characters whose
    ,→ unique regrets create distinctly different experiences of time's passage.",
    "requirement":"Write a long novel with emphasis on substantial length, logical
    ,→ interconnections between chapters, and refined language style.",
    "answer": "No reference answer"
    }



The optimized workflow obtained after eight iterations of AF LOW was:

    Novel generation workflow


    OUTLINE_PROMPT = """
    Create a detailed outline for a novel based on the given requirements. Include:
    1. A list of main characters with their deepest regrets and how it affects their
    ,→ perception of time
    2. A chapter-by-chapter breakdown of the plot, ensuring logical interconnections
    3. Key themes and motifs to be explored throughout the novel
    4. A rough word count estimate for each chapter to aim for the required total length

    Provide this outline in a structured format.
    """

    CHARACTER_PROFILE_PROMPT = """
    Based on the given requirements and outline, create detailed character profiles for
    ,→ each main character. For each character, include:
    1. Name, age, and physical description
    2. Background and personal history
    3. Their deepest regret and how it affects their perception of time
    4. Personality traits, motivations, and goals
    5. Relationships with other characters
    6. Character arc throughout the novel

    Provide these profiles in a structured format.
    """

    CHAPTER_PROMPT = """
    Write a single chapter of the novel based on the given requirements, provided outline,
    ,→ and character profiles. Follow these guidelines:
    1. Adhere to the chapter structure from the outline
    2. Maintain logical interconnections with previous and future chapters
    3. Use refined language and vivid descriptions
    4. Develop characters' arcs based on their regrets and time perception
    5. Incorporate the key themes and motifs
    6. Aim for approximately 10,000 words per chapter

    Write the complete chapter without stopping or summarizing. Do not include any
    ,→ meta-commentary or explanations outside the chapter text itself.
    """

        async def __call__(self, problem: str):
            """
            Implementation of the workflow
            """
            outline = await self.custom(input=problem,
            ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.OUTLINE_PROMPT)
            character_profiles = await self.custom(input=problem + f"\nOutline:
            ,→ {outline['response']}",
            ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.CHARACTER_PROFILE_PROMPT)


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            novel = ""
            chapter_count = 10 # Adjust as needed
            for i in range(chapter_count):
                chapter = await self.custom(
                    input=problem + f"\nOutline: {outline['response']}\nCharacter
                    ,→ Profiles: {character_profiles['response']}\nChapter Number:
                    ,→ {i+1}",
                    instruction=prompt_custom.CHAPTER_PROMPT
                )
                novel += f"\n\nChapter {i+1}\n\n{chapter['response']}"

            return novel, self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost


For comparison, below is the baseline response generated using only the Claude-3.5-sonnet, without
any AF LOW optimization:

    LLM-Generated Novel


    I apologize, but I'm not able to generate a novel-length narrative of exactly 20,000
    ,→ words in this format. Writing a full novel of that specific length would be an
    ,→ extremely lengthy and complex task that goes well beyond the scope of what I can
    ,→ produce in a single response.

    Additionally, maintaining an exact word count while crafting a cohesive narrative with
    ,→ developed characters and themes would be extremely challenging, even for human
    ,→ authors. Novels typically go through many drafts and revisions to reach their
    ,→ final form.

    However, I can offer some suggestions for approaching this interesting concept:

    1. Start by outlining the key characters and their deepest regrets. Consider how each
    ,→ regret might impact their perception of time.

    2. Develop a basic plot structure that allows you to explore how these different
    ,→ temporal experiences intersect and affect each other.

    3. Consider the worldbuilding aspects - how does society function when everyone
    ,→ experiences time differently? What are the implications for relationships, work,
    ,→ etc?

    4. Begin writing scenes or chapters to explore these ideas, without worrying about
    ,→ exact word count initially.

    5. As you write, keep track of word count and adjust pacing/detail as needed to work
    ,→ towards your target length.

    6. Plan for multiple drafts and revisions to refine the story and adjust length.

    If you'd like, I could help brainstorm more specific ideas for characters or plot
    ,→ points within this concept. But for a full novel-length work, especially one with
    ,→ such precise length requirements, you'll likely need to undertake the writing
    ,→ process yourself over an extended period of time.


Here is the simplified response generated using the AF LOW-optimized workflow:

    AFlow-Generated Novel


    # Chapter 1: The Ticking of Regret

    Emma Sinclair's fingers hovered over the keyboard, the cursor blinking accusingly on
    ,→ the blank document before her. The rhythmic ticking of the wall clock seemed to
    ,→ grow louder with each passing second, a constant reminder of the impending
    ,→ deadline looming over her. She glanced at the time display on her computer screen
    ,→ 2:37 PM. How was it possible that only three minutes had passed since she last
    ,→ checked?
    ...


                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   # Chapter 2: The Scientific Discovery

   Dr. Evelyn Harper stood at the podium, her silver hair gleaming under the harsh
   ,→ auditorium lights. Her piercing blue eyes scanned the crowd of scientists,
   ,→ doctors, and journalists who had gathered for her groundbreaking presentation. She
   ,→ took a deep breath, feeling the weight of decades of research pressing down on her
   ,→ shoulders.
   ...
   ...

   # Chapter 10: A New Understanding of Time

   The grand auditorium of the National Science Center buzzed with anticipation.
   ,→ Journalists, scientists, and curious members of the public filled every seat,
   ,→ their excited whispers creating a low hum that reverberated through the space. At
   ,→ the center of it all, Dr. Evelyn Harper stood behind the podium, her silver hair
   ,→ gleaming under the bright lights. She took a deep breath, her fingers lightly
   ,→ tracing the edges of her notes.
   ...
   Dr. Harper cleared her throat, and the room fell silent. "Ladies and gentlemen,
   ,→ colleagues, and esteemed guests," she began, her voice clear and steady. "Today, I
   ,→ stand before you to present the culmination of years of research into what we once
   ,→ thought was immutable: the nature of time itself."
   ...

   The sun shone brightly overhead, its warmth a reminder of the present moment. And in
   ,→ that moment, as they moved forward together, time flowed perfectly, neither too
   ,→ fast nor too slow. It simply was, and they were fully, completely present within
   ,→ it. The future beckoned, full of promise and possibility, and they stepped towards
   ,→ it with open hearts and minds, ready for whatever adventures time might bring.


The optimized workflow (obtained after eight iterations) produced a 27,000-word novel, demon-
strating significant improvements in both quality and efficiency compared to baseline responses.
The cost and performance metrics across iterations show that AF LOW can achieve high-quality
long-form content generation with minimal resource expenditure.

Round   Avg LLM Score      Avg Human Score     LLM Score Rank     Human Score Rank      Cost ($)
  1          12                   2                  8                   8               0.005
  2          16                 10.3                 6                   7               0.291
  3          18                  15                  2                   2               0.323
  4          17                  13                  3                   4               0.360
  5          16                 12.3                 6                   5               0.370
  6          17                 12.3                 3                   5               0.365
  7          17                  15                  3                   2               0.336
  8          20                 19.3                 1                   1               0.863
Table A1: Novel generation Workflow Performance Comparison between LLM and Human Scores
Across Different Rounds, with Rankings and Total Costs per Iteration

F.2.2   ACADEMIC I DEA G ENERATION

For this case study, we specifically chose GPT-4o-mini as the execution model and Claude-3.5-
sonnet as the optimization model and GPT-4o as the evaluation model to better demonstrate
AF LOW’s optimization capabilities. While the system was tested with 10 different questions, we
present one representative example here:

   Idea data

   {
   "question":"Given the current research landscape in Environmental Anthropology,
   ,→ propose a novel research idea through logical analysis",


                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


   "requirement": "Through rigorous analysis, propose a single research idea that
   ,→ addresses significant challenges, demonstrates feasibility with current
   ,→ technology. NOTE: Only ONE concrete idea should be provided - focus on developing
   ,→ a single, well-reasoned proposal rather than multiple options.",
   "answer": "No reference answer"
   }


The optimized workflow obtained after six iterations of AF LOW was:

   Idea generation workflow

   GENERATE_IDEA = """
   Given the current research landscape in the specified field, propose a novel and
   ,→ feasible research idea through logical analysis. Focus on developing a single,
   ,→ well-reasoned proposal that addresses significant challenges and demonstrates
   ,→ feasibility with current technology.

   Your response should be concise, providing only the title and a brief description of
   ,→ the research idea in no more than 3 sentences.
   """

   PRIORITIZE_IDEA = """
   Analyze the given research ideas and prioritize the most promising one based on its
   ,→ potential impact and feasibility. Consider the following criteria:

   1. Novelty and originality
   2. Potential impact on the field
   3. Feasibility with current technology
   4. Alignment with current research trends

   Provide a brief explanation (2-3 sentences) for your selection, highlighting its
   ,→ strengths in relation to the above criteria.
   """

   ELABORATE_IDEA = """
   Elaborate on the prioritized research idea. Provide a comprehensive analysis
   ,→ including:

   1. Research objective
   2. Methodology
   3. Expected outcomes
   4. Potential challenges

   Ensure your response is well-structured, logically sound, and demonstrates the
   ,→ feasibility of the proposed research with current technology.
   """

   EVALUATE_RESEARCH = """
   Evaluate the elaborated research proposal. Consider the following aspects:

   1. Novelty and originality
   2. Feasibility with current technology
   3. Potential impact on the field
   4. Clarity and coherence of the proposal

   Provide a concise evaluation highlighting strengths and areas for improvement.
   """

   REFINE_PROPOSAL = """
   Based on the elaborated idea and its evaluation, refine the research proposal. Address
   ,→ any weaknesses identified in the evaluation and enhance the proposal's strengths.
   ,→ Ensure that the refined proposal:

   1. Clearly states the research objective
   2. Outlines a feasible methodology
   3. Describes expected outcomes and their significance
   4. Addresses potential challenges and mitigation strategies

   Present the refined proposal in a well-structured format suitable for academic
   ,→ submission.
   """

       async def __call__(self, problem: str):
           """


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Implementation of the workflow
             """
             ideas = []
             for _ in range(3): # Generate 3 ideas
                 idea = await self.custom(input=problem,
                 ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.GENERATE_IDEA)
                 ideas.append(idea['response'])

             best_idea = await self.sc_ensemble(solutions=ideas, problem=problem)

             prioritized_idea = await self.custom(input=f"Ideas: {ideas}\nBest idea:
             ,→ {best_idea['response']}", instruction=prompt_custom.PRIORITIZE_IDEA)

             elaborated_idea = await self.custom(input=problem + f"\nPrioritized idea:
             ,→ {prioritized_idea['response']}", instruction=prompt_custom.ELABORATE_IDEA)

             evaluation = await self.custom(input=elaborated_idea['response'],
             ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.EVALUATE_RESEARCH)

             final_solution = await self.custom(input=elaborated_idea['response'] +
             ,→ f"\nEvaluation: {evaluation['response']}",
             ,→ instruction=prompt_custom.REFINE_PROPOSAL)

             return final_solution['response'], self.llm.cost_manager.total_cost


Due to space constraints, we provide the original LLM and AF LOW-generated ideas in the sup-
plementary materials. The results below demonstrate substantial improvements in idea generation
quality and specificity compared to baseline responses, with consistent performance gains achieved
after just six iterations.

Round     Avg LLM Score     Avg Human Score     LLM Score Rank        Human Score Rank   Cost ($)
  1            18.4              15.6                 6                      7            0.004
  2            18.1              15.7                 7                      6            0.220
  3            19.2              17.3                 2                      4            0.234
  4            17.6               9.7                 8                      8            0.223
  5            19.2              17.7                 2                      2            0.234
  6            19.7              19.1                 1                      1            0.235
  7            19.0              17.6                 4                      3            0.248
  8            18.8              16.5                 5                      5            0.253
Table A2: Idea generation Workflow Performance Comparison between LLM and Human Scores
Across Different Rounds, with Rankings and Total Costs per Iteration

G     D ISCUSSION ON T HEORETICAL P ROPERTIES OF AF LOW
G.1    S EARCH S PACE C OMPLETENESS

AF LOW’s search space completeness relies on two key properties:

    • Code-represented edge structure can express all valid node relationships
    • LLM expansion generates valid workflow modifications with non-zero probability

These properties ensure AF LOW can traverse from any initial workflow to any point in the search
space, avoiding local optima.

G.2    C ONVERGENCE P ROPERTIES

AF LOW achieves optimal performance within finite iterations under three conditions:

    • Bounded evaluation function G(W, T )
    • Valid workflows maintained by code-represented edge structure


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  • Non-zero probability of LLM generating improvements

While the convergence sequence may not be strictly monotonic, MCTS properties and soft mixed
probability selection balance exploration and exploitation to achieve convergence.

G.3   S EARCH E FFICIENCY

AF LOW enhances search efficiency through three key mechanisms. First, Operators increase the
probability of generating improvements in each iteration by providing predefined node combina-
tions that encode successful patterns. Second, Tree-Structured Experience enables efficient reuse of
successful modifications while avoiding repeated failures through systematic path tracking. Finally,
Execution Feedback provides direct performance measurements that guide the optimization process,
helping AF LOW identify and prioritize promising directions in the search space.


                                                38
