Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A DD - IT: T RAINING -F REE O BJECT I NSERTION IN I M -
AGES W ITH P RETRAINED D IFFUSION M ODELS

 Yoad Tewel                                                Rinon Gal                                   Dvir Samuel
 NVIDIA, Tel-Aviv University                               NVIDIA, Tel-Aviv University                 Bar-Ilan University

 Yuval Atzmon                                              Lior Wolf                                   Gal Chechik
 NVIDIA                                                    Tel-Aviv University                         NVIDIA

                          Source                   Output                         Source                  Output
                      A sign spelling “ICLR” on top of the building              The tennis player wearing a headband
     Real


                                A sheep wearing boots                                A man sitting next to a table
     Generated


                           An empty                   A couch in           A dog lying on             A painting of cat
                         living room                                                                    saying “Do It”
     Step-by-Step


                                                      the room               the couch


Figure 1: Given an input image (left in each pair), either real (top row) or generated (mid row), along
with a simple textual prompt describing an object to be added Add-it seamlessly adds the object to
the image in a natural way. Add-it allows the step-by-step creation of complex scenes without the
need for optimization or pre-training.

                                                              A BSTRACT
                    Adding Object into images based on text instructions is a challenging task in se-
                    mantic image editing, requiring a balance between preserving the original scene
                    and seamlessly integrating the new object in a fitting location. Despite exten-
                    sive efforts, existing models often struggle with this balance, particularly with
                    finding a natural location for adding an object in complex scenes. We introduce
                    Add-it, a training-free approach that extends diffusion models’ attention mecha-
                    nisms to incorporate information from three key sources: the scene image, the text
                    prompt, and the generated image itself. Our weighted extended-attention mecha-
                    nism maintains structural consistency and fine details while ensuring natural ob-
                    ject placement. Without task-specific fine-tuning, Add-it achieves state-of-the-
                    art results on both real and generated image insertion benchmarks, including our
                    newly constructed ”Additing Affordance Benchmark” for evaluating object place-
                    ment plausibility, outperforming supervised methods. Human evaluations show
                    that Add-it is preferred in over 80% of cases, and it also demonstrates improve-
                    ments in various automated metrics.


                                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


1    I NTRODUCTION
Adding objects to images based on textual instructions is a challenging task in image editing, with
numerous applications in computer graphics, content creation and synthetic data generation. A
creator may want to use text-to-image models to iteratively build a complex visual scene, while
autonomous driving researchers may wish to draw pedestrians in new scenarios for training their
car-perception system. Despite considerable recent research efforts on text-based editing, this
particular task remains a challenge . When adding objects, one needs to preserve the appearance
and structure of the original scene as closely as possible, while inserting the novel objects in a way
that appears natural. To do so, one must first understand affordance—the deep semantic knowledge
of how people and objects interact, in order to position an object in a reasonable location. For
brevity, we call this task Image Additing.
Several studies (Hertz et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022) tried addressing this task by leveraging modern
text-to-image diffusion models. This is a natural choice since these models embody substantial
knowledge about arrangements of objects in scenes and support open-world conditioning on text.
While these methods perform well for various editing tasks, their success rate for adding objects is
disappointingly low, failing to align with both the source image and the text prompt. In response,
another set of methods took a more direct learning approach (Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023;
Canberk et al., 2024). They trained deep models on large image editing datasets, pairing images with
and without an object to add. However, these often struggle with generalization beyond their training
data, falling short of the general nature of the original diffusion model itself. This typically manifests
as a failure to insert the new object, the creation of visual artifacts, or more commonly – failing to
insert the object in the correct place, i.e. struggling with affordances. Indeed, we remain far from
achieving open-world object insertions from text instructions.
Here we describe an open-world, training-free method that can successfully leverage the knowledge
stored in text-to-image foundation models, to naturally add objects into images. As a guiding prin-
ciple, we propose that addressing the affordance challenge requires methods to carefully balance
between the context of the existing scene and the instructions provided in the prompt. We achieve
this by: first, extending the multi-modal attention mechanism (Esser et al., 2024) of recent T2I dif-
fusion models to also consider tokens from a source image; and second, controlling the influence of
each multi-modal attention component: the source image, the target image and the text prompt. A
main contribution of this paper is a mechanism to balance these three sources of attention during gen-
eration. We also apply a structure transfer step and introduce a novel subject-guided latent blending
mechanism to preserve the fine details of the source image while enabling necessary adjustments,
such as shadows or reflections. Our full pipeline is shown at fig. 2. We name our method Add-it.
Image Additing methods typically face three main failure modes: neglect, appearance, and affor-
dance. While current CLIP-based evaluation protocols can partially assess neglect and appearance,
there is a lack of reliable methods for evaluating affordance. To address this gap, we introduce
the “Additing Affordance Benchmark,” where we manually annotate suitable areas for object in-
sertion in images and propose a new protocol specifically designed to evaluate the plausibility of
object placement. Additionally, we introduce a metric to capture object neglect. Add-it outper-
forms all baselines, improving affordance from 47% to 83%. We also evaluate our method on an
existing benchmark (Sheynin et al., 2023) with real images, as well as our newly proposed Addit-
ing Benchmark for generated images. Add-it consistently surpasses previous methods, as reflected
by CLIP-based metrics, our object inclusion metric, and human preference, where our method is
favored in over 80% of cases, even against methods specifically trained for this task.
Our contributions are as follows: (i) We propose a training-free method that achieves state-of-the-
art results on the task of object insertion, significantly outperforming previous methods, including
supervised ones trained for this task. (ii) We analyze the components of attention in a modern
diffusion model and introduce a novel mechanism to control their contribution, along with novel
Subject Guided Latent Blending and a noise structure transfer. (iii) We introduce an affordance
benchmark and a new evaluation protocol to assess the plausibility of object insertion, addressing a
critical gap in current Image Additing evaluation methods.

2    R ELATED W ORK


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Object Placement and Insertion. Inserting objects into images remains a core challenge in image
editing. Traditional computer graphics methods often depend on manual object placement (C. Wang,
2014) or utilize synthetic data-driven approaches (Fisher et al., 2012). Early computer vision tech-
niques employed contextual cues to predict possible object positions (Choi et al., 2012; Lin et al.,
2013; Zhao et al., 2011). With advancements in deep learning, generative models have been trained
to learn object placements. For example, Compositing GAN (Azadi et al., 2020) generates object
composites by refining geometry and appearance, while RelaxedPlacement (Lee et al., 2022) opti-
mizes object placement and sizing based on relationships depicted in scene graphs. OBJect3DIT
(Michel et al., 2024) explores 3D-aware object insertion guided by language instructions, primarily
using synthetic data. Despite their effectiveness, these methods often struggle with the complexities
of real-world placement scenarios.


Editing with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models.             The emergence of high-performing text-to-
image diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Balaji et al.,
2022; Esser et al., 2024) has paved the way for effective text-based image editing techniques. Meth-
ods like Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022) modify attention maps by injecting the input caption’s
attention into the target caption’s attention, while SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022) uses a stochastic
differential equation to iteratively denoise and enhance the realism of user-provided pixel edits. For
editing real images, inversion techniques (Mokady et al., 2023; Wallace et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2023;
Samuel et al., 2023; Deutch et al., 2024; Huberman-Spiegelglas et al., 2023) first invert an input
image to its latent noise representation using a given caption, enabling edits via methods like SDEdit
or Prompt2Prompt. Cao et al. (2023) further improves real image editing using a mutual extended
self-attention mechanism. Despite their effectiveness in various tasks, these methods struggle with
object addition, often failing to align new objects with both the original image and the text prompt.
To improve editing performance, several methods proposed to directly fine-tune diffusion models.
Imagic (Kawar et al., 2023) fine-tunes diffusion models to handle complex textual instructions,
whereas Text2LIVE (Bar-Tal et al., 2022) and Blended Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022) blend
edited regions throughout the generation. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) introduced an
instructable image editing model trained on a large synthetic dataset for instruction-based edits,
while MagicBrush (Zhang et al., 2023) enhances this approach by fine-tuning InstructPix2Pix on
a manually annotated dataset collected through an online editing tool. EmuEdit (Sheynin et al.,
2023) trains a diffusion model on a large synthetic dataset to perform different editing tasks given
a task embedding. EraseDraw (Canberk et al., 2024) leverages inpainting models to automatically
generate high-quality training data for learning object insertion. They show that one can train
models to realistically insert diverse objects into images based on language instructions.
Despite advancements in instruction-based image editing, we demonstrate that current methods still
face significant challenges in accurately interpreting and executing object addition within images.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach addressing the challenging task of object insertion. We
show that by controlling the various attention components in the diffusion model, one can add new
objects to existing images without further training or fine-tuning of the diffusion model.


3     M ETHOD

Our goal is to insert an object into a real or generated image using a simple textual prompt, ensuring
the result appears natural and consistent with the source image. To achieve this, we leverage a
pretrained diffusion model without any additional training or optimization. Our solution consists of
three core components: (1) a weighted extended self-attention mechanism that balances information
from the source image, text prompt, and target image, (2) a noising approach that preserves the
source image’s structure, and (3) a novel Subject-Guided Latent Blending mechanism to retain fine
background details. For real images, we also introduce an inversion step, detailed below.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES : ATTENTION IN MM-DiT BLOCKS

Modern Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) models, such as SD3 (Esser et al., 2024) and FLUX (Black-
Forest, 2024), process concatenated sequences of textual-prompt and image-patch tokens through
unified multi-modal self-attention blocks (MM-DiT blocks). Specifically, FLUX has two types of


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                              Diffusion Step                          Diffusion Step

             "A man sitting
                                   K    V                                  K    V        X
              at the table"

                                                  Latent Blending


                              Q    K    V                             Q    K    V

                                                 Subject
                                                Attention

              Structure
               Transfer
                                                 SAM-2


                                   K    V                                  K    V


                                                                     T                     T
Figure 2: Architecture outline: Given a tuple of source noise Xsource      , target noise Xtarget , and a
text prompt Ptarget , we first apply Structure Transfer to inject the source image’s structure into the
                                                                     T
target image. We then extend the self-attention blocks so that Xtarget      pulls keys and values from
                     T
both Ptarget and Xsource , with each source weighted separately. Finally, we use Subject Guided
Latent Blending to retain fine details from the source image.

attention blocks: Multi-stream blocks which use separate projection matrices (WK , WV , WQ ) for
text and image tokens, and Single-stream blocks where the same projection matrices are used for
both. Both block types compute attention on the concatenated tokens as follows:
                                                       p
                A = softmax([Qp , Qimg ][Kp , Kimg ]⊤ / dk ), h = A · [Vp , Vimg ]           (1)
where Qp , Qimg are the textual-prompt and the image-patch queries, respectively. The same applies
to K and V . Notably, Flux is composed of a series of Multi-stream blocks followed by a series of
Single-stream blocks.

3.2   W EIGHTED E XTENDED S ELF -ATTENTION

Our approach builds on top of the attention mechanism in MM-DiT blocks. In this attention mech-
anism, tokens are drawn from two sources: the image patches Ximage and the textual prompt P .
In prior attention-based diffusion architectures, it was shown that the appearance of a source image
can be transferred to a target through an extended self-attention mechanism, where the new image
can attend to the tokens of the source. We propose a similar extension here, by allowing the multi-
modal attention to include another source — the tokens of the input image we wish to edit. More
formally, we define the three sources of information as: the source image Xsource , the generated
image Xtarget and the textual prompt describing the edit Ptarget . To compute the source image
tokens, we simply denoise it in parallel to the target image, and concatenate its keys and values to
the self-attention blocks, extending eq. (1):
                                                          p
  A = softmax([Qp , Qtarget ][Ksource , Kp , Ktarget ]⊤ / dk ), h = A · [Vsource , Vp , Vtarget ] (2)
where Ksource and Vsource are the keys and value extracted from the source image, and Kp , Vp ,
Ktarget , Vtarget are the keys and values from the prompt and target image respectively. When
Xsource is a generated image, denoising it in parallel is trivial - we simply need to start denoising
from the same seed that created Xsource . Dealing with a real image is more complicated, and we
will describe our solution in the inversion section below.
However, we notice that simply appending the keys and values of the source image to the attention
blocks leads to the source image controlling the attention, which in turn leads to neglect of the
edit prompt, with the final generated image being a simple copy of the source image. We explore
the dynamics of this phenomenon in detail in section 5. To avoid this effect, we can re-balance
the contribution of different attention components by weighting their keys. Indeed, by reducing
the weight of the source image tokens, we can achieve better balance and allow for more changes.
However, if this is not done carefully, then we risk upsetting the balance in the opposite fashion and


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


seeing alignment with the source image completely ignored. Hence, we can introduce a weighting
term to each source of information, giving us the following multi-modal attention equation:
                                                                                    p
              A = softmax([Qp , Qtarget ][γs · Ksource , γp · Kp , γt · Ktarget ]⊤ / dk )
                                                                                            (3)
              h = A · [Vsource , Vp , Vtarget ]

where γs , γp , γt represent the weighting terms for the source image, the prompt, and the target
image, respectively. In section 5 we explore the dynamics of the attention distribution across these
three sources. In practice, we find that it is necessary to balance two key terms: the first is the
                                                        exp(Qp ·Ksource )
attention distributed over the source image Asource =              Z      and the second is the attention
                                             exp(γ·Qp ·Ktarget )
distributed over the target image, Atarget =       Z             , where Z is the softmax normalization
term. To determine γ we define the function f (γ) = Asource −Atarget and use a root-solver algorithm
to find γ such that f (γ) = 0.

3.3   S TRUCTURE T RANSFER

The weighted extended-attention mechanism allows to balance between information from the source
image and the prompt, but the added objects do not always adhere to the image context (e.g. dog
is too big for the chair). We attribute this issue to different seeds dictating specific structures in the
generated image, which do not always align with the source image. We show that effect in fig. 8,
where images generated with the same seed produce similar objects with or without the extended
attention mechanism. To address this problem, we propose to choose seeds with a structural simi-
larity to the source image. We do so by noising the source latent Xsource to a very high noise level
tstruct with randomly sampled noise ϵ ∼ N (0, I) following the recitified flow denoising formula
Xt = (1 − σt )x0 + σt ϵ. When tstruct is high enough, starting the denoising process from Xtstruct will
result in an image with similar global structure to the source image, while still allowing for changes
to image content as demonstrated in fig. 8.

3.4   S UBJECT G UIDED L ATENT B LENDING

The combination of structure transfer and the weighted attention mechanism ensures that the target
image remains consistent with the structure and appearance of the source image, though some fine
details, such as textures and small background objects, may still change. Our goal is to preserve all
elements of the source image not affected by the added object. To achieve this, we propose Latent
Blending; A naive approach would involve identifying the pixels unaffected by the object insertion
and keeping them identical to those in the source image. However, two challenges arise: First, a
perfect mask is needed to separate the object from the background to avoid artifacts. Second, we
aim to preserve collateral effects from the object insertion, such as shadows and reflections. To
address these issues, we propose generating a rough mask of the object, which is then refined using
SAM-2 (Ravi et al., 2024) to obtain a final mask M . We then blend (Avrahami et al., 2022) the
source and target noisy latents at timestep Tblend based on this mask.
To extract the rough object mask, we gather the self-attention maps corresponding to the token rep-
resenting the object. We achieve this by multiplying the queries from the target image patches,
Qtarget , with the key associated with the added object token, kobject . These maps are then aggre-
gated across specific timesteps and layers that we identified as generating the most accurate results
(further details can be found in the appendix A.1. We then apply a dynamic threshold to the atten-
tion maps using the Otsu method (Otsu, 1979) to obtain a rough object mask, Mr . Finally, we refine
this mask using the general-purpose segmentation model, SAM-2. Since SAM-2 operates on im-
ages rather than noisy latents, we first estimate an image, X0 , from the model’s velocity prediction,
vθ , using the formula X0 = XTblend + (σTblend +1 − σTblend ) · vθ . In addition to an input image,
SAM-2 requires a localization prompt in the form of points, a bounding box, or an input mask. In
our method, we provide input points, as they tend to produce the most accurate masks. To extract
these localization points, we iteratively sample local maxima from the attention maps - full details
of this sampling process are provided in appendix A.1. Using these input points, we generate the
refined object mask, M . Finally, we apply a simple latent blending step at timestep Tblend , where
we compute Ztarget = M ⊙ Ztarget + (1 − M ) ⊙ Zsource . We present results with and without latent
blending, along with the resulting mask M , in fig. 9.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                   I-P2P       ED       MB        PbI                InfEdit   MasaCtrl     SDEdit     P2P     Ours
    Affordance     0.276      0.341    0.418     0.311                0.366     0.203        0.397    0.474    0.828

Table 1: Methods comparison based on Affordance score for the Additing Affordance Benchmark.


                                                                      Ours                 90%                 10%


                                                                                                                     P2P
     Ours              79%                     21%


                                                      MB
     Ours             75%                      25%


                                                      ED I-P2P


                                                                                                                     SDEdit
                                                                      Ours                83%                 17%
     Ours               84%                     16%
                                                                                            50%
                             50%                                                           Win Rate
                            Win Rate
    Figure 3: User Study results evaluated on the                     Figure 4: User Study results evaluated on the
    real images from the Emu Edit Benchmark.                          generated images from the Image Additing
                                                                      Benchmark.


3.5     Additing R EAL I MAGES AND S TEP - BY-S TEP G ENERATION

In the previous sections, we described our method for generating an edited image by drawing infor-
mation from a source image within the same batch. When editing a generated image, this process is
straightforward: one can save the source noise, ϵsource , that generated the source image and create
an input batch containing both ϵsource and a random noise, ϵtarget , used to generate the target image.
However, when editing an existing image, xsource , we do not have access to its original noise. A
common approach would be to use an inversion method to recover the original noise, ϵsource , that
generated Xsource . However, in our experiments, popular inversion methods, such as DDIM inver-
sion (Song et al., 2020), do not adequately reconstruct the image using FLUX. We propose a simple
solution: instead of recovering the original noise ϵsource , we sample a random noise ϵ. At each de-
                                                     t
noising step t, we produce a noisy source latent, Xsource    = (1 − σt )Xsource + σt ϵ. We then apply
                                                              t         t
our method as usual, using the input batch at timestep t, [Xsource  , Xtarget ], where the target image
draws information from the source image. This simple technique ensures perfect reconstruction of
                                                 0
the source image, since σ0 = 0 and therefore Xsource    = Xsource .
Our method, applicable to both generated and real images, can be extended for step-by-step gen-
eration. Users can start with an initial image from a textual prompt and iteratively modify it with
additional prompts, progressively adding elements or changes to the scene. Examples of step-by-
step generation are shown in fig. 1 and fig. 10.

                                         Emu Edit                                   Additing Benchmark
       Method                CLIPdir CLIPout CLIPim Inc.                       CLIPdir CLIPout CLIPim Inc.
       InstructPix2Pix       0.074 0.312 0.929 34%                             0.074 0.244 0.943 55%
       Erasedraw             0.088 0.313 0.941 65%                             0.117 0.248 0.958 76%
       Magicbrush            0.091 0.313 0.927 66%                             0.114 0.250 0.925 86%
       Paint by Inpaint      0.071 0.316 0.955 58%                             0.079 0.246 0.954 68%
       InfEdit               0.051 0.321 0.944 53%                             0.098 0.250 0.952 54%
       MasaCtrl              0.018 0.310 0.890 37%                             0.088 0.257 0.890 66%
       SDEdit                —       —       —      —                          0.091 0.248 0.955 60%
       Prompt2Prompt         —       —       —      —                          0.170 0.280 0.850 97%
       Ours                  0.101 0.322 0.929 81%                             0.200 0.261 0.968 93%

            Table 2: CLIP and Inclusion metric results for EmuEdit and Additing Benchmark.
4     E XPERIMENTS
Evaluation Baselines We compare our method with two classes of baselines: (1) Training-Free
methods that leverage the existing capabilities of text-to-image models: Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz
et al., 2022), a method which injects the attention map of the source image into the target image
to preserve its structure, and SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022), a method that adds partial noise to an
existing image and then denoises it. Both methods were re-implemented on the FLUX.1-dev model
for fair comparison. (2) Pretrained Instruction following models, specifically trained to edit and


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                           Source         Ours        Instruct Pix2Pix   Erase Draw   Magic Brush



      “A Coyote behind
    the red-headed bird”


    “A fork on the left
     side of the plate”


    “A basket on the
      front of the
        bicycles”



Figure 5: Qualitative Results from the Emu-Edit Benchmark. Unlike other methods, which fail to
place the object in a plausible location, our method successfully achieves realistic object insertion.

                               Source             Ours           Prompt-to-Prompt     SDEdit



      “A toy truck in
     the child's hands”


          “The man is
            holding a
         shopping bag”


      “A microscope
     on the counter
     next to samples”


Figure 6: Qualitative Results from the Additing Benchmark. While Prompt-to-Prompt fails to align
with the source image, and SDEdit fails to align with the prompt, our method offers Additing that
adheres to both prompt and source image.

add objects to existing images: InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) an instruction following model
trained on a large scale of synthetic instruction data, Magicbrush (Zhang et al., 2023) a version
of InstructPix2Pix fine-tuned on manually annotated editing dataset, and Erasedraw (Canberk et al.,
2024) a model trained on large dataset constructed using an inpainting model. Add-it implementation
details can be found in appendix A.1.

Metrics We evaluate the results of our method and the baselines using automatic metrics and
human evaluations for each source and target image-caption pair. Automatic Metrics: we start by
adopting the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) based metrics proposed in Emu-Edit (Sheynin et al., 2023):
(i) CLIPdir (Gal et al., 2022) measures the agreement between change in captions and the change in
images. (ii) CLIPimg measures similarity between source and target images. (iii) CLIPout measures
the target image and caption similarity. We propose two additional metrics: (iv) Inclusion measures
the portions of cases the object was added to the image, evaluated automatically using the open-


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


vocabulary detection model Grounding-DINO (Liu et al., 2023). (v) Affordance measures whether
the object was added to a plausible location, utilizing Grounding-DINO and a manually annotated
set of possible locations. Human Evaluations: we ask human raters to pick the best Additing output
when faced with a source image, instruction and images generated by our method and a competing
baseline. Further details in appendix A.8.

4.1   E VALUATION RESULTS

Emu-Edit Benchmark Following EraseDraw (Canberk et al., 2024) we evaluate our method on
a subset of EmuEdit’s (Sheynin et al., 2023) validation set with the task class of ”Add”, designed
for insertion instructions. The benchmark consists of sets of images and prompts before and after
an edit, and the corresponding instruction. Table 2 shows our model outperforms all previous ap-
proaches in the CLIPdir , CLIPout and the Inclusion metrics. In the CLIPim metric, which indicates
how close the edited image is to the source image, we are second only to Erasedraw. This result is
not surprising given that in 35% of the cases Erasedraw did not add an object to the image (indi-
cated by the Inclusion metric), artificially boosting the image similarity score. Due to the limitations
of automatic metrics, especially in assessing the naturalness of edits, we conducted a head-to-head
evaluation with human raters against each baseline, as shown in fig. 3. Our method’s outputs were
preferred in 80% of cases. Finally, we present a qualitative comparison to other methods using
images from the EmuEdit benchmark in fig. 5. Previous methods often produce artifacts, unnatu-
ral object placements, or fail to modify the image. In contrast, our method generates high-quality
outputs that consider the context of the source image.

Additing Benchmark To evaluate our method against both pre-trained models and zero-shot meth-
ods, which tend to perform better on generated images, we created a benchmark for the Additing
task. We asked ChatGPT to generate 200 sets of source and target prompts along with Additing in-
structions. Using Flux, we generated images and filtered 100 sets where the instructions were viable.
We report all results in Table 2. Our method outperforms all baselines on the CLIPdir and CLIPim
metrics. Although Prompt-to-Prompt slightly surpasses us on CLIPout and Inclusion, it does so by
heavily altering the source image, as shown by its low CLIPim score. As in the EmuEdit Bench-
mark, we asked human raters to compare our method against the zero-shot baseline. Our method
was preferred in 90% of cases against Prompt2Prompt and 83% against SDEdit fig. 4. Finally, fig. 6
shows a comparison on the Additing Benchmark, where other methods struggle to balance object
addition, background preservation, and context, while ours produces natural, appealing outputs.

Additing Affordance Benchmark Throughout our experiments we observed that the major short-
coming of existing methods is incorrect affordance, namely, objects are added at implausible loca-
tions (see the basket in fig. 5). To automatically quantify affordance, we constructed an affordance
benchmark. It contains 200 images and prompts, with manually annotated bounding-boxes indi-
cating the plausible locations to add objects in each image. Dataset construction and evaluation
protocol details are available in appendix A.6. We present the results of all methods in table 1. As
expected, previous methods perform poorly, with low affordance scores, particularly trained models
like InstructPix2Pix, which scored as low as 0.276. In contrast, Add-it scores nearly double that of
the best-performing method, demonstrating its ability to balance information from the source im-
age and target prompt. We present additional results of our method, including comparisons on the
MagicBrush dataset and image quality metrics, in appendix A.2 and appendix A.3.

5     A NALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the attention distribution in the MM-DiT block and the key components
of our method to better justify our design choices. In appendix A.4 we analyze the role of positional
encoding in the extended-attention mechanism.

MM-DiT Attention Distribution First, we analyze the different attention components in the ex-
tended MM-DiT blocks. Recall that in the extended-attention mechanism described in section 3.2
there are three token sets: the source image Xsource , the target image Xtarget and the prompt
Ptarget . In our experiments, we notice that simply applying the extended attention mechanism re-
sults in the target image closely following the appearance of the source image while neglecting the


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


    (A)                                           (B)


    (C)                                 Source          Scale=1.0        Auto (Ours)         Scale=1.2


             “A pile of laundry in
                 the basket”


Figure 7: (A) Affordance and Object Inclusion scores across weight scale values, with our automatic
weight scale achieving a good balance between the two. (B) Visualization of the prompt token
attention spread across different sources, model blocks, and weight scales, averaged over multiple
examples from a small validation set. (C) A representative example demonstrating the effect of
varying target weight scales.

                                                                     Vanilla Generation      Source Image


                                                                    w/o Structure Transfer       Ours


Figure 8: Ablation over various steps for applying the Structure Transfer mechanism. Applying it
too early misaligns the generated images with the source image’s structure while applying it too late
causes the output image to neglect the object. Our chosen step strikes a balance between both.

prompt - meaning no object is added to the image. We attribute this problem to the way the attention
is distributed across the three sets of tokens. In particular, we find empirically that the target prompt’s
attention Ap ∝ exp(Qp · [Ksource , Kp , Ktarget ]) serves as an effective proxy for balancing the three
sources of attention. A simple way to control the attention distribution is by introducing scale factor
γp , γtarget so that Ap ∝ exp(Qp ·[Ksource , γp ·Kp , γtarget ·Ktarget ]). In practice, we find that using
γ = γp = γtarget is adequate. In fig. 7 (B) we visualize the prompt attention Ap spread across the
three token sets. In the standard extended-attention case (γ = 1.0), the source image tokens (purple)
receive more attention than the target image tokens (orange), preventing the generated image from
incorporating the added object. On the other hand when scaling up too much (γ = 1.2), the target
image tokens overwhelm the source image token, causing the output image to stray away from the
source image structure. Finally, when the scaling value balances the attention between Xsource and
Xtarget (γ = Auto), the output image successfully incorporates the added object, while preserving
the target image structure and taking into account its context when placing the object. These obser-
vations are qualitatively shown in fig. 7 (C) and are also reflected in fig. 7 (A), where the scale that
balances the attention offers a good balance between affordance and Object Inclusion.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                Affordance
                              Source               Map               w/o blend             Ours



    “The girl is wearing
        headphones”


    “A water bottle on
       the bicycle”


Figure 9: Images generated by Add-it with and without the latent blending step, along with the
resulting affordance map. The latent blending block helps align fine details from the source image,
such as removing the girl’s glasses or adjusting the shadows of the bicycles.

Ablation Study Next, we evaluate the impact of different components of our method. First, we
demonstrate the effect of the weight scale, γ. In fig. 7 (A) we present a graph showing affordance
and Object Inclusion as functions of different weight scales. As the weight scale increases, the
added object tends to appear more frequently in the image. However, beyond a certain threshold,
the affordance score drops. This decline occurs when the target image ignores the structure of
the source image, generating objects in unnatural locations, as illustrated in fig. 7 (C). Next, we
explore the effect of latent blending. In fig. 9 we show output images with and without the latent
blending step, along with the affordance map automatically extracted by our method. Notice how the
blending step aligns the fine details of the source image without introducing artifacts. An ablation
of the localization mask construction is provided in appendix A.5. Finally, we examine the structure
transfer component. In fig. 8 we illustrate the effect of applying the structure transfer step at different
denoising process stages. When structure transfer is applied too early, the affordance score is low,
meaning the target image does not adhere to the structure of the source image. On the other hand,
applying it later in the process results in a lower object inclusion metric, indicating that the target
image neglects the object. Ultimately, when the structure transfer is applied at t = 933, we achieve
a balance between object inclusion and affordance. A qualitative example is provided in fig. 8.

6    L IMITATIONS
Add-it shows strong performance across various benchmarks, but it has some limitations. Since
the method relies on pretrained diffusion models, it may inherit biases its biases, potentially affect-
ing object placement in unfamiliar or highly complex scenes, as well as introducing biases such as
gender bias (fig. 15). Additionally, because our method uses target prompts rather than explicit in-
structions, users may need to construct more detailed prompts to achieve the same edit. For instance,
with an image of a dog, the prompt “A dog” won’t add another dog to the scene. Instead, the user
would need to provide a more specific prompt, such as “A second dog beside the dog in the middle.”

7    C ONCLUSION
We introduced Add-it, a training-free method for adding objects to images using simple text prompts.
We analyzed the attention distribution in MM-DiT blocks and introduced novel mechanisms such
as weighted extended-attention and Subject-Guided Latent Blending. Additionally, we addressed
a critical gap in evaluation by creating the ”Additing Affordance Benchmark,” which allows for an
accurate assessment of object placement plausibility in image Additing methods. Add-it consistently
outperforms previous approaches, improving affordance from 47% to 83% and achieving state-of-
the-art results on both real and generated image benchmarks. Our work demonstrates that leveraging
the knowledge in pretrained diffusion models is a promising direction for tackling challenging tasks
like image Additing. As diffusion models continue to evolve, methods like Add-it have the potential
to drive further advancements in semantic image editing and related applications.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


E THICS S TATEMENT
In this work, we acknowledge the ethical considerations associated with image editing technologies.
While our method enables advanced object insertion capabilities, it also has the potential for misuse,
such as creating misleading or harmful visual content. We strongly encourage the responsible and
ethical use of this technology, emphasizing transparency and consent in its applications. Addition-
ally, biases present in pretrained models may affect generated outputs, and we recommend further
research to mitigate such issues in future work. Human evaluations were conducted with informed
consent.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All necessary information to reproduce Add-it is provided in section 3 and appendix A.1. We provide
the proposed “Additing Benchmark” and “Additing Affordance Benchmark” in the supplementary
material of our submission.
We will open-source all the code upon publication of the paper.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Assaf Shocher, Lior Hirsch and Omri Kaduri for useful discussions and for providing
feedback on an earlier version of this manuscript. This work was completed as part of the first
author’s PhD thesis at Tel-Aviv University.

R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In CVPR, 2022.
S. Azadi, D. Pathak, S. Ebrahimi, and T. Darrell. Compositional gan: Learning image-conditional
   binary composition. In International Journal of Computer Vision, volume 128, pp. 2629–2642,
   2020.
Yogesh Balaji, Seungjun Nah, Xun Huang, Arash Vahdat, Jiaming Song, Karsten Kreis, Miika
  Aittala, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, Bryan Catanzaro, et al. eDiff-I: Text-to-image diffusion models
  with an ensemble of expert denoisers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01324, 2022.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. In ECCV, 2022.
Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying mmd
 gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401, 2018.
Black-Forest. Flux: Diffusion models for layered image generation. https://github.com/
  black-forest-labs/flux, 2024. Accessed: 2024-09-24.
Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023.
R C. Wang, L. Yang. Scene design by integrating geometry and physics for realistic image synthesis.
  Computer Graphics Forum, 2014.
Alper Canberk, Maksym Bondarenko, Ege Ozguroglu, Ruoshi Liu, and Carl Vondrick. Erasedraw:
  Learning to draw step-by-step via erasing objects from images. 2024.
Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl:
 Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In ICCV,
 2023.
W. Choi, Y. W. Chao, C. Pantofaru, and S. Savarese. Context-driven 3d scene understanding from a
  single image. In ICCV, 2012.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Gilad Deutch, Rinon Gal, Daniel Garibi, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Turboedit: Text-based
  image editing using few-step diffusion models, 2024.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam
  Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion En-
  glish, Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin, Yannik Marek, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow
  transformers for high-resolution image synthesis, 2024.
M. Fisher, D. Ritchie, M. Savva, T. Funkhouser, and P. Hanrahan. Example-based synthesis of 3d
 object arrangements. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2012.
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-
  Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–13, 2022.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas, Vladimir Kulikov, and Tomer Michaeli. An edit friendly ddpm noise
  space: Inversion and manipulations. arXiv:2304.06140, 2023.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In CVPR, 2023.
J. Y. Lee, Z. Tseng, and P. Abbeel. Relaxedplacement: Learning to synthesize compositional scene
   layouts with object relations. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
D. Lin, S. Fidler, and R. Urtasun. Holistic scene understanding for 3d object detection with rgbd
  cameras. In ICCV, 2013.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei
  Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
  open-set object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In ICLR, 2022.
O. Michel, A. Bhattad, E. VanderBilt, R. Krishna, A. Kembhavi, and T. Gupta. Object3dit:
  Language-guided 3d-aware image editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  36, 2024.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Null-text inversion for
  editing real images using guided diffusion models. CVPR, 2023.
Nobuyuki Otsu. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Transactions on
  Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 9(1):62–66, 1979. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1979.4310076.
Zhihong Pan, Riccardo Gherardi, Xiufeng Xie, and Stephen Huang. Effective real image editing
  with accelerated iterative diffusion inversion. In ICCV, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham
  Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images
  and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. NeurIPS, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.
Dvir Samuel, Barak Meiri, Nir Darshan, Shai Avidan, Gal Chechik, and Rami Ben-Ari. Regularized
  newton raphson inversion for text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Yuval Kirstain, Amit Zohar, Oron Ashual, Devi Parikh,
  and Yaniv Taigman. Emu edit: Precise image editing via recognition and generation tasks. 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, and Nikhil Vijay Naik. EDICT: Exact diffusion inversion via coupled
  transformations. CVPR, 2022.
Navve Wasserman, Noam Rotstein, Roy Ganz, and Ron Kimmel. Paint by inpaint: Learning to add
  image objects by removing them first, 2024.
Sihan Xu, Yidong Huang, Jiayi Pan, Ziqiao Ma, and Joyce Chai. Inversion-free image editing with
  natural language. 2024.
Kai Zhang, Lingbo Mo, Wenhu Chen, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Magicbrush: A manually annotated
  dataset for instruction-guided image editing. In NeurIPS, 2023.
W. H. Zhao, J. Jiang, J. Weng, J. He, E. P. Lim, H. Yan, and X. Li. Image-based contextual ad-
  vertisement recommendation. Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on
  Research and development in Information Retrieval, 2011.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A      A PPENDIX

A.1      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Add-it When evaluating Add-it, we use tstruct = 933 for generated images and tstruct = 867 for
real images and tblend = 500. For the scaling factor γ, we use the root-finding solver described
in section 3.2 on a set of validation images and set γ to 1.05, as it is close to the average result
and performs well in practice. We generate the images with 30 denoising steps, building upon the
diffusers implementation of the FLUX.1-dev model. We apply the extended attention mechanism
until step t = 670 in the multi-stream blocks, and step t = 340 for the single-stream blocks.


Computation Time To compare the computational efficiency of Add-it with the original FLUX
model, we generated 200 images using each method and reported the average generation time along
with the standard error of the mean. The base FLUX model requires 6.4±0.13 seconds to generate a
single image, while Add-it takes 7.23±0.05 seconds per image—an increase of just under one second.
This slight increase is primarily due to caching attention maps and the additional computations
required for the extended attention mechanism. SAM2 contributes only minimally to this difference,
with an average inference time of 0.04 seconds.


Latent Blending Localization To extract a refined object mask as part of
the Subject Guided Latent Blending component, we begin by extracting sub-
ject attention maps.          Empirically, we find that the best-performing layers for
this    task     are:      ["transformer blocks.13","transformer blocks.14",
"transformer blocks.18", "single transformer blocks.23",
"single transformer blocks.33"]. To refine the mask from these attention maps,
we need to identify points to use as prompts for SAM-2. To extract points from the attention map,
we first select the point with the highest attention value. Then, we exclude the area around the
chosen point and select the next highest point. This process is repeated until we either identify
4 points or the current maximal point value falls below 0.35 · pmax , where pmax is the initial
maximum attention value. Finally, we feed the points to the SAM-2 model to end up with a refined
object mask.


      “A horse standing      “The horse is wearing             “The horse is           “A knight is riding
        in the garden”           a pink dress”               wearing a crown”             the horse”


  “A young girl looking at    “The girl is wearing        “A heart-shaped patch on   “A bird is perched on
       the camera”                a raincoat”                   the raincoat”          the girl’s shoulder”


Figure 10: Step-by-Step Generation: Add-it can generate images incrementally, allowing it to
better adapt to user preferences at each step.



                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


       Source               Output             Source                Output            Source                 Output
        A smartphone displaying a map            A bunny sitting on the chair            The middle dog wearing a hat


      A bouquet of flowers in the basket    A bottle in the side of the backpack         A woven basket with laundry


        A parrot on the man’s shoulder     A person pointing at the equation e=mc^2   A flower in her hair above her ear


Figure 11: Qualitative results of our method on the Additing Affordance Benchmark show that our
method successfully adds objects naturally and in plausible locations.

  The character holding a diamond sword            A knight riding the horse               A bird perched on the piano


       A face painted on the rocket               A girl walking in the forest            The cat is wearing a wizard hat


                      Figure 12: Our method can operate on non-photorealistic images.


A.2     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In fig. 10 we present step-by-step outputs generated with Add-it. Notice that the scene remains
unchanged, while each prompt adds an additional ”layer” to the final image, resulting in a more
complex scene.
In fig. 11 we show additional results from the Additing Affordance benchmark. In each case, the
object must be added to a specific location in the source image. Across all examples, Add-it suc-
cessfully places the object in a plausible location, preserving the natural appearance of the image.
In fig. 12 we demonstrate that Add-it can operate on non-photorealistic source images, such as paint-
ings and pixel art. Since our method requires no tuning, we preserve all the generation capabilities
of the base model.
In fig. 13 we show various generation results produced by our model, each originating from a differ-
ent initial noise. Our method preserves the diversity of the base model, enabling users to generate
multiple variations of the added object until they find the desired one.


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


In fig. 14 we demonstrate Add-it’s ability to edit existing objects in an image. Although our method
was originally designed for object Additing, it can also perform edits such as changing a person’s
hair color, eye color, or his shirt.
In fig. 15 we highlight that biases in the pre-trained diffusion model can also manifest in Add-it.
In this figure, we prompt our method to add a doctor to an empty hospital room without specify-
ing gender or any additional details. We display multiple random generations from different noise
initializations and observe that, in all cases, the generated doctor is male. We attribute this bias to
underlying biases in FLUX, which our method inherits.

                                “A dog sitting on the bench”
        Source                 Variation 1               Variation 2              Variation 3


      Variation 4              Variation 5              Variation 6               Variation 7


Figure 13: Our method generates different outputs when given different starting noises. All the
outputs remain plausible.

A.3   A DDITIONAL C OMPARISONS

To further evaluate Add-it, we compare it against three additional baselines: MasaCtrl (Cao et al.,
2023), a training-free editing method that conditions on a source image using a mutual self-attention
mechanism; InfEDIT (Xu et al., 2024), which leverages Latent Consistent Models for training- and
inversion-free image editing; and Paint by Inpaint (Wasserman et al., 2024), a model trained on a
large inpainting dataset to add objects to images. We present the affordance scores of these baselines
in table 3, evaluated on the Additing Affordance Benchmark. Consistent with previous evaluations,
these methods achieve low scores, demonstrating their inability to consistently insert objects into
plausible locations in the scene. We further evaluate the three baselines on both the EmuEdit dataset
and the Additing benchmark, with the results shown in table 4. Add-it outperforms all baselines,
with the exception of the CLIPim metric on the EmuEdit dataset. Notably, the inclusion metric
for these baselines lags significantly behind our method, highlighting a common failure case where
these methods are unable to successfully add the new object to the scene.
We expanded our evaluation by comparing Add-it to existing baselines on the test split of the Mag-
icBrush Benchmark, filtering for examples with insertion instructions only. In table 5 we present a
quantitative comparison of Add-it against other baselines using CLIP and Inclusion metrics. Notably,
our method outperforms all baselines, including the MagicBrush model itself. In fig. 16 provides
a qualitative comparison, showcasing examples where Add-it successfully adds objects like a dog
and a squirrel in plausible locations, seamlessly integrating them into the scene. In contrast, other
methods struggle with both coherent object generation and proper placement.
Finally, we include two widely used metrics to assess image quality and diversity: KID(Bińkowski
et al., 2018), which measures how closely generated images match the distribution of real images


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 A man with a              A man wearing a             A man with
         Source                   ginger hair                 pink shirt                blue eyes


                                 A yellow car               A sports car                A boat


Figure 14: Add-it can perform editing of existing objects in the images, such as changing the man’s
hair color, or switching the car for a boat.


     Source                             A doctor standing in the hospital room


Figure 15: Add-it can suffer from bias of the underlying diffusion model, such as generating mostly
male doctors.


(lower is better), and Inception Score (IS)(Salimans et al., 2016), which evaluates both image quality
and diversity based on a pre-trained inception model (higher is better). We chose KID over FID as
it performs more reliably on smaller evaluation sets. While these metrics are traditionally used for
image generation, our focus is on image Additing. To adapt them for our task, we use an off-the-shelf
open vocabulary detection model to identify regions containing added objects across the dataset. We
then crop these regions to create a dataset of object crops and evaluate KID and IS by comparing
this dataset against the source images before editing. This approach allows us to assess the quality
and diversity of the inserted objects directly. Our method, along with SDEdit and Prompt2Prompt,
achieves the lowest KID scores, indicating high quality of the added objects. Additionally, Add-it
and Prompt2Prompt attain the highest IS scores, demonstrating that the inserted objects are also
diverse.

                                  InfEdit       MasaCtrl    Paint By Inpaint   Ours
                   Affordance      0.366         0.203           0.311         0.828

Table 3: Comparison of methods based on Affordance score for the Additing Affordance Bench-
mark.



                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                      Emu Edit                           Additing Benchmark
      Method               CLIPdir CLIPout CLIPim Inc.               CLIPdir CLIPout CLIPim Inc.
      InfEdit              0.051 0.321 0.944 53%                     0.098 0.250 0.952 54%
      MasaCtrl             0.018 0.310 0.890 37%                     0.088 0.257 0.890 66%
      Paint by Inpaint     0.071 0.316 0.955 58%                     0.079 0.246 0.954 68%
      Ours                 0.101 0.322 0.929 81%                     0.200 0.261 0.968 93%

         Table 4: CLIP and Inclusion metric results for EmuEdit and Additing Benchmark.

                       Method             CLIPdir          CLIPout     CLIPim     Inc.
                       InstructPix2Pix     0.077            0.297       0.917     45%
                       EraseDraw           0.117            0.301       0.934     58%
                       MagicBrush          0.144            0.303       0.905     72%
                       Paint by Inpaint    0.098            0.300       0.928     62%
                       Ours                0.124            0.307       0.937     85%

               Table 5: CLIP and Inclusion metric results for the MagicBrush Benchmark.

      Source             Ours      Instruct Pix2Pix        Erasedraw         Magicbrush   Paint by Inpaint
                                “A squirrel admires the flower vase”


                                   “A dog resting under the bench”


Figure 16: Qualitative results from the MagicBrush benchmark show that our method generates
high-quality objects placed correctly within the scene, whereas other methods struggle with both
object quality and placement.

                                  Method                   KID ↓      IS ↑
                                  InstructPix2Pix          0.034     4.173
                                  EraseDraw                0.027     4.473
                                  MagicBrush               0.040     4.243
                                  Paint by Inpaint         0.030     3.762
                                  SDEdit                   0.016     2.783
                                  Prompt2Prompt            0.014     4.901
                                  Ours                     0.015     4.949

Table 6: KID and Inception Score metrics used to assess the quality and diversity of edits by Add-it
and other baselines.


A.4    T HE ROLE OF P OSITIONAL E NCODING

Here, we examine the significance of positional encodings in the extended attention mechanism.
fig. 17 demonstrates their role through a simple experiment: we applied our method to a source
image where the positional encoding vectors were shifted down and to the right. This misalignment
resulted in a mismatch between the positional encoding of the child’s head in the source and target


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


            Source Image                      w/ PE Shift                      w/o PE Shift


Figure 17: Positional Encoding Analysis: shifting the positional encoding of the source image re-
sults in a corresponding shift in the object’s location in the generated image.


images. Consequently, instead of generating headsets at the actual position of the child’s head,
the model produced them in the area corresponding to the ”shifted head” position. This outcome
demonstrates that the model heavily relies on positional information to transfer features between the
source and target images. Despite the target image containing ”laptop” features instead of ”head”
features at the relevant location, the model chose to place the headphones there. This decision was
based on the area having the same positional encoding as the ”head area” in the source image, rather
than on the actual content of the target image at that location. We believe further research on the
role of positional encoding vectors is an interesting direction for future work in the context of DiT
models.

A.5    L ATENT B LENDING M ASK C ONSTRUCTION A BLATION

Here, we examine different methodologies for generating the object mask used as input to the Latent
Blending step. We qualitatively display these options in fig. 18. First, we compare the results using
the coarse attention mask extracted from the attention layers, as described in appendix A.1.Notably,
the attention maps tend to capture the main parts of the person but often exclude details such as legs,
resulting in incomplete and messy masks. Next, we consider the mask generated by SAM2 when
prompted with the coarse mask as input. In many cases, the coarse mask proves to be an inadequate
prompt for SAM2, leading to refined masks that still fail to capture the entire object. Finally, we
present our chosen methodology, discussed in appendix A.1, where we extract key points from the
attention mask and use them as input to SAM2. This approach produces a refined mask that captures
the entire object, resulting in a seamless integration of the person into the scene. Additionally, table 7
shows the affordance scores for each methodology, demonstrating that our proposed point-based
algorithm yields the best results.

                               Coarse Attention Mask        Mask Prompt SAM        Ours
                Affordance             0.809                      0.77             0.828

Table 7: Ablation of blending mask construction methods based on Affordance score for the Addit-
ing Affordance Benchmark.

A.6   Additing A FFORDANCE B ENCHMARK

Affordance in Image Additing In section 1, we highlight a significant gap in current object inser-
tion evaluation protocols: the lack of a mechanism to assess whether an object was added to a plau-
sible location. Our experiments reveal that existing methods often struggle to find the “right” spot
for object placement, which we refer to as affordance. To address this, we introduced the “Additing
Affordance Benchmark”. The guiding principle behind the benchmark is the need for an automated
method to evaluate whether an image editing method has inserted an object in a plausible location
within the scene. Since developing an automated approach to assess correct object placement is
itself an unsolved challenge, we created a dataset consisting of images, insertion instructions, and
carefully labeled regions indicating plausible insertion areas for each instruction. This allows us to


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                 Coarse                  Mask
                             Attention Mask           Prompt SAM              Ours


                                                                                           Mask Input
           Source


                                                                                           Blend Mask
                                                                                           Output
Figure 18: Qualitative ablation of blending mask construction: While the coarse attention mask
and the mask-prompted SAM mask may not perfectly segment the added object, our point-based
algorithm typically generates precise masks, leading to a seamless integration of the object into the
scene.


use an off-the-shelf open-vocabulary detector (as described below) to determine whether an added
object’s bounding box lies within the manually labeled region, thereby indicating whether it was
placed in a plausible location. As shown in section 4, the Additing Affordance Benchmark reveals
that all existing image addition methods struggle with this requirement, highlighting a critical gap
in the field that needs to be addressed to develop effective object insertion methods.

Dataset Construction Here, we provide the details for constructing the Additing Affordance
Benchmark dataset. First, we used ChatGPT-4 to generate a dataset of tuples, each consisting of
a source prompt and a target prompt, representing an image before and after object insertion, along
with an instruction for the transition and a subject token representing the object to be added. The
exact prompt is shown in fig. 20. Next, we used FLUX.1-dev to generate the source images from the
source prompts in each tuple. We manually filtered out images where the object had no plausible
location or too many possible locations, resulting in a dataset of 200 images. Finally, we manually
annotated bounding boxes for each image, marking the plausible locations where the object could
be added, as shown in fig. 19.

Evaluation protocol: Given a set of an Additing model output images, we use Grounding-DINO
to detect the area where new objects were added and set the affordance score of a single image to be
the fraction of added object that at least 0.5 of their area falls inside the GT box.

A.7   P ROMPTING WITH Add-it

In contrast to instruction-based editing methods, Add-it operates on target prompts that describe
the edited image, including the added object. Example prompts appear in the qualitative figures
throughout the paper. In fig. 21 we demonstrate that an LLM, such as ChatGPT, can easily convert
between these representations. Moreover, our EmuEdit evaluation is conducted using automatically
converted captions with the exact same prompt - showing its effectiveness.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


  A person pointing at   A bottle in the side of    The teddy bear     The middle dog   A bunny sitting
  the equation e=mc^2       the backpack           has a red bow tie   wearing a hat     on the chair


Figure 19: Visual examples from the Additing Affordance Benchmark. Each image is annotated
with bounding boxes highlighting the plausible areas where the object can be added.

Please generate a JSON list of 300 sets. Each set consists
of: an index, a source prompt, instruction, a target prompt,
and a subject token.
The source prompt describes a source image.
The target prompt describes the source image after an object
has been added to it.
The instruction is a description of what needs to be changed
to go from the source to the target prompt.
The subject token is the noun that refers to the added
object, a single word that appears in the target prompt.
Here are is an example:
{
    "src_prompt": "A person sitting on a chair",
    "tgt_prompt": "A scarf wrapped around their neck",
    "subject_token": "scarf",
    "instruction": "Wrap a scarf around the person’s neck."
}
Only generate examples where there is clearly
only one possible place for the object to be added, so it
can be tagged correctly.
Write it as a JSON list yourself.
Please DO NOT include negative examples in your prompts,
such as "a man wearing no hat" in the source prompt.
DO NOT write code; Return only the JSON list.

   Figure 20: The prompt provided to ChatGPT in order to generate the Affordance Benchmark.


A.8     U SER S TUDY D ETAILS

We evaluate the models through an Amazon Mechanical Turk user study using a two-alternative
forced choice protocol. In the study, raters saw an instruction, a source image, and two edited im-
ages, each produced by a different approach. They chose the edit that best followed the instruction,
taking into account: image quality and realism, instruction following and preservation of the source
image. For the evaluation, each head-to-head example was rated by two raters. In fig. 22 we show
an example of a single trial a rater has seen.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Given an input caption and an editing instruction, generate
an output caption that reflects how an input image,
corresponding to the input caption, would appear after
being edited according to the instruction.

Here are few example:
input_caption: A hotel bed ready for use
instruction: Add a suitcase to the bed
output_caption: A hotel bed with a suitcase on it

input_caption: A table with two plates of breakfast food
instruction: Add a fork to the table between the plates
output_caption: A table with two plates of breakfast food
with a fork between them.

Figure 21: The prompt provided to ChatGPT in order to generate output prompts from instruction-
based prompts appearing in benchmark such as EmuEdit.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                        Figure 22: One trial of the Additing user study.


                                               23
