Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


P ROBABILISTIC L EARNING TO D EFER : H ANDLING
M ISSING E XPERT ’ S A NNOTATIONS AND C ONTROL -
LING W ORKLOAD D ISTRIBUTION

 Cuong Nguyen                                                  Thanh-Toan Do
 Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing               Department of Data Science and AI
 University of Surrey, United Kingdom                          Monash University, Australia

 Gustavo Carneiro
 Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing
 University of Surrey, United Kingdom



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent progress in machine learning research is gradually shifting its focus to-
         wards human-AI cooperation due to the advantages of exploiting the reliability of
         human experts and the efficiency of AI models. One of the promising approaches
         in human-AI cooperation is learning to defer (L2D), where the system analyses
         the input data and decides to make its own decision or defer to human experts. Al-
         though L2D has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance, in its standard setting,
         L2D entails a severe limitation: all human experts must annotate the whole train-
         ing dataset of interest, resulting in a time-consuming and expensive annotation
         process that can subsequently influence the size and diversity of the training set.
         Moreover, the current L2D does not have a principled way to control workload
         distribution among human experts and the AI classifier, which is critical to opti-
         mise resource allocation. We, therefore, propose a new probabilistic modelling
         approach inspired by the mixture-of-experts, where the Expectation - Maximisa-
         tion algorithm is leverage to address the issue of missing expert’s annotations.
         Furthermore, we introduce a constraint, which can be solved efficiently during
         the E-step, to control the workload distribution among human experts and the AI
         classifier. Empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world datasets shows that our
         proposed probabilistic approach performs competitively, or surpasses previously
         proposed methods assessed on the same benchmarks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Human experts have the remarkable ability to learn new concepts and make accurate predictions.
However, in many applications where the volume of data scales up exponentially, like radiology (The
Royal College of Radiologists, 2023), relying solely on human experts becomes economically im-
practical or even infeasible due to significant increases in hiring costs and processing time. In
contrast, machine learning or AI models excel at processing large amounts of information but may
be prone to biases. Thus, an ideal system would therefore consist of neither human experts nor AI
models in isolation but rather a judicious combination of both, leveraging the reliability of humans
and the efficiency of AI models.
Such an ideal system must be capable of identifying the strengths and weaknesses of each human
expert and AI model, so that samples can be assigned to decision-makers with high predictive ac-
curacy at low processing cost. Learning to defer (L2D) (Madras et al., 2018) is one of the learning
paradigms that provide such a capability. L2D extends learning to reject (Chow, 1957; Cortes et al.,
2016) by deferring samples to human experts when the AI model is not confident. Although L2D
can surpass the performance of human experts or the AI model alone, the learning paradigm has a
notable limitation: every human expert must annotate every sample within the training dataset.
This requirement places a substantial burden on the human experts involved, resulting in a resource-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


intensive and time-consuming annotation process. Consequently, this may reduce the size of the
training set, in addition to decreasing the diversity of labelling and potentially increasing biases due
to the probable involvement of fewer annotators.
Another problem in L2D is the lack of workload control, where some experts (either human or AI
model) are more frequently queried to make decisions, while the remaining experts are entirely ig-
nored. Although solely relying on a few human experts is desirable in some applications where
rewards are proportional to the amount of work (e.g., crowd-sourcing), it becomes unfair in fields
like radiology, where payment is fixed. In such cases, the more accurate the radiologist is, the more
work they are burdened with without corresponding compensation. Moreover, in those high-stakes
applications, overloading one expert can easily lead to fatigue, increasing the risk of errors, and
resulting in potentially poor life-and-death decisions. One typical example is reported in (Berlin,
2000), where a radiologist misdiagnosed because he interpreted 162 cases in one day while the
average interpretation was only 50 cases. One workaround solution for the imbalanced workload
distribution is to integrate a specific cost for each expert (e.g., proportional to salary) to balance out
the workload (Narasimhan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). Such a solution is impractical because
human experts will most likely be paid similar salaries, making the quantification of cost per ex-
pert infeasible. Furthermore, our preliminary experiments have shown that such a naive solution
may need many iterations to fine-tune the cost to converge to the desirable workload distribution or
may not converge at all in several cases. Furthermore, as L2D trades off the reliability of human
experts for the efficiency of AI classifiers, it is crucial to have the ability to control the workload
distribution between AI and human experts to study that trade-off. Despite such importance, con-
trolling workload is, however, overlooked in the L2D literature. The current practice is to employ
a post-hoc method by sorting the deferral score of a trained L2D method evaluated on the test set
and varying the threshold to obtain different deferral rates for the AI model (Mozannar et al., 2023).
Such a post-hoc approach is impractical because it requires access to all test samples before making
a prediction, and it does not allow for workload control to be set during training and tested during
evaluation. Hence, this prompts further studies to develop a principled mechanism to control the
workload distribution in L2D.
We, therefore, propose a probabilistic framework inspired by the mixture-of-experts with constraints
to address both problems: handling missing expert’s annotation and controlling workload distribu-
tion. Treating the missing expert’s annotation as a latent variable enables us to formulate the pro-
posed framework with the Expectation - Maximisation (EM) algorithm. In addition, the constraints
introduced to control the workload distribution among experts and between AI and human experts
yield an efficient solution, and hence, can be integrated seamlessly into the EM algorithm without
compromising computational efficiency. Our contributions can be summarised as follows:
       • We propose a new probabilistic modelling approach for L2D with missing expert’s annota-
         tions and leverage the EM algorithm to optimise it. Such a solution extends the capacity of
         L2D to practical settings where each expert annotates only a portion of the training dataset.
       • We also introduce a constraint in the optimisation of the E step, which can be solved effi-
         ciently, to control the workload distributed to each human expert and the AI model.
The empirical evaluation on both synthetic and real-world datasets at different missing rates demon-
strates the capability of our proposed method when dealing with missing expert’s annotation settings,
while being able to control the desired workload for human experts and the AI model.

2    BACKGROUND
                                                                         x            z             ‚
Learning to defer (Madras et al., 2018) is mo-
tivated from the observation that in certain sce-
narios or datasets, a machine learning model
trained on ground truth cannot perform on-                  „            t            y
par with human experts. Hence, L2D is pro-              M+1                               N
posed by integrating a deferral or gating mech-
anism to query either a human expert or an AI       Figure 1: L2D is modelled as a mixture of M human
classifier to make decisions. In other words,       experts and an AI classifier. The human expert’s an-
L2D is similar to a mixture of M human ex-          notation t is either observed (standard L2D) or hidden
perts and an AI classifier. The AI classifier is    (our setting).


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


learnt from ground truth data to support the classification for the easy examples, reducing the cost
of querying human experts.
                                                                                (m)
A C-way classification task in LDA consists of a dataset D = ({(xi , yi , (ti )M      N
                                                                                m=1 )}i=1 , where
              d
xi ∈ X ⊆ R is an input sample, yi ∈ Y = {1, . . . , C} is the corresponding ground truth label,
     (m)
and ti ∈ Y represents the annotation of sample xi made by an expert indexed by m. In addition,
an AI classifier, parameterised by θM +1 , is introduced as a learnable expert.
We follow the mixture of experts to model the L2D problem. The training data of L2D can be
modelled as follows:
      1. draw a sample from data distribution: x ∼ Pr(x),
      2. draw an annotation from each expert: t(m) ∼ Pr(t|x, θm ) = Categorical(t|f (x; θm )),
      3. draw a categorical variable to select an expert: z ∼ Pr(z|x, γ) = Categorical(z|g(x; γ)),
      4. draw a label from the belief of that expert: y ∼ Pr(y|z, t) = Categorical(y|t(z) ),
where: g(.; γ) : X → {1, . . . , M + 1} is the gating model, and f (.; θm ) : X → ∆C−1 = {v ∈
[0, 1]C : v⊤1 = 1} is a classification model representing an expert (including the AI classifier)
indexed by m ∈ {1, . . . , M + 1}. Note that in this setting, every sample in the training set is
annotated by all experts, where the function representing each human expert f (.; θm ) is simply
                                                (m)                           (m)
a mapping table that returns an annotation ti given an input xi , with ti = f (xi ; θm ), ∀m ∈
{1, . . . , M }. The data modelling can also be illustrated through the graphical model in Fig. 1.
The objective of L2D is to learn the gating model’s and AI classifier’s parameters by maximising
data-likelihood on observed data, which can be written as follows:
                     PN              QM +1 (m)
         maxγ,θM +1 i=1 ln Pr yi , m=1 ti         xi , γ, {θ}M +1
                                                             m=1
                                           QM +1 (m)
                        PN                                             (M +1)
          = maxγ,θM +1 i=1 ln Pr yi xi , m=1 ti , γ + ln Pr ti                xi , θM +1 .   (1)


The first term on the right hand side of Eq. (1) is to train the gating model, parameterised by γ,
while the second term is used to train the AI classifier. The annotation t of the AI classifier,
therefore, has to be modified accordingly: in the first term, t is the prediction of the AI classi-
       (M +1)
fier: ti       = f (xi ; θM +1 ), so that the gating model can assess the performance of each expert
(including human and the AI classifier) to defer, while in the second term, it is the ground truth
         (M +1)
label: ti       = yi in order to train the AI classifier. Such a modification is required because L2D
has both un-learnable (i.e., human) and learnable experts (i.e., the classifier). Equivalently, one can
remove the second term from Eq. (1) by training the classifier on ground truth labels separately, then
considering that trained classifier as an un-learnable human expert. In that case, Eq. (1) is simplified
                                                          (M +1)
to consist of only the first term, where the annotation ti       does not need to be modified.
In this modelling, L2D is a latent variable model, where the latent variable is the index z of the
expert being selected. Hence, the objective in Eq. (1) can be optimised by the EM algorithm as
shown in Appendix A.1.


3   M ISSING EXPERT ’ S ANNOTATIONS

In this section, we relax the assumption that every sample in the training set is annotated by all
human experts, presented in Section 2. In particular, for each training sample, annotations made by
some human experts are assumed to be observed, while the ones made by the remaining experts are
unobserved (or missing).
For each sample, we denote Diobs. as the set of expert indices that annotate sample xi , and Diunobs. as
the set of expert indices who do not annotate sample xi . The objective function originally presented
in Eq. (1) that maximises log-likelihood on observed data can be rewritten as follows:

                                 PN                             (m)
                                                                     xi , γ, {θ}M +1
                                                   Q
                  maxγ,{θm }M +1 i=1 ln Pr yi , m∈Dobs. ti                      m=1 .                (2)
                             m=1                          i


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                                                                              Posterior of expert selection
                                                  Pr(z|x; ‚)
                                                                                          q(z)
     input                   gating model

    ì
                                                                                                                 loss of
                                 g (:; ‚)                           E-step
                                                                                                              gating model



                         annotations & ground truth
   f (:; „1 )
       ..                    t1 . . .       ? ¥y
        .
                                                  posterior of missing annotations
   f (:; „M )                           q(t̂M )

                                “pseudo-complete”
  f (:; „M+1 )
                                   annotations
expert’s models
                                                                       loss of expert’s models                  M-step


Figure 2: Visualisation of the proposed probabilistic L2D where the E-step infers the posteriors of expert
selection and missing annotations, while the M-step maximises the “completed” data likelihood to estimate the
gating function and AI model parameters γ and θM +1 .


The objective function in Eq. (2) learns both the gating model parameter γ and the parameter of M
experts plus the AI classifier, denoted by {θm }M +1
                                                m=1 , while the standard (or “complete-annotation”)
L2D in Eq. (1) learns only the parameters of the gating model and classifier.
Due to the latent variables z and t(j) , for j ∈ Dunobs. , it is difficult to calculate the log-likelihood
in Eq. (2). Thus, the EM algorithm is employed to optimise a lower-bound of the objective function
in Eq. (2). The “complete” data log-likelihood in Eq. (2) for one sample can be written as follows:

                                                        (m) Q               (j)
                                                           , j∈Dunobs. ti , zi xi , γ, {θm }M      +1
                                            Q
 Qi = E         Q            (j) ln Pr yi ,   m∈Diobs. ti                                       m=1
                 j∈Diunobs. ti )
         q(zi ,                                                     i

                                  h
                                                Q           (m) Q               (j)
    =E          Q            (j)   ln Pr yi zi , m∈Dobs. ti , j∈Dunobs. ti
                 j∈Diunobs. ti )
         q(zi ,                                        i                i

                                                              i
          P                      (j)                               P                    (m)
       + j∈Dunobs. ln Pr ti xi , θj + ln Pr(zi |xi , γ) + m∈Dobs. ln Pr ti                   xi , θm , (3)
                     i                                                                   i

                 Q            (j)
where q(zi ,      j∈Diunobs. ti ) denotes the posterior of the latent variables.


E step The posterior of both z and t(j) can be obtained through a mean-field variational inference
as follows:
      Q                                                                  h
                       (j)             Q             (j)                        Q                (j)
 q zi , j∈Dunobs. ti         = q(zi ) j∈Dunobs. q ti     = argminq KL q(zi ) j∈Dunobs. q ti
              i                              i                                       i
           Q                                                              i
                              (j)                   (m)        (k)
       Pr zi , j∈Dunobs. ti xi , yi , m∈Dobs. ti , γ (k) , {θm }M     +1
                                          Q
                    i                            i
                                                                    m=1
                 h                            i P              h                            i
                                         (k)                        (j)        (j)     (k)
  = argmin KL q(zi )∥ Pr zi |xi , γ             + j∈Dunobs. KL q(ti ) Pr ti |xi , θj
                                                       i
        q
                                               h                                             i
                                           ln Pr yi zi , Q             (m) Q            (j)
            −E         Q                 (j)                 m∈Diobs. ti   , j∈Dunobs. ti      ,
                           j∈Diunobs. q ti
                                                                                   i
                q(zi )

                                                                                                     (4)
where γ (k) and θ(k) denote the gating and expert model parameters at the k-th iteration.
The optimisation in Eq. (4) can be expanded further and solved by the fixed-point iteration method.
Please refer to Appendix B for the detailed derivation of the solution. Note that the log-likelihood
of the last term in Eq. (4) may lead to numerical instability when t is a hard label (i.e., when t
is observed). In our implementation, we smooth the observed annotations when calculating that
log-likelihood to avoid computational instability issue.


                                                                4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


M step The posteriors of latent variables obtained in the E step allows the calculation of the com-
plete data log-likelihood in Eq. (3). In the M step, that completed data log-likelihood is maximised
with respect to the parameters of interest γ and θ as follows:
              (k+1) M +1                         PN                     (k)
  γ (k+1) , {θm    }m=1 ← argmaxγ,{θm }M +1 i=1 Qi (γ, θ, γ (k) , {θm }M      +1
                                                                             m=1 )
                                            m=1
                                                                            h                   i
                                                PN P                                 (j)
                         = argmaxγ,{θm }M +1 i=1 j∈Dunobs. Eq(t(j) ) ln Pr ti xi , θj
                                            m=1               i        i

                              P                   (m)
                            + m∈Dobs. ln Pr ti         xi , θm + Eq(zi ) [ln Pr(zi |xi , γ)] .    (5)
                                       i



Note that the term related to Pr(y|z, t) in Eq. (3) is omitted in the M step because it is considered
as a constant w.r.t. γ and {θm }M +1
                                m=1 . The whole training procedure can be visualised in Fig. 2.

Remark 1 The first and the second terms in Eq. (5) resemble the minimum entropy principle in
semi-supervised learning for expert models parameterised by {θm }M     m=1 (Grandvalet & Bengio,
2004). In particular, the first term is equivalent to minimising the entropy of the missing expert’s
annotations, while the second term trains the expert models on observed annotations.

4    C ONSTRAINING THE NUMBER OF ASSIGNMENTS IN THE E- STEP
A naive implementation of the EM algorithm often results in a workload-imbalance, where one
or a few experts are queried more frequently, while the remaining experts remaining idle. Due
to this nature, a naively-trained gating model would become biased toward the high-performing
experts, resulting in a sub-optimal workload distribution among: (i) human experts themselves and
(ii) human experts and the AI model, as mentioned in Section 1.
Ideally, in many applications where human experts are equally-competent, a perfect balanced work-
load among experts and the AI model can be expressed as follows:
                            1
                              PN                   1
                                                     PN
                           N    i=1 Eqe(zi ) [z] = N      e(zi ) = M1+1 1 ,
                                                      i=1 q                                   (6)
where qe is used to denote a constrained posterior to distinguish from the unconstrained posterior q
presented in Section 3. Note that this step happens between the E and M steps.
The workload balancing constraint in Eq. (6) is a special case, where all experts (including human
and the AI classifier) are treated equally. To further generalise the control of the workload distributed
to each expert, we propose the following workload constraint:
                                                PN
                                       ε l ⪯ N1 i=1 qe(zi ) ⪯ ε u ,                                   (7)
where ε u , ε l ∈ [0, 1]M +1 are hyper-parameters, and ⪯ is the element-wise operator.
The constrained optimisation is integrated into the E step when all annotations are observed (stan-
dard L2D) or considered as a “second E step” when annotations are partially observed as presented
in Section 3. Nevertheless, the constrained optimisation can be written as follows:
                                                                                  PN
      qei∗ = argminqe KL [e
                          q (zi )∥q ∗ (zi )] , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , N } s.t.: ε l ⪯ N1 i=1 qe(zi ) ⪯ ε u , (8)
       ∗
    q (zi ) denotes the unconstrained
where                                    posterior of z, and can be either the true posterior
                  (m) M +1      M +1
Pr zi xi , yi , {ti }m=1 , {θm }m=1 , γ in case of full-observed annotations (standard L2D) or
the approximate posterior q(z) obtained in Eq. (4).
The constrained optimisation in Eq. (8) is also known as the I-projection in information geometry
and can be solved efficiently through its duality (Graça et al., 2007). Readers are referred to Ap-
pendix C for the detailed derivation of the solution. In general, the Lagrange multipliers obtained
through the duality can be written as follows:

                                                    PN                                      ⊤
 λ ∗u , λ ∗l = argminλ u ,λλu ≥0 λ ⊤       ⊤      1
                                                            P ∗
                                   u εu − λl εl + N  i=1 ln  zi q (z i ) exp  −  λ
                                                                                (λ u − λ l )  z i − 1  . (9)
This can be solved efficiently using the projected gradient solver. The constrained posterior of the
latent variable can then be obtained as follows:

                                                         λ∗u − λ ∗l )⊤ zi − 1 .
                            qe∗ (zi ) ∝ q ∗ (zi ) exp − (λ                                      (10)


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Please refer to Appendix D for a detailed training procedure of our proposed method.
The controllable workload constraint proposed in this section not only allows to distribute the work-
load more flexibly, but also facilitate the analysis of L2D, especially the accuracy - coverage curve
(see Subsection 5.2). Current practice when analysing accuracy - coverage is to either:
       • vary the cost of selection for human experts and classifier (Narasimhan et al., 2022), or
       • add another loss term in the M step: L = LM−step + ζ(PrM +1 (z|x; γ) − c)2 , where c is
         the desired coverage value and ζ is a weighting hyper-parameter, or
       • use the prediction values from the gating model (Mozannar et al., 2023) to rank the test
         samples, and then plot the accuracy-coverage curve by adjusting the prediction threshold
         in a post-hoc fashion. (see Algorithm 2 in Appendix E).
The first two approaches above often require multiple attempts to fine-tune the cost per human
expert or the hyper-parameter ζ associated with the new loss, resulting in a time-consuming and
resource-wasting training procedure. In our experiments, we were unable to successfully train for
some coverage values. In fact, we empirically observed that both of the approaches to constrain
workload distribution are highly sensitive to pre-defined coverage values c, resulting in notably
brittle performance. For example, when running on Cifar-100 as described in Section 5 using the
second method to constrain the coverage at c = 0.2, we observed that setting ζ = 1 leads to zero
coverage, while setting ζ = 50 leads to a coverage of 1. Applying a strategy similar to the bisection
method to gradually narrow the range of ζ did not lead to successful convergence during training.
The third approach of threshold adjusting for post-hoc plotting (Mozannar et al., 2023) requires
human intervention after each test sample has been processed by the system. Hence, it is inconsistent
with the L2D training, resulting in an unreliable evaluation. Furthermore, it needs to know the gating
model estimates for all of the testing samples before performing deferral, which is impractical,
especially for model deployment.
In contrast, our proposed workload constrained optimisation in the E step is effective in terms of
distributing the workload both among experts and between experts and the AI model without fine-
tuning any hyper-parameter. In addition, it results in a train-test consistent L2D model, where the
gating model makes decision at test time without post-hoc human intervention.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our proposed method and the state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic (i.e.,
Cifar-100 (Krizhevsky, 2009)) and real-world (i.e., NIH-ChestXray (Majkowska et al., 2020),
Chaoyang (Zhu et al., 2022) and MiceBone) datasets to benchmark L2D approaches.
For Cifar-100, we follow a similar setting as in (Hemmer et al., 2023), which simulates two experts,
each following an asymmetric label noise. In particular, each expert performs correctly on 10 super-
classes, while making 50 percent of labelling mistakes on the remaining 10 super-classes.
For real-world datasets, we use the annotations made by the human experts associated with the
datasets. For each dataset, we randomly remove the annotations made by each human expert at a
predefined missing rate to form the dataset with missing expert’s annotations. In terms of human ex-
perts, NIH-AO dataset has one expert who performs at 99% prediction accuracy; Chaoyang dataset
has three experts, with one performing at 91% accuracy, the other at 87%, and the last one at 99%;
while MiceBone has eight experts, each performing at approximately 80% to 85% prediction accu-
racy. Note that for Chaoyang, we evaluate on two settings: one with all three experts and the other
with the first two experts (excluding the best expert with 99% accuracy).
All results are reported from the checkpoint obtained at the last iteration in each training. Please refer
to Appendix F for further details on the datasets and hyper-parameters used. The full implementation
can be found at https://github.com/cnguyen10/pl2d.

5.1   BASELINES

Three baselines are used in the L2D evaluation with missing expert’s annotations: “naive” (Madras
et al., 2018) and two variants of semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Hemmer et al., 2023).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


             Best human expert         Classifier              Naive-L2D            MixMatch-L2D          FixMatch-L2D               Probabilistic-L2D
           0:85                                                0:85                                               0:85

            0:8                                                 0:8                                                0:8

Accuracy


                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                       Accuracy
           0:75                                                0:75                                               0:75

            0:7                                                 0:7                                                0:7

           0:65                                                0:65                                               0:65

            0:6                                                 0:6                                                0:6
                  0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8     1                      0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8     1                     0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8    1
                            Coverage                                            Coverage                                           Coverage
(a) Cifar-100 - 2 experts - 0.3 miss. (b) Cifar-100 - 2 experts - 0.5 miss. (c) Cifar-100 - 2 experts - 0.7 miss.

           0:94                                                0:94                                               0:94
           0:92                                                0:92                                               0:92
            0:9                                                 0:9                                                0:9
Accuracy


                                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                       Accuracy
           0:88                                                0:88                                               0:88
           0:86                                                0:86                                               0:86
           0:84                                                0:84                                               0:84
           0:82                                                0:82                                               0:82
                  0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8     1                      0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8     1                     0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8    1
                            Coverage                                            Coverage                                           Coverage
(d) Chaoyang - 2 experts - 0.3 miss. (e) Chaoyang - 2 experts - 0.5 miss. (f) Chaoyang - 2 experts - 0.7 miss.

Figure 3: Comparison of coverage - accuracy curves between different L2D methods on a variety of datasets,
each at a different missing rate.


The naive baseline is built from the original L2D method in (Madras et al., 2018), but with the
gating model being modified to repeatedly sample either a human or AI classifier until the selected
one is able to provide an annotation for that input data. Such a selection is equivalent to setting the
probability Pr(z|x, γ) of the missing experts to zero in our EM framework (see Appendix A.2).
For the SSL baselines (Hemmer et al., 2023), each expert is modelled as an independent SSL clas-
sifier, where labelled data is represented by samples with observed annotations, while un-labelled
data is the one with missing annotations. Although different SSL methods can be used to train
each classifier to model each expert, for simplicity, we use MixMatch (Berthelot et al., 2019) and
FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020) because of their well-documented effectiveness in dealing with SSL
problems. Missing annotations are then replaced by labels predicted by the SSL classifier. Finally,
the standard L2D method (Madras et al., 2018) with the integration of workload constraint presented
in Section 4 is trained on the “pseudo-complete” annotation dataset.
Note that although other L2D methods that handle multiple experts can be used (e.g., multi-
L2D (Verma et al., 2023)), they do not provide a mechanism to control the workload distribution to
study the trade-off in the coverage-accuracy-curves, and hence, are omitted from our evaluation.

5.2           R ESULTS

Because L2D trades off the reliability of human experts for the efficiency of AI classifier, such
a tradeoff is, therefore, analysed through the coverage - accuracy curve. Coverage computes the
percentage of test samples assigned and predicted by the AI classifier, while accuracy measures the
final prediction of the L2D system.
Fig. 3 shows the coverage-accuracy curves of the baselines and our proposed method on various
datasets, each at different missing rates. In Cifar-100, our proposed probabilistic L2D outperforms
the baselines at small coverage, while being on par at larger coverage values. The SSL baseline per-
forms poorly because the synthetic annotations (i.e., randomly flipping labels between two classes)
do not always satisfy the smooth manifold assumption in which similar samples have similar annota-
tions. In Chaoyang and NIH-AO (shown in Appendix G.1) datasets, the baselines perform similarly
while our method slightly surpasses them. In MiceBone, all methods perform worse than the best


                                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 1: Area-under-coverage-accuracy-curve (×100) of different learning to defer methods when dealing with
missing annotations on different datasets (larger is better). Note that at no missing annotation (or zero missing
rate), all methods are simplified to the same learning algorithm, and hence, share the same result.

  Dataset      № experts      Missing rate    Naive L2D      MixMatch       FixMatch     Probabilistic (ours)
                                    0            75.38          75.38         75.38              75.38
                                   0.3           72.80          66.95         67.39              73.33
  Cifar-100         2
                                   0.5           70.83          66.80         67.27              72.13
                                   0.7           67.68          65.52         66.52              71.19
  NIH-AO            1              0.2           91.79          92.26         91.41              93.40
                                    0            89.49          89.49         89.49              89.49
                                   0.3           87.48          86.90         86.86              90.50
                    2
  Chaoyang                         0.5           87.46          88.12         86.66              90.03
                                   0.7           87.09          87.11         86.92              88.41
                    3              0.5           89.94          88.55         90.33              91.07
                                    0            79.58          79.58         79.58              79.58
                                   0.3           79.67          81.02         81.87              83.48
  MiceBone          8
                                   0.5           80.30          82.19         82.12              83.69
                                   0.7           81.31          80.60         82.55              83.10


human expert at small coverage. This is due to the slightly inconsistent performance of human ex-
perts in training and testing sets (see Table 2 in Appendix F). Nevertheless, our approach shows
relatively better results, particularly at low coverage.
For a further comparison, we calculate the area-under-coverage-accuracy-curve (AUC-CAC) of
each coverage - accuracy curve in Fig. 3 and the additional results in Appendix G.1, and report in
Table 1. In general, our proposed probabilistic L2D outperforms the baselines across all datasets at
various missing rates.
In terms of missing expert’s annotation rates (see Fig. 6 in Appendix G.2 for further results of
coverage-accuracy curves), the results on Cifar-100 in Table 1 agrees with our intuition, in which
the higher the missing rate, the lower the AUC-CAC. This is slightly different in Chaoyang and
MiceBone datasets, especially MiceBone at lower missing expert’s annotation rates. Such a differ-
ence is mainly attributed to the inconsistent performance in training and testing sets (see Table 2 in
Appendix F) coupled with missing data. For example, without any regularisation, training a naive
L2D baseline on the MiceBone dataset would prefer the human expert id 534 when there is no
missing data, while selecting expert id 290 when 70 percent of data is missing due to their highest
performance in each setting (see the rows highlighted in Table 2). Such selections, coupled with
their inconsistent performance between training and testing, lead to the observation: the system
performs better at higher missing rate.

5.3   A BLATION STUDY ON CONTROLLABLE WORKLOAD

To study the controllable workload further, we perform additional experiments using the proposed
probabilistic L2D under two settings: 1) imbalanced in which the workload of each human ex-
pert is not controlled, and 2) balanced in which the workload is divided evenly for all human
experts. It is equivalent to setting εl = 0 and εu = 1 in the former configuration, while setting
εl ≈ εl = (1 − coverage)/M for each human expert in the latter one.
Figs. 4a and 4b shows the results on Chaoyang dataset with 2 and 3 human experts, respectively. At
the same coverage, the imbalanced-workload approach performs slightly better than the balanced
one. However, it is clear that the imbalanced one is biased toward the human expert with highest per-
formance – note expert 1 in Fig. 4a and expert 3 in Fig. 4b. This bias is more severe in Fig. 4b where
almost half of all testing samples are deferred to the expert 3, who has 99% prediction accuracy.
Fig. 4c shows another disadvantage of the imbalanced approach on MiceBone – a dataset with
inconsistent human performance in the training and testing sets (see Table 2 in Appendix F). Without
balancing the workload, L2D tends to prioritise the human expert with the highest performance in the
training set, resulting in an overfitting. In contrast, the balanced approach regularises the training,
and hence, leads to higher performance overall.
Nevertheless, the gain of overloading to one expert (or imbalanced approach) is small (less than 1
percent prediction accuracy in the Chaoyang dataset) or even negative (in MiceBone), and hence,


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025



                                                 53:8254:74                                                    46:27
                                                                                                                                                  0:88                         Best human
                    50                                                                                                                                                         Classifier
                                                                                         Imbalanced (accuracy = 97.42%)
                                                                                  40                                                              0:86                         Imbalanced

Deferral rate (%)


                                                              Deferral rate (%)
                                                                                         Balanced (accuracy = 96.35%)
                                                                                                                                                                               Balanced
                          Imbalanced (accuracy = 90.13%)
                    40    Balanced (accuracy = 89.69%)                                                                                            0:84


                                                                                                                                       Accuracy
                                                                                  30
                         31:31                                                             26:45                   26:40
                                                                                                                           25:13                  0:82
                    30                                                                                 23:09                   24:06
                             24:89
                                                                                  20                                                               0:8
                                         20:37                                         16:53
                    20
                                     14:87                                                         12:06                                          0:78
                                                                                  10
                         Expert 1    Expert 2    Classifier                            Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert 3 Classifier                             0   0:2   0:4   0:6     0:8    1
                           91%         87%         82%                                   91%      87%      99%      82%                                            Coverage
          (a) Chaoyang - coverage of 0.5.                          (b) Chaoyang - coverage of 0.25.                                    (c) MiceBone - missing rate of 0.3

Figure 4: (a) and (b) show comparisons of two different workload constraints on Chaoyang dataset with 50%
missing annotations per expert, where in the imbalanced setting, εl = 0 and εu = 1 for each human expert,
while in the balanced setting, εl ≈ εu = (1 − coverage)/M for each human expert, and (c) coverage -
accuracy curve on MiceBone at 30% missing rate.


may not compensate for overworking the best expert. In fact, by overworking that expert, it is hard
to guarantee that the expert’s accuracy will not be affected. In practice, it is, therefore, preferred to
distribute the workload evenly across all human experts.

6                    R ELATED WORK
Learning to defer extends the capability of learning to reject (Chow, 1957) by integrating human
experts into the decision making process (Madras et al., 2018). In its simplest form, L2D consists of
a classifier and a gating model that analyses an input sample and queries an expert (either a human or
the classifier) to predict the label of that sample. By complementing the strengths of human experts
and the classifier, L2D can perform better than the human experts or the classifier in isolation at a
lower cost compared with if all samples need to be analysed by a human expert. Most studies in the
L2D literature focuses on statistical learning that develops surrogate losses for the 0-1 loss to make
the learning consistent with the optimal Bayes classifier and gating model (Mozannar & Sontag,
2020) or well-calibrated (Verma & Nalisnick, 2022). In addition, most studies consider only the
setting of a single human expert, while in practice, there may be several human experts available.
There are a few studies that considers the practical setting of multiple experts by either revising the
gating model to output a weight for each expert (Keswani et al., 2021), using mixture of experts
to produce a weighted average over the predictions of human experts and AI classifier (Hemmer
et al., 2022), or extending further the surrogate loss (Verma et al., 2023). In contrast, our proposed
method follows a probabilistic approach by modelling L2D as a variant of mixture of experts, and
can be optimised by employing the EM algorithm. In addition, given that it is based on mixture
of experts, our method can be straightforwardly extended to multiple human experts. The main
difference between (Keswani et al., 2021; Verma et al., 2023) and our method, beside the modelling,
is the codomain of the gating model. In our method, the output space of the gating model is the
probability simplex ∆M := {y : y ∈ [0, 1]M +1 ∧ y11⊤ = 1}, meaning that the probability of
deferring to one expert is influenced by the probability of deferring to other experts. In (Keswani
et al., 2021), the codomain of the gating model is the hypercube [0, 1]M +1 , meaning that the deferral
probability of each expert is independent. In (Verma et al., 2023), the codomain is RC+M +1 due to
the unification of the classifier and gating model into a single model.

Missing experts’ annotations is one of the challenges in L2D (Leitão et al., 2022) because the
standard L2D setting requires that every expert must annotate the whole training dataset. This is
impractical because that increases the annotation cost significantly, or even infeasible for large-scale
datasets. To our best knowledge, there is one study in the literature addressing such an issue (Hem-
mer et al., 2023). That study proposes a two-phase method: (i) train a semi-supervised learning
model for each expert where the observed annotations are represented by the labels and the missing
ones are the unlabelled samples, then (ii) use the synthesised pseudo-labels to replace the missing
annotations and obtain a “complete” annotation dataset to train an L2D system. Due to the nature of
two phase training, an error in the semi-supervised learning phase may be amplified in the training
of L2D systems, potentially deteriorating performance. In contrast, our method models the missing


                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


annotations to train a L2D system in an end-to-end manner. Such a modelling avoids error due to
separate training, resulting in a high-performing and efficient training.

7    L IMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION

Scalability The proposed method, however, has a limited scalability with the number of human
experts. As the number of human experts grows, the number of models required to represent them
also increases, leading to a substantial rise in GPU memory and computational time needed for
training (e.g, see Table 3). Although such an issue can be worked around by distributing each
model of human expert to a different GPU, it is expensive due to the need of multiple GPUs. Thus,
future work will focus on addressing the scalability of the proposed method, such as clustering M
experts into K groups (M ≫ K), where experts in the same group perform similarly. In that case,
we only need K models to represent the experts in each group, making it feasible to work with
datasets consisting of hundreds or even thousands of human experts. We can also apply further
dimensional reduction techniques, such as hierarchical clustering, if the labelling pattern of human
experts is diverse. Alternatively, one can design a conditional model, denoted as h(x, ζ) with ζ
being the embedding of a human expert, to model each human expert. The embedding ζ can be
obtained by extending from sample-wise to set-wise representation learning through the usage of
deep set (Zaheer et al., 2017). Such a conditional modelling can adapt to any number of human
experts, and hence, addresses the scalability issue.

Deferral at low coverage As we mentioned in Section 1, L2D aims to maximise reliability, while
keeping the cost within the acceptable limits. The choice of the ideal operating point that balances
reliability and costs typically depends on specific priorities. In high-stakes applications (e.g., health-
care), deferring uncertain cases offers significant advantages, such as improving decision accuracy,
enhancing trust by acknowledging the limitations of the classifier, and leveraging human oversight
to ensure accountability in high-stakes scenarios. Deferred cases can also provide valuable learning
opportunities to improve the AI model. However, deferring cases can be costly due to increased
annotation budgets, potential expert burnout, and possible delays in decision-making. On the other
hand, minimising deferrals maximises the efficiency of the L2D system, allowing for lower costs
and quicker decision-making. This approach also reduces reliance on human experts and demon-
strates the capability of the classifier to handle easier cases independently. However, not deferring
uncertain cases poses risks, such as potential misdiagnoses and diminished oversight. These risks
can have severe consequences for patient safety and undermine trust in the system, especially when
high-stakes decisions are involved.

Dynamic expert performance can be accommodated by incorporating temporal dynamics and
performance variability through sequential modelling techniques or adaptive mechanisms. For fast-
changing performance, such as fatigue, the model could include real-time performance tracking
using metrics such as dynamic accuracy, allowing the adjustment of the deferral strategy based on
current conditions. Slow-changing performance, like expertise improvement through learning, can
be modelled using techniques such as Bayesian updating to adapt expert-specific parameters over
time. Temporal modelling (e.g., recurrent neural networks) can also capture patterns in performance
changes, enabling the system to make adjustments. By integrating such adaptive mechanisms, the
model would better reflect the evolving nature of human expertise, improving its decision-making
capabilities in dynamic scenarios.

8    C ONCLUSION

This paper proposes a probabilistic modelling for L2D that extends the capability of the standard
L2D to a practical setting where each human expert does not need to annotate the whole dataset
of interest, but only a portion of the dataset. By modelling the expert selection and missing human
experts’ annotations as latent variables, the proposed method is optimised through the EM algorithm.
We also propose to integrate a workload control mechanism as a constrained optimisation in the
E step to enable the capability of distributing the workload to human experts and the classifier
efficiently. Empirical evaluation demonstrates that the proposed probabilistic L2D outperforms prior
methods in both synthetic and real-world datasets with different missing rates of annotations.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) -
UK Research and Innovation through the grant EP/Y018036/1. We also thank Dr David Rosewarne
from Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust for providing useful discussion on the point of
view of radiologists to further motivate this study.

R EFERENCES
Björn Barz and Joachim Denzler. Do we train on test data? Purging CIFAR of near-duplicates.
  Journal of Imaging, 6(6):41, 2020.
Leonard Berlin. Liability of interpreting too many radiographs. American Journal of Roentgenology,
  175(1):17–22, 2000.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A
  Raffel. MixMatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Olivier Cappé and Eric Moulines. Online Expectation–Maximization algorithm for latent data mod-
  els. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 71(3):593–613, 02
  2009.
Chi-Keung Chow. An optimum character recognition system using decision functions. IRE Trans-
  actions on Electronic Computers, pp. 247–254, 1957.
Corinna Cortes, Giulia DeSalvo, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning with rejection. In International
  Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 67–82. Springer, 2016.
João Graça, Kuzman Ganchev, and Ben Taskar. Expectation Maximization and posterior constraints.
   In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20, 2007.
Yves Grandvalet and Yoshua Bengio. Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 17, 2004.
Patrick Hemmer, Sebastian Schellhammer, Michael Vössing, Johannes Jakubik, and Gerhard
  Satzger. Forming effective human-AI teams: Building machine learning models that complement
  the capabilities of multiple experts. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2022.
Patrick Hemmer, Lukas Thede, Michael Vössing, Johannes Jakubik, and Niklas Kühl. Learning to
  defer with limited expert predictions. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37,
  pp. 6002–6011, 2023.
Vijay Keswani, Matthew Lease, and Krishnaram Kenthapadi. Towards unbiased and accurate de-
  ferral to multiple experts. In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 154–165,
  2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University
  of Toronto, 2009.
Diogo Leitão, Pedro Saleiro, Mário AT Figueiredo, and Pedro Bizarro. Human-AI collaboration in
  decision-making: Beyond learning to defer. ICML 2022 Workshop on Human-Machine Collabo-
  ration and Teaming, 2022.
David Madras, Toni Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Predict responsibly: Improving fairness and accu-
  racy by learning to defer. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Anna Majkowska, Sid Mittal, David F Steiner, Joshua J Reicher, Scott Mayer McKinney, Gavin E
  Duggan, Krish Eswaran, Po-Hsuan Cameron Chen, Yun Liu, Sreenivasa Raju Kalidindi, Alexan-
  der Ding, Greg S. Corrado, Daniel Tse, and Shravya Shetty. Chest radiograph interpretation
  with deep learning models: Assessment with radiologist-adjudicated reference standards and
  population-adjusted evaluation. Radiology, 294(2):421–431, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Hussein Mozannar and David Sontag. Consistent estimators for learning to defer to an expert. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7076–7087. PMLR, 2020.
Hussein Mozannar, Hunter Lang, Dennis Wei, Prasanna Sattigeri, Subhro Das, and David Sontag.
  Who should predict? Exact algorithms for learning to defer to humans. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 10520–10545. PMLR, 2023.
Harikrishna Narasimhan, Wittawat Jitkrittum, Aditya K Menon, Ankit Rawat, and Sanjiv Kumar.
  Post-hoc estimators for learning to defer to an expert. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 35, pp. 29292–29304, 2022.
Lars Schmarje, Claudius Zelenka, Ulf Geisen, Claus-C Glüer, and Reinhard Koch. 2D and 3D
  segmentation of uncertain local collagen fiber orientations in SHG microscopy. In German Con-
  ference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 374–386. Springer, 2019.
Lars Schmarje, Vasco Grossmann, Claudius Zelenka, Sabine Dippel, Rainer Kiko, Mariusz Oszust,
  Matti Pastell, Jenny Stracke, Anna Valros, Nina Volkmann, and Reinhard Koch. Is one anno-
  tation enough? - A data-centric image classification benchmark for noisy and ambiguous label
  estimation. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems – Datasets and Benchmarks
  Track, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pvvPh5sSJTC.
Lars Schmarje, Monty Santarossa, Simon-Martin Schröder, Claudius Zelenka, Rainer Kiko, Jenny
  Stracke, Nina Volkmann, and Reinhard Koch. A data-centric approach for improving ambiguous
  labels with combined semi-supervised classification and clustering. In European Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 363–380. Springer, 2022b.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Zizhao Zhang, Han Zhang, Colin A Raffel,
  Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Alexey Kurakin, and Chun-Liang Li. FixMatch: Simplifying semi-supervised
  learning with consistency and confidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 596–608, 2020.
The Royal College of Radiologists. Clinical radiology UK workforce census 2023. Technical report,
  The Royal College of Radiologists, 2023.
Rajeev Verma and Eric Nalisnick. Calibrated learning to defer with one-vs-all classifiers. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22184–22202. PMLR, 2022.
Rajeev Verma, Daniel Barrejón, and Eric Nalisnick. Learning to defer to multiple experts: Consis-
  tent surrogate losses, confidence calibration, and conformal ensembles. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 11415–11434. PMLR, 2023.
Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, and Ronald M Sum-
  mers. ChestX-ray8: Hospital-scale chest X-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised
  classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2097–2106, 2017.
Mou-Cheng Xu, Yu-Kun Zhou, Chen Jin, Stefano B Blumberg, Frederick J Wilson, Marius deGroot,
 Daniel C Alexander, Neil P Oxtoby, and Joseph Jacob. Learning morphological feature pertur-
 bations for calibrated semi-supervised segmentation. In International Conference on Medical
 Imaging with Deep Learning, pp. 1413–1429. PMLR, 2022.
Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, Barnabas Poczos, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and
 Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
 ume 30, 2017.
Maximilian Zenk, David Zimmerer, Fabian Isensee, Paul F Jäger, Jakob Wasserthal, and Klaus
 Maier-Hein. Realistic evaluation of FixMatch on imbalanced medical image classification tasks.
 In German Workshop on Medical Image Computing, pp. 291–296. Springer, 2022.
Zheng Zhang, Wenjie Ai, Kevin Wells, David Rosewarne, Thanh-Toan Do, and Gustavo Carneiro.
  Learning to complement and to defer to multiple users. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 144–162. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-72992-8 9.
Chuang Zhu, Wenkai Chen, Ting Peng, Ying Wang, and Mulan Jin. Hard sample aware noise robust
  learning for histopathology image classification. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


A     BASELINE OF LEARNING TO DEFER
A.1      F ULL DATA ANNOTATIONS

This follows the standard setting of learning to defer, in which every sample is annotated by all
experts. In this subsection, we present the EM algorithm to optimise the objective function in Eq. (2).
The “complete” data log-likelihood in this case can be written as follows:
                                                      "              M +1
                                                                               !                    #
                                                                           (m)
                                                                     Y
      (k)
 Qi (γ , γ, θM +1 ) = EPr z |x ,y ,QM +1 t(m) ,γ (k)   ln Pr yi zi ,      ti     + ln Pr(zi |xi , γ)
                                   i    i   i   m=1     i
                                                                                        m=1
                           + ln Pr(ti = yi |xi , θM +1 ).
                                                                                                                     (11)

E step     calculates the posterior of the expert index z as follows:
                                 M +1
                                            !                M +1
                                                                       !
                                        (m)                        (m)
                                 Y                            Y
                 Pr zi xi , yi ,      ti      ∝ Pr yi zi ,        ti     Pr(zi |xi , γ).                             (12)
                                       m=1                                 m=1


M step maximises the complete-data log-likelihood as follows:
                                                                     N
                                                                     X
                              γ (k+1) , θM +1 ← argmax                    Qi (γ (k) , γ, θM +1 ).                    (13)
                                                            γ,θM +1 i=1


As mentioned in Section 4, one can apply the constrained E step right after the E step to obtain a
constrained posterior on z before performing the maximisation in the M step.

A.2      M ISSING EXPERT ’ S ANNOTATIONS

In this subsection, every sample is no longer annotated by all experts, but at least one expert. The
objective function can be written as follows:
                                                             
                    XN                Y (m)
              max       ln Pr yi ,        ti   xi , γ, θM +1 
              γ,θM +1
                        i=1                  m∈Diobs.
                                                                         
                           N
                                                                  (m)                       (M +1)
                           X                            Y
              = max              ln Pryi xi ,                   ti , γ  + ln Pr          ti        |xi , θM +1 .   (14)
                 γ,θM +1
                           i=1                     m∈Diobs.


For the naive learning to defer baseline, we sample an expert from Pr(z|x, γ) until the sampled
expert has an annotation available for the sample of interest. This is equivalent to:
                                        Pr(zi = j|xi , γ) = 0, ∀j ∈ Diunobs. .                                       (15)
We then follow the exact EM algorithm specified in Appendix A.1.

B     U NCONSTRAINED POSTERIOR OF LATENT VARIABLES IN THE E STEP
We employ the variational EM to optimise the objective function in Eq. (2). The variational inference
is applied in the E step to approximate the posterior of the latent variables z and t. The variational
distribution can be written as follows:
                          Y                               Y
                  q(z,            t(j) ) = q(z; ρ)                   q(t(j) ; ϕ(j) ) ,            (16)
                           unobs.
                                           |  {z }         unobs.
                                                                     |    {z      }
                         j∈D                      Categorical(z;ρ) j∈D             Categorical(t(j) ;ϕ(j) )

where the variational parameters ρ and ϕ(j) are probability vector and obtained through the optimi-
sation in Eq. (4).


                                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


The optimisation in the “unconstrained” E step is restated here to ease the derivation:
              h                            i                h                                i
                                                                 (j)  (j)        (j)    (k)
                                                 X
  argmin KL q(zi ; ρi )∥ Pr zi |xi , γ (k) +            KL q(ti ; ϕi ) Pr ti xi , θj
        q
                                                                          j∈Diunobs.
                                                              h                                      i
                                                                    Q          (m) Q            (j)
       − Eq(z ;ρ ) Q
                                              (j)
                                           q t ;ϕ
                                                  (j)
                                                        ln Pr y z ,
                                                               i i   m∈D obs. ti  , j∈D unobs. ti      .                             (4)
                  i   i     j∈D unobs.        i     i                                     i                   i
                               i



The objective function in Eq. (4) (also known as variational-free energy) can be expanded as follows:
              M +1       h                             i                                  C          h                          i
                                                                                               (j)        (j)               (k)
              X                                                                  X        X
     Lvfe =           ρin ln ρin − ln gn (xi ; γ (k) )) +                                     ϕic     ln ϕic − ln fc (xi ; θj )
              n=1                                                            j∈Diunobs. c=1
                  M +1 X
                       C
                                                        (j)               (n)
                  X                        Y
              −                  ρin                ϕic eyi ln ζiyi ,                                                               (17)
                  n=1 c=1              j∈D unobs.

                                                                                                            (n)
where: ev is the v-th unit vector (often known as one-hot vector), and ζij is the j-th element of
 (n)
ζi     defined as follows:
                                                              (
                                                                   (n)
                                                   (n)            ti           if n ∈ Dobs.
                                                  ζi =                                        .                                     (18)
                                                                  f (xi ; θn ) if n ∈ Dunobs.

Variational parameter ρ We minimise the variational-free energy in Eq. (17) w.r.t. ρ, which is
the probability to select which expert (either human or the classifier) among a total of M +1 experts.
                                                          PM +1
Note that because ρ is a probability, it is constrained by n=1 ρin = 1.
We form the Lagrangian by isolating the terms which contain ρi and adding the appropriate Lagrange
multiplier, ηi ≥ 0, as follows:
                          M +1      h                             i M +1 X
                                                                         C
                                                                                                                   (j)        (n)
                          X                                          X                                  Y
       Lvfe [ρi ] =              ρin ln ρin − ln gn (xi ; γ (k) )) −       ρin                                    ϕic eyi ln ζiyi
                          n=1                                                      n=1 c=1           j∈D unobs.
                                  M +1
                                                    !
                                  X
                      + ηi                 ρin − 1 .                                                                                (19)
                                   n=1


Taking the derivative with respect to ρin gives:
                                                                C
              dLvfe [ρi ]                                      X                          Y           (j)           (n)
                          = ln ρin − ln gn (xi ; γ (k) ) + 1 −                                       ϕic eyi ln ζiyi + ηi .         (20)
                dρin                                           c=1                     j∈D unobs.

Setting the derivative to zero yields the optimal value of the variational paramter:
                                                                               
                                                 C
                                                              (j)        (n)
                                                X     Y
                     ρin ∝ gn (xi ; γ (k) ) exp             ϕic eyi ln ζiyi − 1.                                                  (21)
                                                                         c=1 j∈D unobs.


It can also be rewritten as follows:

    q(zi ) ∝ Pr zi |xi , γ (k)
                                                                                             
                                         h                                             i     
                                                      Q          (m)   Q           (j)
           × exp EQ                     ln Pr yi zi ,
                                      (j)                 obs.
                                                       m∈Di    t i   ,     unobs.
                                                                        j∈Di      ti      − 1  .
                        j∈D unobs. q ti
                                                                                             
                                       i
                                                                                                                                    (22)


                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Variational parameter ϕ Similarly, we can obtain the variational parameter ϕ and write the solu-
tion in the following form:

    (j)          (j)     (k)
q(ti ) ∝ Pr ti |xi , θj
                                                                                               
                                          h                                               i    
                                                        Q          (m)   Q            (j)
   × exp E                            ′   ln Pr yi zi ,      obs. ti   ,     unobs. t i      − 1  .
           q(zi ) j ′ ∈Dunobs. \j q t(j )               m∈Di             j∈Di
                     Q
                                      i
                                                                                                
                              i
                                                                                                (23)
                                                          unobs.
Eqs. (22) and (23) result in a system of (M + 1 + C|Di |         ) non-linear equations in the form
x = f (x), which can be solved by fixed-point iteration method or the Newton - Raphson method.
For simplicity, we use the fixed-point method with a fixed number of iterations as 10 to solve the
above system of non-linear equations.

C     C ONSTRAINED POSTERIOR OF LATENT VARIABLES IN THE E STEP
This section provides the detailed derivation of the constrained optimisation in Eq. (8), which can
be rewritten in the form of standard optimisation as follows:
                                                     N
                                                1 X
                        qi∗ }N
                       {e    i=1 = argmin             Eqe(zi ) [ln qe(zi ) − ln q ∗ (zi )]
                                       {qi }N
                                            i=1
                                                N i=1
                                              N                                N
                                      1 X                                  1 X
                             s.t.:          qe(zi ) ⪯ ε u      ∧       −         qe(zi ) ⪯ −εεl .            (24)
                                      N i=1                                N i=1

The Lagrangian of the constrained optimisation can be written as follows:
        N
                                                     "    N
                                                                    !     #      "                      N
                                                                                                                    !#
     1 X                                               1 X                                          1 X
L=        Eqe(zi ) [ln qe(zi ) − ln q ∗ (zi )] + λ ⊤
                                                   u         qe(zi ) − ε u + λ ⊤
                                                                               l  εl −                    qe(zi )
    N i=1                                              N i=1                                        N i=1
          N
      1 X
  =                                                 λu − λ l )⊤ qe(zi ) − λ ⊤
            Eqe(zi ) [ln qe(zi ) − ln q ∗ (zi )] + (λ                               ⊤
                                                                            u εu + λl εl,
      N i=1
                                                                                                             (25)
where λ u , λ l ∈ RM
                   +
                     +1
                        are the Lagrange multipliers.
Taking the functional derivative (similar to the derivation of variational inference explained in
David Blei’s lecture: https://www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/fall11/
cos597C/lectures/variational-inference-i.pdf) with respect to q(zi ) gives:
                              dL    1
                                  =   [ln qe(zi ) − ln q ∗ (zi ) + 1 + λ u − λ l ]                           (26)
                              de
                               qi   N

Setting the KKT condition gives:
                          dL
                              = 0 ⇔ ln qe(zi ) − ln q ∗ (zi ) + λ u − λ l + 1 = 0.                           (27)
                          de
                           qi

Solving for qe(zi ) gives:
                                     ln qe(zi ) ∝ ln q ∗ (zi ) − λ u + λ l − 1.                              (28)

Or:
                                                  1              q ∗ (zi )
                                  qe(zi ) =                                    ,                             (29)
                                                λu , λl ) exp (λ
                                              Z(λ              λ − λ )⊤ z + 1
                                                                   u       l       i

         λu , λ l ) is the normalisation constant defined as follows:
where: Z(λ
                                              X          q ∗ (zi )
                              Z(λλu , λ l ) =                             .                                  (30)
                                                      λu − λ l )⊤ zi + 1
                                              zi exp (λ



                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 1 The EM algorithm for learning to defer with missing expert’s annotations
 1: procedure T RAINING(D, ε l , ε u , n, K)
 2:    ▷ Di : training dataset defined in Section 2                                                     ◁
 3:    ▷ ε l , ε u : the lower and upper workload constrained vectors                                   ◁
 4:    ▷ n: mini-batch size                                                                             ◁
 5:    ▷ K: number of iterations                                                                        ◁
 6:    initialise parameter of gating model γ (0)
                                                      (0)
 7:      initialise parameters of expert models (θm )M    m=1
                                                             +1

 8:      for k ∈ {1, . . . , K} do
 9:           draw a mini-batch of n samples
10:           for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} do                  ▷ Iterate through every sample in the mini-batch
                                     (j)
11:                q ∗ (zi ), (q ∗ (ti ))j∈Dunobs. ← min VARIATIONAL - FREE ENERGY ▷ E step in Eq. (4)
12:           q ∗ (zi ) ← C ONSTRAINED P OSTERIOR({q ∗ (zi )}ni=1 , ε l , ε u )               ▷ Section 4
13:           calculate the data-completed log-likelihood Qi (γ, θ, γ (k) , θ(k) )           ▷ see Eq. (3)
                                                 Pn                                    PM +1
14:           γ (k+1) , θ(k+1) ← argmaxγ,θ i=1 Qi (γ, θ, γ (k) , θ(k) ) + ln Pr(γ) + m=1 ln Pr(θm )
15:      return γ, θM +1                                   ▷ Parameters of gating model and AI classifier



Substituting qe(zi ) in Eq. (29) into the Lagrangian in Eq. (25) gives:

               N
           1 X
      L=                    λu + λ l − 1 − ln Z(λ
                 Eqe(zi ) [−λ                                  λu − λ l )⊤ qe(zi ) − λ ⊤
                                                λu , λ l )] + (λ                               ⊤
                                                                                       u εu + λl εl
           N i=1
                                         N
                                     1 X
           λ⊤
        = −λ         ⊤
             u εu + λl εl − 1 −                 λu , λ l )
                                           ln Z(λ
                                     N i=1
                                        N
                                     1 X X             q ∗ (zi )
           λ⊤
        = −λ         ⊤
             u εu + λl εl − 1 −            ln                        .                                (31)
                                     N i=1           λ − λ )⊤ z + 1
                                              z exp (λ
                                                 i           u   l    i



According to the duality, λ u and λ l can be obtained through the following optimisation:

                                                           N
                                                        1 X X               q ∗ (zi )
    λ ∗u , λ ∗l = argmax L = argmin λ ⊤       ⊤
                                      u εu − λl εl +          ln                            .         (32)
                   λu ≥0
              λ u ,λ             λu ≥0
                            λ u ,λ                      N i=1            λu − λl )⊤ zi + 1
                                                                 zi exp (λ


D      T RAINING PROCEDURE

The training of the proposed probabilistic L2D with workload constraints is described in Algo-
rithm 1.


E     P OST- HOC METHOD FOR ACCURACY - COVERAGE CURVES

In the standard learning to defer, the coverage constraint is imposed as a post-hoc during test-
ing. The post-hoc procedure is shown in Algorithm 2 (refer to helpers/metrics.py in https:
//github.com/clinicalml/human_ai_deferral/ as the original code to implement
the post-hoc algorithm). In particular, the confidence values produced by the gating model to select
the AI classifier are used to sort the test samples, with the top-k samples being selected to defer
to the AI classifier. Such a post-hoc testing procedure is inconsistent with the training procedure
in learning to defer due to the human intervention. Furthermore, the procedure requires to access
all of the testing samples ahead of time before performing deferral. This is, however, impractical,
especially in model deployment.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Algorithm 2 Current practice in calculating coverage and accuracy at test time
                                                   (m) M
 1: procedure C OVERAGE -ACCURACY({(xi , (ti          )m=1 , yi )}N
                                                                  i=1 , γ, θ, τ )
 2:    ▷ xi : input sample                                                                            ◁
            (m)
 3:     ▷ ti : annotation made by expert indexed by m                                                 ◁
 4:     ▷ yi : ground truth                                                                           ◁
 5:     ▷ γ: parameter of gating (deferral) model                                                     ◁
 6:     ▷ θ: parameter of ML classifier                                                               ◁
 7:     ▷ τ : coverage value of interest                                                              ◁
 8:     initialise an emptied ordered set of confidence selecting the classifier: P ← ()
 9:     for i ∈ {1, . . . , N } do
10:          pi ← g(xi ; γ)                                          ▷ probability of routing/selection
11:          P ← P ∪ pi,M +1                             ▷ store confidence of selecting the classifier
12:     Iclf ← ARG - TOP - K(population = P, k = ⌊τ N ⌋) ▷ Indices of samples classified by classifier
13:     Iexperts ← {1, . . . , N }\Iclf ▷ Indices of samples classified by human experts or classifier
14:     return total accuracy


F     E XPERIMENT SETTING

F.1   DATASETS

Cifar-100 consists of 50,000 training and 10,000 testing images which are categorised into 20
superclasses. These superclasses are then divided further into 100 classes. We follow the approach of
(Hemmer et al., 2023) to simulate two experts, each exhibiting asymmetric label noise. In particular,
each expert classifies correctly on 10 designated superclasses, while making errors 50% of the time
on the remaining 10 superclasses. The annotations made by each expert is then randomly sampled
at a missing rate of interest. Moreover, given that the Cifar-100 dataset has about 10 percent of
testing images that are duplicated or almost identical to the ones in the training set, we decide to use
ciFAIR-100 (Barz & Denzler, 2020), which replaces those duplicated images by ones that belong to
the same classes.

NIH-ChestXray consists of 4,374 chest X-ray images taken from the ChestXray-8 dataset (Wang
et al., 2017). Each X-ray image is initially reviewed by three radiologists over four radio-graphic
findings. If there is a disagreement between the three radiologists, the image is returned for an
additional review. The labels and notes from the previous rounds are made available during each
iterative review. Adjudication continues until a consensus is reached or for a maximum of five rounds
to determine the ground truth label. Although there are a total of 22 radiologists (including board-
certified and resident radiologists), each radiologist annotates only a subset of the whole dataset with
small mutual overlapping, increasing the difficulty to form a test set for learning to defer. We follow
a similar approach as in (Hemmer et al., 2023) to select the radiologist with id 4295342357, who
has the largest number of annotations – 2,350 images – for the evaluation. To form a train - test split,
we randomly select 20% of patients to be in the test subset, while the remaining patients are used in
the training subset. We further randomly remove 20% of the annotations from the training subset to
simulate the missing annotations. In addition, the original image size of 1,024-by-1,024 is resized
to 256-by-256 before randomly cropping to 224-by-224 during training.

Chaoyang consists of 4,021 training and 2,139 testing images of colon patches obtained from
the Chaoyang hospital in China (Zhu et al., 2022). Each image is annotated by three professional
pathologists over four categories: normal, serrated, adenocarcinoma, and adenoma. The ground
truth labels are obtained via the majority vote of the three annotations. The performance of the three
pathologists are 91%, 87% and 99% accurate according to this majority vote. In our experiments,
we show results with all three experts, and with two experts, where we exclude the third expert.

MiceBone consists of 4,736 second-harmonic generation microscopy images from 35 3D-scans of
6 mice where 3 mice had the disease osteogenesis imperfecta – also known as brittle bone disease,
while the others do not (Schmarje et al., 2019). We follow the same preprocessing procedure in
(Schmarje et al., 2022b) by using the given segmentation masks to cut the original 2D image slices


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


into many patches, each consisting of one class, resulting in a total of 7,240 2D-images. Each image
is then annotated by one to five professional annotators to classify into three classes (Schmarje et al.,
2022a). Among the 79 annotators, only 8 annotators annotate the whole dataset. Hence, we use the
annotations of those 8 annotators to represent 8 experts in our experiment, while using the majority
vote as the ground truth. The performance of those 8 experts are shown in Table 2. For the train -
test split, we use the first four folds as the training set, and the remaining fold as the test set.

                    Table 2: The performance of 8 experts from the MiceBone dataset.

                                              Prediction accuracy (%)
                        Expert id        Train         (with missing rate)
                                                                             Test
                                        0        0.3        0.5     0.7
                           047        86.34    64.45      49.15    34.68     85.74
                           290        85.82    65.63      49.82    36.81     85.29
                           533        86.29    64.37      49.61    35.30     84.96
                           534        86.59    64.47      50.11    35.00     84.45
                           580        80.76    60.40      47.90    33.79     79.07
                           581        85.83    64.12      50.43    36.37     84.32
                           966        86.54    64.47      49.41    35.62     87.56
                           745        85.01    65.61      50.71    35.81     84.38


F.2   T RAINING HYPER - PARAMETERS

The model used throughout the evaluation is mainly Resnet-18 for datasets that have large size
images (e.g., NIH, Chaoyang and MiceBone), while Pre-Act-Resnet-18 is used in datasets with
smaller image size (e.g., ciFAIR-100). Each method is trained for 300 epochs (1,000 epochs for
ciFAIR-100) using stochastic gradient descent with a momentum of 0.9 and a learning rate of 0.01.
The learning rate is decayed through a cosine decaying scheduler, and the gradient norm is clipped
at the maximal of 10 for numerical stability. In addition, a mixed precision using bfloat16 is
applied over all methods and datasets to speed up the training. The proposed method is implemented
in Jax – a Python library that accelerates array computation and program transformation to achieve
high-performance numerical computing for large-scale machine learning.
For the baseline relying on semi-supervised learning, we also use the same backbone. The trained
model is then used to produce pseudo-labels for the missing annotations. A standard L2D is then
trained on the observed labels and pseudo-labels to produce the final results.

G     A DDITIONAL RESULTS
G.1   C OVERAGE - ACCURACY CURVES ON NIH-AO, C HAOYANG AND M ICE B ONE

This subsection provides more results in addition to the ones presented in Subsection 5.2. In partic-
ular, Fig. 5 show the coverage - accuracy curves for NIH-AO, Chaoyang with 3 human experts and
MiceBone.

G.2   C OMPARISON FOR DIFFERENT MISSING RATES

This subsection provides further results of our proposed method evaluated on Cifar-100 and
Chaoyang at different missing rates.

FixMatch L2D Although FixMatch often surpasses MixMatch in several computer vision bench-
marks, in the L2D setting shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 5, FixMatch is on par with MixMatch and inferior
in some settings. This is due to the strong data augmentation applied in real-world medical image
datasets. The strong data augmentation in FixMatch is designed for natural images, and hence, when
applied to medical images, it creates undesired artifacts or transformations, creating more difficul-
ties for the learning algorithm to utilise unlabelled data (Zenk et al., 2022). In practice, the shearing


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


                  Best human expert                 Classifier               Naive-L2D                 MixMatch-L2D                    FixMatch-L2D                 Probabilistic-L2D

                                           1                                                                           1


                                        0:95
                                                                                                                     0:95



                             Accuracy


                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                         0:9
                                                                                                                      0:9

                                        0:85
                                                                                                                     0:85
                                         0:8
                                               0   0:2     0:4 0:6            0:8       1                                    0       0:2          0:4 0:6 0:8       1
                                                           Coverage                                                                               Coverage
                             (a) Chaoyang - 3 experts - 0.5 miss.                                           (b) NIH-AO - 1 expert - 0.2 miss.

           0:88                                                             0:88                                                                  0:88

           0:86                                                             0:86                                                                  0:86

           0:84                                                             0:84                                                                  0:84
Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                                       Accuracy
           0:82                                                             0:82                                                                  0:82

            0:8                                                              0:8                                                                   0:8

           0:78                                                             0:78                                                                  0:78

           0:76                                                             0:76                                                                  0:76
                  0    0:2              0:4 0:6    0:8      1                       0       0:2   0:4 0:6              0:8       1                       0    0:2   0:4 0:6     0:8     1
                                        Coverage                                                  Coverage                                                          Coverage
(c) MiceBone - 8 experts - 0.3 miss. (d) MiceBone - 8 experts - 0.5 miss. (e) MiceBone - 8 experts - 0.7 miss.

                  Figure 5: Additional coverage - accuracy curve results on: Chaoyang, NIH-AO and MiceBone.

             Best human expert                           Classifier                 no missing                       missing 0.3                     missing 0.5           missing 0.7
                                                                                                                                                  0:88
                                                                            0:94
           0:85
                                                                            0:92                                                                  0:86
            0:8
                                                                             0:9                                                                  0:84
Accuracy


                                                                 Accuracy


                                                                                                                                       Accuracy


           0:75                                                             0:88                                                                  0:82
            0:7                                                             0:86                                                                   0:8
                                                                            0:84
           0:65                                                                                                                                   0:78
                                                                            0:82
            0:6                                                                                                                                   0:76
                  0    0:2              0:4 0:6    0:8      1                       0       0:2   0:4 0:6              0:8       1                       0    0:2   0:4 0:6     0:8     1
                                        Coverage                                                  Coverage                                                          Coverage
                      (a) Cifar-100                                                     (b) Chaoyang                                                         (c) MiceBone

Figure 6: The coverage - accuracy curves of our method on different missing rates, including the setting with
complete expert’s annotation.


transformation in FixMatch is often omitted when applying on medical image datasets (Xu et al.,
2022). In the paper, we use the vanilla FixMatch as a baseline in Section 5 to keep the consistency
with previous studies (Hemmer et al., 2023).

H             RUNNING TIME
We also report the running time to train the naive, semi-supervised baselines and our method in
Table 3. These running times are reported for a whole training using the same number of epochs
(1,000 for Cifar-100 and 300 for others). For the semi-supervised learning baseline, the running
time includes the semi-supervised training for all experts (the first number) and the standard L2D
(the second number).


                                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Table 3: Running time of different L2D approaches (in GPU-hour); for semi-supervised learning baselines,
the reported one includes the semi-supervised training for all experts (the first number) and the standard L2D
training (the second number).

                                                                                  Running time (GPU-hour)
                      Dataset       № experts
                                                            Naive           MixMatch         FixMatch                              Probabilistic L2D
                      Cifar-100            2                       5.1       9.8 + 5.1       10.9 + 5.1                                                   5.0
                      Chaoyang             2                       1.8       5.4 + 1.8        5.8 + 1.8                                                   3.8
                      MiceBone             8                       4.4      22.4 + 4.4       25.3 + 4.4                                                  12.8


I           A BLATION STUDY ON THE MINI - BATCH SIZE FOR THE CONSTRAINED E
            STEP

We conduct another ablation study to understand the influence of mini-batch sizes to the constrained
optimisation of the workload distribution presented in Section 4. Recall that the workload distribu-
tion is a global constraint, so larger batch sizes may lead to more accurate learning. We evaluate
mini-batches of sizes 20, 50 and 100 at different missing annotation rates on Chaoyang dataset and
plot the results in Figs. 7a and 7b. The area under curve of the evaluations presented in Fig. 7 agree
with the intuition that the larger the batch size, the higher the performance.

                  Best human expert                Classifier                Batch size 20          Batch size 50                                  Batch size 100
                                                                                                                                                90:50



                                                                                                       Area under curve (× 100)
                                                                 0:93                                                                      90:13                    90:03
           0:93
                                                                                                                                  90
                                                                                                                                                               89:45
            0:9                                                   0:9
Accuracy


                                                      Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  89
                                                                                                                                                         Batch size 20
           0:87                                                  0:87                                                                                    Batch size 50
                                                                                                                                                         Batch size 100
                                                                                                                                  88
           0:84                                                  0:84                                                                  87:60
                                                                                                                                                           87:16
           0:81                                                  0:81                                                             87
                  0     0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8   1                        0   0:2   0:4 0:6    0:8   1                                       0.3              0.5
                              Coverage                                            Coverage                                                Missing annotation rate
(a) Chaoyang - 2 experts - 0.3 miss. (b) Chaoyang - 2 experts - 0.5 miss.                                                              (c) Area under curve

Figure 7: Coverage - accuracy curves of probabilistic L2D trained on different mini-batch sizes and their
corresponding area under curve.



J           O NLINE EM

Conventionally, the EM algorithm requires to load and process the whole dataset at each iteration.
This is, however, impractical, especially for large datasets that cannot fit into memory. Given this
limitation, we employ an online version of the EM algorithm (Cappé & Moulines, 2009), which
could be performed in a mini-batch setting. The online EM algorithm maintains an exponential
moving average as an approximation of the full average Q defined in Eq. (3). In particular, the
stochastic EM algorithm can be presented as follows:

E-step                calculates the complete-data log-likelihood as the one in the conventional EM algorithm.

M-step optimises the exponential weighted average w.r.t. the parameters of interest:

    γ (k+1) , θ(k+1) ← argmax(1 − τk )Q θ, γ, γ (k−1) , θ(k−1) + τk Q θ, γ, θ(k) , γ (k) ,                                                                             (33)
                                         θ,γ
                                                                                              P+∞                                                P+∞
where τk is the step size satisfying the decaying conditions:                                      k=1 τk = +∞ and                                      k=1 τk < +∞.


                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025


Such a moving average update in the M step is similar to the momentum used in stochastic gradient
descent. To this end, our implementation uses the SGD with a momentum of 0.9 as a solution that
integrates the online EM into our method.


                                               21
